[["51","11","28","그들 가운데 하나인 하가보스라는 이가 나서서, 장차 온 세상에 큰 기근이 들 것이라고 성령의 힘으로 예고하였다. 그 기근은 클라우디우스 황제 때에 일어났다.","그들 가운데 하가보라는 사람이 성령의 감동을 받아 일어나서 온 세상에 큰 기근이 들 것이라고 예언하였다. 과연 이 기근은 글라우디오 황제 때에 일어났다.","그 중에 아가보라 하는 한 사람이 일어나 성령으로 말하되 천하에 큰 흉년이 들리라 하더니 글라우디오 때에 그렇게 되니라","그 중에 아가보라 하는 한 사람이 일어나 성령으로 말하되 천하가 크게 흉년 들리라 하더니 글라우디오 때에 그렇게 되니라","그중에 아가보라는 사람이 어느 날 집회에서 성령의 감동으로 일어나 이스라엘 전역에 큰 기근이 일어날 것을 예언하였다. 과연 이 예언은 글리우디오 황제 때에 이루어졌다.","and one of them named Agabus stood up and predicted by the Spirit that there would be a severe famine all over the world, and it happened under Claudius.","And there stood up one of them named Agabus, and signified by the Spirit that there should be great dearth throughout all the world: which came to pass in the days of Claudius Caesar.","One of them, named Agabus, stood up and through the Spirit predicted that a severe famine would spread over the entire Roman world. (This happened during the reign of Claudius.)","et surgens unus ex eis nomine Agabus significavit per Spiritum famem magnam futuram in universo orbe terrarum; quae facta est sub Claudio.","ויקם אחד מהם ושמו אגבוס ויגד על פי הרוח כי רעב גדול יבוא על כל ישבי תבל ויהי כן בימי קלודיוס׃"],["51","11","29","그래서 제자들은 저마다 형편에 따라 유다에 사는 형제들에게 구호 헌금을 보내기로 결의하였다.","그래서 신도들은 각각 힘 닿는 대로 헌금하여 유다에 있는 교우들을 돕기로 하였다.","제자들이 각각 그 힘대로 유대에 사는 형제들에게 부조를 보내기로 작정하고","제자들이 각각 그 힘대로 유대에 사는 형제들에게 3)부조를 보내기로 작정하고 헬, 봉사","안디옥에 있던 신도들은 유대에 있는 교우들을 돕기 위한 헌금을 힘닿는 대로 모아 보내기로 결의하였다.","So the disciples determined that, according to ability, each should send relief to the brothers who lived in Judea.","Then the disciples, every man according to his ability, determined to send relief unto the brethren which dwelt in Judaea:","The disciples, each according to his ability, decided to provide help for the brothers living in Judea.","Discipuli autem, prout quis habebat, proposuerunt singuli eorum in ministerium mittere habitantibus in Iudaea fratribus;","ויועצו התלמידים לשלח איש איש מאשר תשיג ידו לעזרת האחים הישבים ביהודה׃"],["51","11","30","그들은 그대로 실행하여 그것을 바르나바와 사울 편에 원로들에게 보냈다.","이렇게 헌금한 것을 그들은 바르나바와 사울의 손을 거쳐 교회 원로들에게 보냈다.","이를 실행하여 바나바와 사울의 손으로 장로들에게 보내니라","이를 실행하여 바나바와 사울의 손으로 장로들에게 보내니라","그리고 곧 그대로 실행하여 그 헌금을 바나바와 사울편에 예루살렘 교회에게 보냈다.","This they did, sending it to the presbyters in care of Barnabas and Saul.","Which also they did, and sent it to the elders by the hands of Barnabas and Saul.","This they did, sending their gift to the elders by Barnabas and Saul.","quod et fecerunt, mittentes ad presbyteros per manum Barnabae et Sauli.","וכן גם עשו וישלחו אל הזקנים על ידי בר נבא ושאול׃"],["51","12","1","그즈음 헤로데 임금이 교회에 속한 몇몇 사람을 해치려고 손을 뻗쳤다.","이 무렵 헤로데 왕이 교회의 어떤 사람들에게 박해의 손을 뻗쳐","그 때에 헤롯 왕이 손을 들어 교회 중에서 몇 사람을 해하려 하여","그 때에 헤롯왕이 손을 들어 교회 중 몇 사람을 해하려하여","이 무렵 헤롯왕은 교회 지도자들에게 박해의 손을 뻗쳐","About that time King Herod laid hands upon some members of the church to harm them.","Now about that time Herod the king stretched forth his hands to vex certain of the church.","It was about this time that King Herod arrested some who belonged to the church, intending to persecute them.","Illo autem tempore, misit Herodes rex manus, ut affli geret quosdam de ecclesia.","בעת ההיא שלח המלך הורדוס את ידו להרע לאנשים מן הקהל׃"],["51","12","2","그는 먼저 요한의 형 야고보를 칼로 쳐 죽이게 하고서,","우선 요한의 형 야고보를 잘라 죽였다.","요한의 형제 야고보를 칼로 죽이니","요한의 형제 야고보를 칼로 죽이니","요한의 형제인 사도 야고보를 죽였다.","He had James, the brother of John, killed by the sword,","And he killed James the brother of John with the sword.","He had James, the brother of John, put to death with the sword.","Occidit autem Iacobum fratrem Ioannis gladio.","וימת את יעקב אחי יוחנן בחרב׃"],["51","12","3","유다인들이 그 일로 좋아하는 것을 보고 베드로도 잡아들이게 하였다. 때는 무교절 기간이었다.","유다인들이 좋아하는 것을 보고 이번에는 또 베드로를 잡아오라고 하였다. 그 때는 바로 무교절 기간이었다.","유대인들이 이 일을 기뻐하는 것을 보고 베드로도 잡으려 할새 때는 무교절 기간이라","유대인들이 이 일을 기뻐하는 것을 보고 베드로도 잡으려 할쌔 때는 무교절일이라","헤롯은 유대인들이 이 일을 흡족해하자 이번에는 베드로를 잡아들였다. 그러나 무교절 기간이었기 때문에","and when he saw that this was pleasing to the Jews he proceeded to arrest Peter also. (It was [the] feast of Unleavened Bread.)","And because he saw it pleased the Jews, he proceeded further to take Peter also. (Then were the days of unleavened bread.)","When he saw that this pleased the Jews, he proceeded to seize Peter also. This happened during the Feast of Unleavened Bread.","Videns autem quia placeret Iudaeis, apposuit apprehendere et Petrum - erant autem dies Azymorum -","וירא כי טוב הדבר בעיני היהודים ויוסף לתפש גם את פטרוס והימים ימי חג המצות׃"],["51","12","4","그는 베드로를 붙잡아 감옥에 가두고 네 명씩 짠 네 개의 경비조에 맡겨 지키게 하였다. 파스카 축제가 끝나면 그를 백성 앞으로 끌어낼 작정이었던 것이다.","그는 베드로를 잡아서 감옥에 가두고 네 사람으로 편성된 네 패의 경비병에게 맡겨 지키게 하였다. 과월절이 지나면 그를 유다인들 앞에 끌어낼 속셈이었던 것이다.","잡으매 옥에 가두어 군인 넷씩인 네 패에게 맡겨 지키고 유월절 후에 백성 앞에 끌어 내고자 하더라","잡으매 옥에 가두어 군사 넷씩인 네 패에게 맡겨 지키고 유월절 후에 백성 앞에 끌어 내고자 하더라","그를 감옥에 가두고 네 명의 군인을 한 조로 하는 네 패의 경비병을 시켜 잘 감시하라고 말하였다. 유월절이 끝나면 그를 유대인들 앞에 끌어낼 속셈이었다.","He had him taken into custody and put in prison under the guard of four squads of four soldiers each. He intended to bring him before the people after Passover.","And when he had apprehended him, he put him in prison, and delivered him to four quaternions of soldiers to keep him; intending after Easter to bring him forth to the people.","After arresting him, he put him in prison, handing him over to be guarded by four squads of four soldiers each. Herod intended to bring him out for public trial after the Passover.","quem cum apprehendisset, misit in carcerem tradens quattuor quaternionibus militum custodire eum, volens post Pascha producere eum populo.","ויאחז אתו ויתנהו במשמר וימסרהו לארבע מחלקות של ארבעה אנשי צבא לשמרו כי אמר להעלותו אחרי הפסח לפני העם׃"],["51","12","5","그리하여 베드로는 감옥에 갇히고 교회는 그를 위하여 끊임없이 기도하였다.","이렇게 되어 베드로는 감옥에 갇혀 있었고 교회는 그를 위하여 하느님께 줄곧 기도를 드렸다.","이에 베드로는 옥에 갇혔고 교회는 그를 위하여 간절히 하나님께 기도하더라","이에 베드로는 옥에 갇혔고 교회는 그를 위하여 간절히 하나님께 빌더라","교회에서는 감옥에 갇혀 있는 베드로를 안전하게 지켜 주시기를 하나님께 간절히 기도드리고 있었다.","Peter thus was being kept in prison, but prayer by the church was fervently being made to God on his behalf.","Peter therefore was kept in prison: but prayer was made without ceasing of the church unto God for him.","So Peter was kept in prison, but the church was earnestly praying to God for him.","Et Petrus quidem servabatur in carcere; oratio autem fiebat sine intermissione ab ecclesia ad Deum pro eo.","פטרוס היה עצור במשמר והקהלה העתירה בעדו בחזקה אל האלהים׃"],["51","12","6","헤로데가 베드로를 끌어내려고 하던 그 전날 밤, 베드로는 두 개의 쇠사슬에 묶인 채 두 군사 사이에서 잠을 자고 있었고, 문 앞에서는 파수병들이 감옥을 지키고 있었다.","헤로데가 베드로를 유다인들 앞에 끌어내려고 하던 그 전날 밤의 일이었다. 베드로는 두 개의 쇠사슬에 묶인 채 군인 두 사람 사이에서 잠을 자고 있었고 감옥 문 앞에는 경비병들이 지키고 있었다.","헤롯이 잡아 내려고 하는 그 전날 밤에 베드로가 두 군인 틈에서 두 쇠사슬에 매여 누워 자는데 파수꾼들이 문 밖에서 옥을 지키더니","헤롯이 잡아 내려고 하는 그 전날 밤에 베드로가 두 군사 틈에서 두 쇠사슬에 매여 누워 자는데 파숫군들이 문 밖에서 옥을 지키더니","베드로가 처형당하기로 예정된 바로 전날 밤이었다. 베드로는 두 개의 쇠사슬에 묶인 채 두 군인 틈에서 잠이 들어 있었다. 옥문 앞에는 다른 군인들이 경비를 보고 있었다.","On the very night before Herod was to bring him to trial, Peter, secured by double chains, was sleeping between two soldiers, while outside the door guards kept watch on the prison.","And when Herod would have brought him forth, the same night Peter was sleeping between two soldiers, bound with two chains: and the keepers before the door kept the prison.","The night before Herod was to bring him to trial, Peter was sleeping between two soldiers, bound with two chains, and sentries stood guard at the entrance.","Cum autem producturus eum esset Herodes, in ipsa nocte erat Petrus dormiens inter duos milites vinctus catenis duabus, et custodes ante ostium custodiebant carcerem.","ויהי בלילה ההוא אשר אמר הורדוס להביאו מחר לדין ויישן פטרוס בין שני אנשי צבא והוא אסור בשנים זקים ושמרי הפתח שמרים את המשמר׃"],["51","12","7","그런데 갑자기 주님의 천사가 나타나더니 감방에 빛이 비치는 것이었다. 천사는 베드로의 옆구리를 두드려 깨우면서, “빨리 일어나라.” 하고 말하였다. 그러자 그의 손에서 쇠사슬이 떨어져 나갔다.","그런데 갑자기 주의 천사가 나타나 베드로 앞에 서자 환한 빛이 감방을 비추었다. 천사가 베드로의 옆구리를 찔러 깨우며 \"빨리 일어나라.\" 하고 재촉하였다. 그러자 곧 쇠사슬이 그의 두 손목에서 벗겨졌다.","홀연히 주의 사자가 나타나매 옥중에 광채가 빛나며 또 베드로의 옆구리를 쳐 깨워 이르되 급히 일어나라 하니 쇠사슬이 그 손에서 벗어지더라","홀연히 주의 사자가 곁에 서매 옥중에 광채가 조요하며 또 베드로의 옆구리를 쳐 깨워 가로되 급히 일어나라 하니 쇠사슬이 그 손에서 벗어지더라","그때 갑자기 환한 빛이 감방안에 비치면서 주님의 천사가 베드로의 앞에 나타나 옆구리를 찔러 깨웠다. \"빨리 일어나라!\" 그러자 곧 쇠사슬이 그의 두 팔목에서 벗겨졌다.","Suddenly the angel of the Lord stood by him and a light shone in the cell. He tapped Peter on the side and awakened him, saying, “Get up quickly.” The chains fell from his wrists.","And, behold, the angel of the Lord came upon him, and a light shined in the prison: and he smote Peter on the side, and raised him up, saying, Arise up quickly. And his chains fell off from his hands.","Suddenly an angel of the Lord appeared and a light shone in the cell. He struck Peter on the side and woke him up. \"Quick, get up!\" he said, and the chains fell off Peter's wrists.","Et ecce angelus Domini astitit, et lumen refulsit in habitaculo; percusso autem latere Petri, suscitavit eum dicens:  “Surge velociter! “. Et ceciderunt catenae de manibus eius.","והנה מלאך יהוה נצב עליו ואור נגה בחדר ויספק על ירך פטרוס ויעירהו לאמר קום מהרה ויפלו מוסרותיו מעל ידיו׃"],["51","12","8","천사가 베드로에게 “허리띠를 매고 신을 신어라.” 하고 이르니 베드로가 그렇게 하였다. 천사가 또 베드로에게 “겉옷을 입고 나를 따라라.” 하고 말하였다.","\"허리띠를 띠고 신을 신어라.\" 하는 천사의 말을 듣고 베드로는 그대로 하였다. 그랬더니 천사는 \"겉옷을 걸치고 나를 따라오너라.\" 하였다.","천사가 이르되 띠를 띠고 신을 신으라 하거늘 베드로가 그대로 하니 천사가 또 이르되 겉옷을 입고 따라오라 한대","천사가 가로되 띠를 띠고 신을 들메라 하거늘 베드로가 그대로 하니 천사가 또 가로되 겉옷을 입고 따라 오라 한대","천사가 다시 말하였다. \"허리띠를 매고 신을 신으라.\" 베드로가 그대로 하자 천사는 \"겉옷을 입고 나를 따라오라\" 하고 명령하였다.","The angel said to him, “Put on your belt and your sandals.” He did so. Then he said to him, “Put on your cloak and follow me.”","And the angel said unto him, Gird thyself, and bind on thy sandals. And so he did. And he saith unto him, Cast thy garment about thee, and follow me.","Then the angel said to him, \"Put on your clothes and sandals.\" And Peter did so. \"Wrap your cloak around you and follow me,\" the angel told him.","Dixit autem angelus ad eum:  “Praecingere et calcea te sandalia tua! “. Et fecit sic. Et dicit illi:  “Circumda tibi vestimentum tuum et sequere me! “.","ויאמר אליו המלאך חגר מתניך והנעל את רגליך ויעש כן ויאמר אליו עטה מעילך ולך אחרי׃"],["51","12","9","베드로는 따라 나가면서도, 천사가 일으키는 그 일이 실제인 줄 모르고 환시를 보는 것이려니 생각하였다.","베드로는 천사를 따라 나가면서도 천사가 하는 일이 현실이 아니고 환상이려니 하였다.","베드로가 나와서 따라갈새 천사가 하는 것이 생시인 줄 알지 못하고 환상을 보는가 하니라","베드로가 나와서 따라갈쌔 천사의 하는 것이 참인줄 알지 못하고 환상을 보는가 하니라","베드로는 천사를 따라 감방을 나갔다. 그러나 그렇게 하면서도 그는 꿈이나 환상을 보는 줄로 알았다.","So he followed him out, not realizing that what was happening through the angel was real; he thought he was seeing a vision.","And he went out, and followed him; and wist not that it was true which was done by the angel; but thought he saw a vision.","Peter followed him out of the prison, but he had no idea that what the angel was doing was really happening; he thought he was seeing a vision.","Et exiens sequebatur et nesciebat quia verum est, quod fiebat per angelum; aestimabat autem se visum videre.","ויצא וילך אחריו ולא ידע אם אמת הוא הנעשה לו על ידי המלאך כי כמראה היה בעיניו׃"],["51","12","10","그들이 첫째 초소와 둘째 초소를 지나 성안으로 통하는 쇠문 앞에 다다르자, 문이 앞에서 저절로 열렸다. 그래서 밖으로 나가 어떤 거리를 따라 내려갔는데, 천사가 갑자기 그에게서 사라져 버렸다.","그들이 첫째 초소와 둘째 초소를 지나 거리로 통하는 철문 앞에 다다르자 문이 저절로 열렸다. 그래서 천사와 함께 밖으로 나와 거리의 한 구간을 지나자 천사는 어느새 사라져버렸다.","이에 첫째와 둘째 파수를 지나 시내로 통한 쇠문에 이르니 문이 저절로 열리는지라 나와서 한 거리를 지나매 천사가 곧 떠나더라","이에 첫째와 둘째 파수를 지나 성으로 통한 쇠문에 이르니 문이 절로 열리는지라 나와 한 거리를 지나매 천사가 곧 떠나더라","그들이 첫째 초소와 둘째 초소를 지나 드디어 거리로 나가는 철문 앞에 이르자 철문이 저절로 열렸다. 그들이 철문을 나와 함께 한 구간쯤 걸어왔을 때 어느새 천사의 모습은 보이지 않았다.","They passed the first guard, then the second, and came to the iron gate leading out to the city, which opened for them by itself. They emerged and made their way down an alley, and suddenly the angel left him.","When they were past the first and the second ward, they came unto the iron gate that leadeth unto the city; which opened to them of his own accord: and they went out, and passed on through one street; and forthwith the angel departed from him.","They passed the first and second guards and came to the iron gate leading to the city. It opened for them by itself, and they went through it. When they had walked the length of one street, suddenly the angel left him.","Transeuntes autem primam custodiam et secundam venerunt ad portam ferream, quae ducit ad civitatem, quae ultro aperta est eis, et exeuntes processerunt vicum unum, et continuo discessit angelus ab eo.","ויעברו דרך המשמרת הראשונה והשניה ויבאו עד שער הברזל אשר יצאו בו העירה ויפתח השער לפניהם מאליו ויצאו החוצה וילכו מהלך רחוב אחד והמלאך סר מעליו פתאם׃"],["51","12","11","그제야 베드로가 정신이 들어 이렇게 말하였다. “이제야 참으로 알았다. 주님께서 당신의 천사를 보내시어 헤로데의 손에서, 유다 백성이 바라던 그 모든 것에서 나를 빼내어 주셨다.”","그제야 베드로가 정신이 나서 \"나는 이제야 사실을 알았다. 주께서 천사를 보내셔서 헤로데의 손에서 나를 건지시고 유다 백성들이 잔뜩 꾸민 흉계에서 나를 벗어나게 하셨다.\" 하고 말하였다.","이에 베드로가 정신이 들어 이르되 내가 이제야 참으로 주께서 그의 천사를 보내어 나를 헤롯의 손과 유대 백성의 모든 기대에서 벗어나게 하신 줄 알겠노라 하여","이에 베드로가 정신이 나서 가로되 내가 이제야 참으로 주께서 그의 천사를 보내어 나를 헤롯의 손과 유대 백성의 모든 기대에서 벗어나게 하신줄 알겠노라 하여","그제서야 베드로는 지금까지 일어난 일을 깨닫고 \"이것은 꿈이 아니고 현실이구나! 주께서 천사를 보내어 헤롯의 손아귀와 유대인의 계략에서 나를 구해 주셨구나!\" 하고 혼자서 소리쳤다.","Then Peter recovered his senses and said, “Now I know for certain that [the] Lord sent his angel and rescued me from the hand of Herod and from all that the Jewish people had been expecting.”","And when Peter was come to himself, he said, Now I know of a surety, that the LORD hath sent his angel, and hath delivered me out of the hand of Herod, and from all the expectation of the people of the Jews.","Then Peter came to himself and said, \"Now I know without a doubt that the Lord sent his angel and rescued me from Herod's clutches and from everything the Jewish people were anticipating.\"","Et Petrus ad se reversus dixit:  “Nunc scio vere quia misit Dominus angelum suum et eripuit me de manu Herodis et de omni exspectatione plebis Iudaeorum “.","ויהי בשובו אל דעתו ויאמר פטרוס עתה זה ידעתי באמת כי האלהים שלח את מלאכו ויפלטני מיד הורדוס ומכל מזמת עם היהודים׃"],["51","12","12","이러한 사실을 깨달은 베드로는 마르코라고 하는 요한의 어머니 마리아의 집으로 갔다. 거기에는 많은 사람이 모여 기도하고 있었다.","이 사실을 깨달은 베드로는 마르코라고도 불리는 요한의 어머니 마리아의 집으로 갔다. 거기에는 많은 사람이 모여 기도를 드리고 있었다.","깨닫고 마가라 하는 요한의 어머니 마리아의 집에 가니 여러 사람이 거기에 모여 기도하고 있더라","깨닫고 마가라 하는 요한의 어머니 마리아의 집에 가니 여러 사람이 모여 기도하더라","베드로는 곧 많은 사람이 모여서 기도하고 있는 마가라고 불리는 요한의 어머니 마리아의 집으로 갔다.","When he realized this, he went to the house of Mary, the mother of John who is called Mark, where there were many people gathered in prayer.","And when he had considered the thing, he came to the house of Mary the mother of John, whose surname was Mark; where many were gathered together praying.","When this had dawned on him, he went to the house of Mary the mother of John, also called Mark, where many people had gathered and were praying.","Consideransque venit ad domum Mariae matris Ioannis, qui cognominatur Marcus, ubi erant multi congregati et orantes.","הוא חשב כזאת והוא בא עד בית מרים אם יוחנן המכנה מרקוס אשר נקהלו שם רבים והם מתפללים יחד׃"],["51","12","13","베드로가 바깥 문을 두드리자 로데라는 하녀가 누구인지 보려고 문으로 갔다.","베드로가 대문을 두드리자 로데라는 어린 여종이 문간으로 나왔다.","베드로가 대문을 두드린대 로데라 하는 여자 아이가 영접하러 나왔다가","베드로가 대문을 두드린대 로데라 하는 계집 아이가 영접하러 나왔다가","베드로가 대문 앞에 서서 문을 두드리자 로데라는 소녀가 문을 열어 주려고 나왔다.","When he knocked on the gateway door, a maid named Rhoda came to answer it.","And as Peter knocked at the door of the gate, a damsel came to hearken, named Rhoda.","Peter knocked at the outer entrance, and a servant girl named Rhoda came to answer the door.","Pulsante autem eo ostium ianuae, processit puella ad audiendum, nomine Rhode;","וידפק על דלת השער ותגש נערה להקשיב ושמה רודי׃"],["51","12","14","그 하녀는 베드로의 목소리를 알아듣고 너무 기뻐서, 문을 열어 주지도 않고 안으로 달려가 베드로가 문 앞에 서 있다고 알렸다.","그 여종은 베드로의 목소리를 알아듣고 너무 기뻐서 문을 열어줄 생각도 않고 안으로 달려 들어가 베드로가 대문 밖에 와 있다고 알려주었다.","베드로의 음성인 줄 알고 기뻐하여 문을 미처 열지 못하고 달려 들어가 말하되 베드로가 대문 밖에 섰더라 하니","베드로의 음성인줄 알고 기뻐하여 문을 미처 열지 못하고 달려 들어가 말하되 베드로가 대문 밖에 섰더라 하니","그런데 문을 두드리는 사람이 베드로인 걸 보자 소녀는 너무도 기뻐서 문을 열어 주는 것도 잊어버리고 안으로 달려들어가 모든 사람에게 베드로가 왔다는 것을 알렸다.","She was so overjoyed when she recognized Peter’s voice that, instead of opening the gate, she ran in and announced that Peter was standing at the gate.","And when she knew Peter's voice, she opened not the gate for gladness, but ran in, and told how Peter stood before the gate.","When she recognized Peter's voice, she was so overjoyed she ran back without opening it and exclaimed, \"Peter is at the door!\"","et ut cognovit vocem Petri, prae gaudio non aperuit ianuam, sed intro currens nuntiavit stare Petrum ante ianuam.","ותכר את קול פטרוס ומשמחתה לא פתחה לו אם דלת השער ותרץ הביתה ותגד להם כי פטרוס עמד על השער׃"],["51","12","15","사람들이 “너 정신 나갔구나.” 하는데도 그 하녀는 사실이라고 우겼다. 그래서 사람들은 “베드로의 천사다.” 하고 말하였다.","그 말을 듣고 모두 그 여종에게 \"너 미쳤구나!\" 하였지만 로데는 베드로가 정말 대문 밖에 와 있다고 우겼다. 그래도 사람들은 \"베드로를 지켜주는 천사겠지.\" 하고 말하였다.","그들이 말하되 네가 미쳤다 하나 여자 아이는 힘써 말하되 참말이라 하니 그들이 말하되 그러면 그의 천사라 하더라","저희가 말하되 네가 미쳤다 하나 계집 아이는 힘써 말하되 참말이라 하니 저희가 말하되 그러면 그의 천사라 하더라","그러나 그들은 소녀의 말을 믿지 않고 \"네가 제정신이 아닌 게로구나?\" 하고 꾸짖었다. 소녀가 끝까지 우겨대자 그들은 \"그럼 그의 천사일거야. 베드로가 아무래도 처형당했나 보다\" 하고 말하였다.","They told her, “You are out of your mind,” but she insisted that it was so. But they kept saying, “It is his angel.”","And they said unto her, Thou art mad. But she constantly affirmed that it was even so. Then said they, It is his angel.","\"You're out of your mind,\" they told her. When she kept insisting that it was so, they said, \"It must be his angel.\"","At illi dixerunt ad eam:  “Insanis! “. Illa autem affirmabat sic se habere. Illi autem dicebant:  “Angelus eius est “.","ויאמרו אליה משגעת את והיא מתאמצת כי כן הוא ויאמרו מלאכו הוא׃"],["51","12","16","베드로가 줄곧 문을 두드리자 사람들이 문을 열어 그를 보고서는 깜짝 놀랐다.","베드로가 계속해서 문을 두드리자 그들은 문을 열어보고 정말 베드로가 온 것을 알고는 깜짝 놀랐다.","베드로가 문 두드리기를 그치지 아니하니 그들이 문을 열어 베드로를 보고 놀라는지라","베드로가 문 두드리기를 그치지 아니하니 저희가 문을 열어 베드로를 보고 놀라는지라","그러나 베드로가 계속해서 문을 두드리자 마침내 나와서 문을 열어 본 그들은 깜짝 놀랐다.","But Peter continued to knock, and when they opened it, they saw him and were astounded.","But Peter continued knocking: and when they had opened the door, and saw him, they were astonished.","But Peter kept on knocking, and when they opened the door and saw him, they were astonished.","Petrus autem perseverabat pulsans; cum autem aperuissent, viderunt eum et obstupuerunt.","ופטרוס הרבה לדפק ויפתחו ויראהו וישתוממו׃"],["51","12","17","베드로는 그들에게 조용히 하라고 손짓한 다음, 주님께서 자기를 어떻게 감옥에서 끌어내 주셨는지 이야기하였다. 이어서 “이 일을 야고보와 다른 형제들에게 알려 주십시오.” 하고 이르고서, 그곳을 떠나 다른 곳으로 갔다.","베드로는 그들에게 조용히 하라고 손짓을 한 다음 주께서 자기를 감옥에서 인도해 내신 경위를 말해 주었다. 그리고 이 소식을 야고보와 다른 교우들에게 알리라고 하고는 다른 곳으로 떠나갔다.","베드로가 그들에게 손짓하여 조용하게 하고 주께서 자기를 이끌어 옥에서 나오게 하던 일을 말하고 또 야고보와 형제들에게 이 말을 전하라 하고 떠나 다른 곳으로 가니라","베드로가 저희에게 손짓하여 종용하게 하고 주께서 자기를 이끌어 옥에서 나오게 하던 일을 말하고 또 야고보와 형제들에게 이 말을 전하라 하고 떠나 다른 곳으로 가니라","베드로는 손짓으로 그들에게 조용히 하라고 이른 후에 그동안 일어난 일과 주께서 어떻게 자기를 감옥에서 인도해 내셨는가를 설명하였다. 그리고 \"야고보와 다른 사람들에게도 이 일을 알려 주십시오\" 하고 당부한 다음 안전한 곳으로 피해 갔다.","He motioned to them with his hand to be quiet and explained [to them] how the Lord had led him out of the prison, and said, “Report this to James and the brothers.” Then he left and went to another place.","But he, beckoning unto them with the hand to hold their peace, declared unto them how the Lord had brought him out of the prison. And he said, Go shew these things unto James, and to the brethren. And he departed, and went into another place.","Peter motioned with his hand for them to be quiet and described how the Lord had brought him out of prison. \"Tell James and the brothers about this,\" he said, and then he left for another place.","Annuens autem eis manu, ut tacerent, enarravit quomodo Dominus eduxisset eum de carcere dixitque:  “Nuntiate Iacobo ct fratribus haec “. Et egressus abiit in alium locum.","והוא רמז להם בידו לחשות ויספר להם את אשר הוציאו האדון מן המשמר ויאמר הגידו את זאת ליעקב ולאחים ויצא וילך לו למקום אחר׃"],["51","12","18","날이 밝자 군사들 사이에서는 베드로가 없어진 일로 적지 않은 소동이 일어났다.","날이 밝자 군인들 사이에는 베드로가 없어졌기 때문에 큰 소동이 일어났다.","날이 새매 군인들은 베드로가 어떻게 되었는지 알지 못하여 적지 않게 소동하니","날이 새매 군사들은 베드로가 어떻게 되었는지 알지 못하여 적지 않게 소동하니","아침이 되자 감옥에서는 큰 소동이 일어 났다. 베드로의 모습을 그 어느 곳에서도 찾을 수 없었기 때문이다.","At daybreak there was no small commotion among the soldiers over what had become of Peter.","Now as soon as it was day, there was no small stir among the soldiers, what was become of Peter.","In the morning, there was no small commotion among the soldiers as to what had become of Peter.","Facta autem die, erat non parva turbatio inter milites, quidnam de Petro factum esset.","הבקר אור ומבוכה לא קטנה היתה בין אנשי הצבא על פטרוס מה היה לו׃"],["51","12","19","헤로데는 베드로를 찾다가 찾아내지 못하자 파수병들을 문초한 뒤, 처형하라고 명령을 내렸다. 그리고 유다를 떠나 카이사리아로 내려가 그곳에 머물렀다.","헤로데는 부하들을 풀어 베드로를 찾다가 끝내 못 찾게 되자 경비병들을 문초한 다음 그들을 대신 처형시켰다. 이 일이 있은 뒤에 헤로데는 유다를 떠나 가이사리아에 가서 얼마 동안 머물러 있었다.","헤롯이 그를 찾아도 보지 못하매 파수꾼들을 심문하고 죽이라 명하니라 헤롯이 유대를 떠나 가이사랴로 내려가서 머무니라","헤롯이 그를 찾아도 보지 못하매 파숫군들을 심문하고 죽이라 명하니라 헤롯이 유대를 떠나 가이사랴로 내려가서 거하니라","베드로를 끌어내 오라고 보낸 헤롯은 베드로가 없어졌다는 말을 듣자 16명의 경비병을 군법회의에 회부하여 전원에게 사형을 선고하였다. 그런 다음에 헤롯은 가이사랴로 내려가 그곳에 머물렀다.","Herod, after instituting a search but not finding him, ordered the guards tried and executed. Then he left Judea to spend some time in Caesarea.","And when Herod had sought for him, and found him not, he examined the keepers, and commanded that they should be put to death. And he went down from Judaea to Caesarea, and there abode.","After Herod had a thorough search made for him and did not find him, he cross-examined the guards and ordered that they be executed. Then Herod went from Judea to Caesarea and stayed there a while.","Herodes autem, cum requisisset eum et non invenisset, interrogatis custodibus, iussit eos abduci; descendensque a Iudaea in Caesaream ibi commorabatur.","ויהי כאשר בקש אותו הורדוס ולא מצאו חקר את השמרים ויצו להוציאם למות וירד מיהודה אל קסרין וישב שם׃"],["51","12","20","헤로데는 티로와 시돈 사람들에게 몹시 화가 나 있었다. 그리하여 그들은 뜻을 모아 헤로데에게 갔다. 그리고 임금의 시종장 블라스토스를 설득하여 화평을 청하였다. 그들의 지방이 임금의 영토에서 양식을 공급받고 있었기 때문이다.","한편 띠로와 시돈 사람들은 헤로데에게 몹시 미움을 사고 있었다. 그러나 그들의 지방은 헤로데의 영토에서 식량을 공급받고 있었기 때문에 뜻을 모아 헤로데를 찾아갔다. 우선 그의 시종 블라스토를 설득한 다음 그 힘을 빌려 헤로데에게 화평을 청하였다.","헤롯이 두로와 시돈 사람들을 대단히 노여워하니 그들의 지방이 왕국에서 나는 양식을 먹는 까닭에 한마음으로 그에게 나아와 왕의 침소 맡은 신하 블라스도를 설득하여 화목하기를 청한지라","헤롯이 두로와 시돈 사람들을 대단히 노여워하나 저희 지방이 왕국에서 나는 양식을 쓰는고로 일심으로 그에게 나아와 왕의 침소 맡은 신하 블라스도를 친하여 화목하기를 청한지라","헤롯이 가이사랴에 있는 동안 두로와 시돈의 대표들이 그를 만나러 왔다. 헤롯은 본래 이 두 도시 사람들을 매우 못마땅해하고 있었으므로 이 대표들은 왕의 시종 블라스도를 설득하여 그를 내세워 헤롯에게 화평을 청하였다. 그 두 도시는 헤롯의 영토와 무역을 하면서 경제적으로 의존하는 형편이었다. 특히 식량은 헤롯이 다스리는 영토에서 사들여야만 하였다.","He had long been very angry with the people of Tyre and Sidon, who now came to him in a body. After winning over Blastus, the king’s chamberlain, they sued for peace because their country was supplied with food from the king’s territory.","And Herod was highly displeased with them of Tyre and Sidon: but they came with one accord to him, and, having made Blastus the king's chamberlain their friend, desired peace; because their country was nourished by the king's country.","He had been quarreling with the people of Tyre and Sidon; they now joined together and sought an audience with him. Having secured the support of Blastus, a trusted personal servant of the king, they asked for peace, because they depended on the king's country for their food supply.","Erat autem iratus Tyriis et Sidoniis; at illi unanimes venerunt ad eum et, persuaso Blasto, qui erat super cubiculum regis, postulabant pacem, eo quod aleretur regio eorum ab annona regis.","ואיבה היתה בין הורדוס ובין בני צור וצידון ויבאו אליו בלב אחד ויפתו את בלסטוס אשר על חדר המלך ויבקשו שלום יען לקחו מחית ארצותם מארץ המלך׃"],["51","12","21","정해진 날에 헤로데는 화려한 임금 복장을 하고 연단에 앉아 그들에게 연설을 하였다.","헤로데는 정한 날에 용포를 두르고 옥좌에 앉아 사람들에게 연설을 하였다.","헤롯이 날을 택하여 왕복을 입고 단상에 앉아 백성에게 연설하니","헤롯이 날을 택하여 왕복을 입고 위에 앉아 백성을 효유한대","알현을 허락할 날이 되자 헤롯은 용포를 입고 왕좌에 앉아 그들에게 연설을 하였다.","On an appointed day, Herod, attired in royal robes, [and] seated on the rostrum, addressed them publicly.","And upon a set day Herod, arrayed in royal apparel, sat upon his throne, and made an oration unto them.","On the appointed day Herod, wearing his royal robes, sat on his throne and delivered a public address to the people.","Statuto autem die, Herodes, vestitus veste regia, sedens pro tribunalicontionabatur ad eos;","ויהי ביום המועד וילבש הורדוס לבוש מלכות וישב על כסא המשפט ויטף אליהם אמרתו׃"],["51","12","22","그때에 군중이 “저것은 신의 목소리지 사람의 목소리가 아니다.” 하고 외쳤다.","그 때에 사람들이 \"이것은 사람의 소리가 아니라 신의 소리다.\" 하고 외쳤다.","백성들이 크게 부르되 이것은 신의 소리요 사람의 소리가 아니라 하거늘","백성들이 크게 부르되 이것은 신의 소리요 사람의 소리는 아니라 하거늘","연설이 끝나자 그들은 열렬한 박수를 보내며 \"인간의 음성이 아니라 신의 음성입니다\" 하고 소리쳤다.","The assembled crowd cried out, “This is the voice of a god, not of a man.”","And the people gave a shout, saying, It is the voice of a god, and not of a man.","They shouted, \"This is the voice of a god, not of a man.\"","populus autem acclamabat:  “Dei vox et non hominis! “.","ויריעו לו העם לאמר קול אלהים הוא ולא קול אדם׃"],["51","12","23","그러자 즉시 주님의 천사가 헤로데를 내리쳤다. 그가 그 영광을 하느님께 돌리지 않았기 때문이다. 그리하여 그는 벌레들에게 먹혀 숨을 거두었다.","그러나 헤로데가 그 영광을 하느님께 돌리지 않았기 때문에 주의 천사가 곧 헤로데를 내리쳤다. 이리하여 그는 벌레에게 먹혀 죽어버리고 말았다.","헤롯이 영광을 하나님께로 돌리지 아니하므로 주의 사자가 곧 치니 벌레에게 먹혀 죽으니라","헤롯이 영광을 하나님께로 돌리지 아니하는고로 주의 사자가 곧 치니 충이 먹어 죽으니라","그러자 그 순간 주님의 천사가 헤롯을 내리쳐 헤롯은 곧 병이 들어 몸에 구더기가 가득 슬어서 죽었다. 하나님께 돌려야 할 영광을 가로채 사람들에게서 예배를 받는 죄를 저질렀기 때문이었다.","At once the angel of the Lord struck him down because he did not ascribe the honor to God, and he was eaten by worms and breathed his last.","And immediately the angel of the Lord smote him, because he gave not God the glory: and he was eaten of worms, and gave up the ghost.","Immediately, because Herod did not give praise to God, an angel of the Lord struck him down, and he was eaten by worms and died.","Confestim autem percussit eum angelus Domini, eo quod non dedisset gloriam Deo; et consumptus a vermibus exspiravit.","ויכהו מלאך יהוה פתאם עקב אשר לא נתן הכבוד לאלהים ויאכלהו תולעים ויגוע׃"],["51","12","24","하느님의 말씀은 더욱 자라면서 널리 퍼져 나갔다.","하느님의 말씀은 더욱 줄기차게 널리 퍼져 나갔다.","하나님의 말씀은 흥왕하여 더하더라","하나님의 말씀은 흥왕하여 더하더라","하나님의 말씀은 점점 더 널리 퍼지고 새로운 신도들이 날로 늘어갔다.","But the word of God continued to spread and grow.","But the word of God grew and multiplied.","But the word of God continued to increase and spread.","Verbum autem Dei crescebat et multiplicabatur.","ודבר אלהים הולך ורב׃"],["51","12","25","바르나바와 사울은 예루살렘에서 사명을 수행한 다음, 마르코라고 하는 요한을 데리고 돌아갔다.","바르나바와 사울은 예루살렘에서 그들의 사명을 다 마치고 마르코라 하는 요한을 데리고 다시 돌아갔다.","바나바와 사울이 부조하는 일을 마치고 마가라 하는 요한을 데리고 예루살렘에서 돌아오니라","바나바와 사울이 1)부조의 일을 마치고 마가라 하는 요한을 데리고 예루살렘에서 돌아오니라헬, 봉사를","바나바와 사울은 예루살렘에서 그들의 임무를 마치자 요한 마가와 함께 안디옥으로 다시 돌아갔다.","After Barnabas and Saul completed their relief mission, they returned to Jerusalem, taking with them John, who is called Mark.","And Barnabas and Saul returned from Jerusalem, when they had fulfilled their ministry, and took with them John, whose surname was Mark.","When Barnabas and Saul had finished their mission, they returned from Jerusalem, taking with them John, also called Mark.","Barnabas autem et Saulus reversi sunt in Ierusalem expleto ministerio, assumpto Ioanne, qui cognominatus est Marcus.","וישובו בר נבא ושאול מירושלים אחרי כלותם את השמוש ויקחו אתם את יוחנן המכנה מרקוס׃"],["51","13","1","안티오키아 교회에는 예언자들과 교사들이 있었는데, 그들은 바르나바, 니게르라고 하는 시메온, 키레네 사람 루키오스, 헤로데 영주의 어린 시절 친구 마나엔, 그리고 사울이었다.","그 때 안티오키아 교회에는 예언자와 교사 몇 사람이 있었는데 그들은 바르나바와 니게르라고 불리는 시므온과 키레네 사람 루기오와 영주 헤로데와 함께 자라난 마나엔과 사울이었다.","안디옥 교회에 선지자들과 교사들이 있으니 곧 바나바와 니게르라 하는 시므온과 구레네 사람 루기오와 분봉 왕 헤롯의 젖동생 마나엔과 및 사울이라","안디옥 교회에 선지자들과 교사들이 있으니 곧 바나바와 니게르라 하는 시므온과 구레네 사람 루기오와 분봉왕 헤롯의 젖동생 마나엔과 및 사울이라","안디옥의 교회에서는 바나바와 사울 외에 \"흑인\"이라는 뜻의 니게르라는 별명을 가진 시므온과 구레네 사람 루기오와 영주 헤롯왕의 젖동생 마나엔 등이 예언자와 교사로 일하고 있었다.","Now there were in the church at Antioch prophets and teachers: Barnabas, Symeon who was called Niger, Lucius of Cyrene, Manaen who was a close friend of Herod the tetrarch, and Saul.","Now there were in the church that was at Antioch certain prophets and teachers; as Barnabas, and Simeon that was called Niger, and Lucius of Cyrene, and Manaen, which had been brought up with Herod the tetrarch, and Saul.","In the church at Antioch there were prophets and teachers: Barnabas, Simeon called Niger, Lucius of Cyrene, Manaen (who had been brought up with Herod the tetrarch) and Saul.","Erant autem in ecclesia, quae erat Antiochiae, pro phetae et doctores: Barnabas et Simeon, qui vocabatur Niger, et Lucius Cyrenensis et Manaen, qui erat Herodis tetrarchae collactaneus, et Saulus.","ואנשים נביאים ומלמדים היו באנטיוכיא בקהלה אשר בה בר נבא ושמעון הנקרא ניגר ולוקיוס הקוריני ומנחם אשר גדל עם הורדוס שר הרבע ושאול׃"],["51","13","2","그들이 주님께 예배를 드리며 단식하고 있을 때에 성령께서 이르셨다. “내가 일을 맡기려고 바르나바와 사울을 불렀으니, 나를 위하여 그 일을 하게 그 사람들을 따로 세워라.”","그들이 단식을 하며 주님께 예배 드리고 있을 때에 성령께서 \"바르나바와 사울을 따로 세워라. 내가 그들에게 맡기기로 정해 놓은 일이 있다.\" 하고 말씀하셨다.","주를 섬겨 금식할 때에 성령이 이르시되 내가 불러 시키는 일을 위하여 바나바와 사울을 따로 세우라 하시니","주를 섬겨 금식할 때에 성령이 가라사대 내가 불러 시키는 일을 위하여 바나바와 사울을 따로 세우라 하시니","하루는 그들이 금식하며 예배를 드리고 있는데 성령께서 \"너희는 바나바와 사울을 따로 세워 내가 두 사람에게 맡길 특별한 일을 하게 하여라\" 하고 말씀하셨다.","While they were worshiping the Lord and fasting, the holy Spirit said, “Set apart for me Barnabas and Saul for the work to which I have called them.”","As they ministered to the Lord, and fasted, the Holy Ghost said, Separate me Barnabas and Saul for the work whereunto I have called them.","While they were worshiping the Lord and fasting, the Holy Spirit said, \"Set apart for me Barnabas and Saul for the work to which I have called them.\"","Ministrantibus autem illis Domino et ieiunantibus, dixit Spiritus Sanctus:  “Separate mihi Barnabam et Saulum in opus, ad quod vocavi eos “.","ויהי בשרתם את יהוה ובצומם ויאמר רוח הקדש הבדילו לי את בר נבא ואת שאול למלאכה אשר קראתים לה׃"],["51","13","3","그래서 그들은 단식하며 기도한 뒤 그 두 사람에게 안수하고 나서 떠나보냈다.","그래서 그들은 다시 단식하며 기도를 하고 나서 그들에게 안수를 해주고 떠나보냈다.","이에 금식하며 기도하고 두 사람에게 안수하여 보내니라","이에 금식하며 기도하고 두 사람에게 안수하여 보내니라","그래서 그들은 금식기도를 끝낸 후에 두 사람에게 안수를 하고 떠나 보냈다.","Then, completing their fasting and prayer, they laid hands on them and sent them off.","And when they had fasted and prayed, and laid their hands on them, they sent them away.","So after they had fasted and prayed, they placed their hands on them and sent them off.","Tunc ieiunantes et orantes imponentesque eis manus dimiserunt illos.","ויצומו ויתפללו ויסמכו את ידיהם עליהם וישלחום׃"],["51","13","4","성령께서 파견하신 바르나바와 사울은 셀레우키아로 내려간 다음, 거기에서 배를 타고 키프로스로 건너갔다.","바르나바와 사울은 성령께서 보내시는 대로 셀류기아로 내려가서 배를 타고 키프로스 섬으로 건너갔다.","두 사람이 성령의 보내심을 받아 실루기아에 내려가 거기서 배 타고 구브로에 가서","두 사람이 성령의 보내심을 받아 실루기아에 내려가 거기서 배 타고 구브로에 가서","성령의 지시를 따라 실루기아로 내려간 바나바와 사울은 배를 타고 구브로 섬으로 건너갔다.","So they, sent forth by the holy Spirit, went down to Seleucia and from there sailed to Cyprus.","So they, being sent forth by the Holy Ghost, departed unto Seleucia; and from thence they sailed to Cyprus.","The two of them, sent on their way by the Holy Spirit, went down to Seleucia and sailed from there to Cyprus.","Et ipsi quidem missi ab Spiritu Sancto devenerunt Seleuciam et inde navigaverunt Cyprum","והמה המשלחים על ידי רוח הקדש ירדו אל סלוקיא ומשם באו באניה אל קפרוס׃"],["51","13","5","그리고 살라미스에 이르러 유다인들의 여러 회당에서 하느님의 말씀을 선포하였다. 그들은 요한을 조수로 데리고 있었다.","그들은 살라미스에 이르러 유다인의 여러 회당에 들러 하느님의 말씀을 전파하였다. 그 때 요한 마르코도 그들을 따라다니며 일을 도왔다.","살라미에 이르러 하나님의 말씀을 유대인의 여러 회당에서 전할새 요한을 수행원으로 두었더라","살라미에 이르러 하나님의 말씀을 유대인의 여러 회당에서 전할쌔 요한을 수종자로 두었더라","요한 마가도 그들을 돕기 위해 동행하였다. 그들은 살라미라는 동네의 여러 유대인 회당에 들어가 하나님의 말씀을 전파하였다.","When they arrived in Salamis, they proclaimed the word of God in the Jewish synagogues. They had John also as their assistant.","And when they were at Salamis, they preached the word of God in the synagogues of the Jews: and they had also John to their minister.","When they arrived at Salamis, they proclaimed the word of God in the Jewish synagogues. John was with them as their helper.","et, cum venissent Salamina, praedicabant verbum Dei in synagogis Iudaeorum; habebant autem et Ioannem ministrum.","ויבאו אל עיר סלמיס ויגידו את דבר האלהים בבתי הכנסיות אשר ליהודים ויהי להם גם יוחנן למשרת׃"],["51","13","6","그들이 온 섬을 가로질러 파포스에 다다랐을 때에 마술사 한 사람을 만났는데, 유다인으로서 바르예수라고 하는 거짓 예언자였다.","그들이 섬을 다 돌고 마침내 바포에 이르렀을 때 한 유다인 마술사를 만나게 되었다. 그는 바르예수라고 하는 거짓 예언자였고","온 섬 가운데로 지나서 바보에 이르러 바예수라 하는 유대인 거짓 선지자인 마술사를 만나니","온 섬 가운데로 지나서 바보에 이르러 바예수라 하는 유대인 거짓 선지자 박수를 만나니","이 마을에서 저 마을로 섬 전체를 두루 다니면서 설교를 계속하여 그들이 마침내 바보라는 마을에 이르렀을 때였다. 그곳에는 거짓 예언자이며 총독 서기오 바울의 시종인 바예수라고 하는 유대인 마술사가 있었다. 총독은 사려 깊고 통찰력 있는 사람이어서 바나바와 바울을 초청하였다. 그는 하나님께서 전하신 말씀을 듣기를 원하였다.","When they had traveled through the whole island as far as Paphos, they met a magician named Bar-Jesus who was a Jewish false prophet.","And when they had gone through the isle unto Paphos, they found a certain sorcerer, a false prophet, a Jew, whose name was Barjesus:","They traveled through the whole island until they came to Paphos. There they met a Jewish sorcerer and false prophet named Bar-Jesus,","Et cum perambulassent universam insulam usque Paphum, invenerunt quendam virum magum pseudoprophetam Iudaeum, cui nomen Bariesu,","ויעברו בכל האי עד פפוס וימצאו איש מגוש אחד נביא שקר איש יהודי ושמו בר ישוע׃"],["51","13","7","그는 슬기로운 사람인 세르기우스 바오로 총독의 수행원 가운데 하나였다. 총독은 바르나바와 사울을 불러 하느님의 말씀을 듣기를 원하였다.","총독 세루기오 바울로의 시종이었다. 총독은 매우 영리한 사람이어서 바르나바와 사울을 청하여 하느님의 말씀을 들으려고 하였다.","그가 총독 서기오 바울과 함께 있으니 서기오 바울은 지혜 있는 사람이라 바나바와 사울을 불러 하나님의 말씀을 듣고자 하더라","그가 총독 서기오 바울과 함께 있으니 서기오 바울은 지혜 있는 사람이라 바나바와 사울을 불러 하나님 말씀을 듣고자 하더라","(6절에 포함되어 있음)","He was with the proconsul Sergius Paulus, a man of intelligence, who had summoned Barnabas and Saul and wanted to hear the word of God.","Which was with the deputy of the country, Sergius Paulus, a prudent man; who called for Barnabas and Saul, and desired to hear the word of God.","who was an attendant of the proconsul, Sergius Paulus. The proconsul, an intelligent man, sent for Barnabas and Saul because he wanted to hear the word of God.","qui erat cum proconsule Sergio Paulo, viro prudente. Hic, accitis Barnaba et Saulo, quaesivit audire verbum Dei;","אשר היה עם סרגיוס פולוס שר המדינה איש נבון והוא קרא אליו את בר נבא ואת שאול ויתאו לשמע את דבר האלהים׃"],["51","13","8","그러나 그리스 말로 마술사를 뜻하는 그 엘리마스는 총독이 믿지 못하게 막으려고 그들을 반대하고 나섰다.","그리스 말로 엘리마라고도 하는 그 마술사는 총독의 개종을 막으려고 두 사도를 방해하였다.","이 마술사 엘루마는 (이 이름을 번역하면 마술사라) 그들을 대적하여 총독으로 믿지 못하게 힘쓰니","이 박수 엘루마는(이 이름을 번역하면 박수라) 저희를 대적하여 총독으로 믿지 못하게 힘쓰니","그러나 마술사 ㄱ) 엘루마는 총독이 두 사도의 말에 귀를 기울였다가 주님을 믿게 될까봐 그들을 훼방하였다. (ㄱ. \"박수\"라는 뜻으로 바예수의 헬라식 이름)","But Elymas the magician (for that is what his name means) opposed them in an attempt to turn the proconsul away from the faith.","But Elymas the sorcerer (for so is his name by interpretation) withstood them, seeking to turn away the deputy from the faith.","But Elymas the sorcerer (for that is what his name means) opposed them and tried to turn the proconsul from the faith.","resistebat autem illis Elymas, magus, sic enim interpretatur nomen eius, quaerens avertere proconsulem a fide.","ויעמד לנגדם אלימא המגוש כי זה תרגום שמו ויבקש להטות את השר מן האמונה׃"],["51","13","9","그때에 바오로라고도 하는 사울이 성령으로 가득 차 그를 유심히 보며","그러나 바울로라고도 불리는 사울은 성령으로 가득 차서 그 마술사를 쏘아보며","바울이라고 하는 사울이 성령이 충만하여 그를 주목하고","바울이라고 하는 사울이 성령이 충만하여 그를 주목하고","그러자 바울이라고도 불리는 사울이 성령이 충만하여 마술사를 쏘아보며 말하였다.","But Saul, also known as Paul, filled with the holy Spirit, looked intently at him","Then Saul, (who also is called Paul,) filled with the Holy Ghost, set his eyes on him.","Then Saul, who was also called Paul, filled with the Holy Spirit, looked straight at Elymas and said,","Saulus autem, qui et Paulus, repletus Spiritu Sancto, intuens in eum","ושאול הנקרא גם פולוס מלא רוח הקדש ויסתכל בו׃"],["51","13","10","말하였다. “온갖 사기와 온갖 기만으로 충만한 자, 악마의 자식, 모든 정의의 원수! 당신은 언제까지 주님의 바른길을 왜곡시킬 셈이오?","\"기만과 죄악으로 가득 찬 이 악마의 자식아, 너는 나쁜 짓만 골라가면서 하는 악당이다. 언제까지 너는 주님의 길을 훼방할 셈이냐?","이르되 모든 거짓과 악행이 가득한 자요 마귀의 자식이요 모든 의의 원수여 주의 바른 길을 굽게 하기를 그치지 아니하겠느냐","가로되 모든 궤계와 악행이 가득한 자요 마귀의 자식이요 모든 의의 원수여 주의 바른 길을 굽게 하기를 그치지 아니하겠느냐","\"기만과 악독이 가득 차고 모든 선한 일의 원수인 이 악마의 자식아, 언제까지 주께 대항할 작정이냐?","and said, “You son of the devil, you enemy of all that is right, full of every sort of deceit and fraud. Will you not stop twisting the straight paths of [the] Lord?","And said, O full of all subtilty and all mischief, thou child of the devil, thou enemy of all righteousness, wilt thou not cease to pervert the right ways of the Lord?","\"You are a child of the devil and an enemy of everything that is right! You are full of all kinds of deceit and trickery. Will you never stop perverting the right ways of the Lord?","dixit:  “O plene omni dolo et omni fallacia, fili Diaboli, inimice omnis iustitiae, non desines subvertere vias Domini rectas?","ויאמר אתה המלא כל מרמה וכל עולה בן בליעל ושונא כל צדק הלא תחדל לסלף את דרכי יהוה הישרים׃"],["51","13","11","이제 보시오, 주님의 손이 당신 위에 놓여 있소. 당신은 눈이 멀어 한동안 해를 보지 못할 것이오.” 그러자 즉시 짙은 어둠이 그를 덮쳐, 그는 사방을 더듬으며 자기 손을 잡아 이끌어 줄 사람을 찾았다.","이제 주님께서 손으로 너를 내리치실 것이다. 그러면 너는 눈이 멀어 한동안 햇빛을 보지 못하게 될 것이다.\" 하고 꾸짖었다. 이 말이 떨어지자 안개와 어둠이 내리덮쳐 그는 앞을 더듬으며 손을 잡아줄 사람을 찾았다.","보라 이제 주의 손이 네 위에 있으니 네가 맹인이 되어 얼마 동안 해를 보지 못하리라 하니 즉시 안개와 어둠이 그를 덮어 인도할 사람을 두루 구하는지라","보라 이제 주의 손이 네 위에 있으니 네가 소경이 되어 얼마 동안 해를 보지 못하리라 하니 즉시 안개와 어두움이 그를 덮어 인도할 사람을 두루 구하는지라","이제 진노하신 하나님께서 벌을 내려 너는 한동안 빛을 보지 못하는 맹인이 될 것이다.\" 그러자 바로 그 순간에 안개와 어둠이 그를 덮어서 그는 앞을 더듬으며 손을 잡아 부축해 줄 사람을 찾았다.","Even now the hand of the Lord is upon you. You will be blind, and unable to see the sun for a time.” Immediately a dark mist fell upon him, and he went about seeking people to lead him by the hand.","And now, behold, the hand of the Lord is upon thee, and thou shalt be blind, not seeing the sun for a season. And immediately there fell on him a mist and a darkness; and he went about seeking some to lead him by the hand.","Now the hand of the Lord is against you. You are going to be blind, and for a time you will be unable to see the light of the sun.\" Immediately mist and darkness came over him, and he groped about, seeking someone to lead him by the hand.","Et nunc, ecce manus Domini super te; et eris caecus, non videns solem usque ad tempus “. Et confestim cecidit in eum caligo et tenebrae, et circumiens quaerebat, qui eum manum darent.","ועתה הנה יד יהוה בך והיית עור ולא תראה את השמש עד עת מועד ותפל עליו פתאם אפלה וחשכה ויפן הנה והנה ויבקש איש להוליכו בידו׃"],["51","13","12","그때에 그 광경을 본 총독은 주님의 가르침에 깊은 감동을 받아 믿게 되었다.","이 광경을 처음부터 보고 있던 총독은 주님께 관한 가르침에 깊이 감동되어 신도가 되었다.","이에 총독이 그렇게 된 것을 보고 믿으며 주의 가르치심을 놀랍게 여기니라","이에 총독이 그렇게 된 것을 보고 믿으며 주의 가르치심을 기이히 여기니라","이것을 본 총독은 하나님의 말씀의 권능에 놀라워하며 하나님을 믿게 되었다.","When the proconsul saw what had happened, he came to believe, for he was astonished by the teaching about the Lord.","Then the deputy, when he saw what was done, believed, being astonished at the doctrine of the Lord.","When the proconsul saw what had happened, he believed, for he was amazed at the teaching about the Lord.","Tunc proconsul, cum vidisset factum, credidit admirans super doctrinam Domini.","והשר כאשר ראה את המעשה האמין וישתומם על תורת האדון׃"],["51","13","13","바오로 일행은 파포스에서 배를 타고 팜필리아의 페르게로 가고, 요한은 그들과 헤어져 예루살렘으로 돌아갔다.","바울로 일행은 바포에서 배를 타고 밤필리아 지방 베르게로 건너갔다. 거기에서 요한은 그들과 헤어져 예루살렘으로 돌아갔다.","바울과 및 동행하는 사람들이 바보에서 배 타고 밤빌리아에 있는 버가에 이르니 요한은 그들에게서 떠나 예루살렘으로 돌아가고","바울과 및 동행하는 사람들이 바보에서 배 타고 밤빌리아에 있는 버가에 이르니 요한은 저희에게서 떠나 예루살렘으로 돌아가고","바울 일행은 바보에서 배를 타고 밤빌리아로 가는 길에 버가라는 항구에 내렸다. 그러나 거기서 요한은 두 사람을 남겨 두고 혼자서 예루살렘으로 돌아가 버렸으므로","From Paphos, Paul and his companions set sail and arrived at Perga in Pamphylia. But John left them and returned to Jerusalem.","Now when Paul and his company loosed from Paphos, they came to Perga in Pamphylia: and John departing from them returned to Jerusalem.","From Paphos, Paul and his companions sailed to Perga in Pamphylia, where John left them to return to Jerusalem.","Et cum a Papho navigassent, qui erant cum Paulo, venerunt Pergen Pamphyliae; Ioannes autem discedens ab eis reversus est Hierosolymam.","ויצאו פולוס והאנשים אשר אתו מפפוס וירדו באניה ויבאו אל פרגי אשר בפמפוליא ויעזב אתם יוחנן וישב ירושלים׃"],["51","13","14","그들은 페르게에서 더 나아가 피시디아의 안티오키아에 이르러, 안식일에 회당에 들어가 앉았다.","나머지 사람들은 베르게에서 다시 길을 떠나 비시디아 안티오키아까지 갔다. 그들은 안식일이 되어 그 곳 회당에 들어가 앉아 있었다.","그들은 버가에서 더 나아가 비시디아 안디옥에 이르러 안식일에 회당에 들어가 앉으니라","저희는 버가로부터 지나 비시디아 안디옥에 이르러 안식일에 회당에 들어가 앉으니라","바나바와 바울만이 비시디아 지방에 있는 안디옥이라는 도시로 갔다. 안식일이 되어 두 사람이 예배를 드리려고 회당으로 갔을 때였다.","They continued on from Perga and reached Antioch in Pisidia. On the sabbath they entered (into) the synagogue and took their seats.","But when they departed from Perga, they came to Antioch in Pisidia, and went into the synagogue on the sabbath day, and sat down.","From Perga they went on to Pisidian Antioch. On the Sabbath they entered the synagogue and sat down.","Illi vero pertranseuntes, a Perge venerunt Antiochiam Pisidiae, et ingressi synagogam die sabbatorum sederunt.","והמה נסעו מפרגי ויבאו אל אנטיוכיא אשר בפיסדיא ויבאו אל בית הכנסת ביום השבת וישבו׃"],["51","13","15","율법과 예언서 봉독이 끝나자 회당장들이 그들에게 사람을 보내어, “형제들이여, 백성을 격려할 말씀이 있으면 해 주십시오.” 하고 말하였다.","회당에서 율법서와 예언서의 낭독이 끝나자 회당의 간부들이 사람을 시켜 바울로와 바르나바에게 \"두 분께서 혹 격려할 말씀이 있거든 이 회중에게 한 말씀 해주셨으면 좋겠습니다.\" 하고 청하였다.","율법과 선지자의 글을 읽은 후에 회당장들이 사람을 보내어 물어 이르되 형제들아 만일 백성을 권할 말이 있거든 말하라 하니","율법과 선지자의 글을 읽은 후에 회당장들이 사람을 보내어 물어 가로되 형제들아 만일 백성을 권할 말이 있거든 말하라 하니","보통 때처럼 모세의 책과 예언서 낭독을 끝낸 예배위원들이 두 사람에게 부탁하였다. \"형제들이여, 혹시 우리에게 가르칠 말씀이 있거든 나오셔서 말씀하여 주십시오.\"","After the reading of the law and the prophets, the synagogue officials sent word to them, “My brothers, if one of you has a word of exhortation for the people, please speak.”","And after the reading of the law and the prophets the rulers of the synagogue sent unto them, saying, Ye men and brethren, if ye have any word of exhortation for the people, say on.","After the reading from the Law and the Prophets, the synagogue rulers sent word to them, saying, \"Brothers, if you have a message of encouragement for the people, please speak.\"","Post lectionem autem Legis et Prophetarum, miserunt principes synagogae ad eos dicentes:  “Viri fratres, si quis est in vobis sermo exhortationis ad plebem, dicite! “.","ויהי אחר קריאת התורה והנביאים וישלחו אליהם ראשי הכנסת לאמר אנשים אחים אם יש לכם דבר מוסר לעם דברו׃"],["51","13","16","그러자 바오로가 일어나 조용히 하라고 손짓한 다음 이렇게 말하였다. “이스라엘인 여러분, 그리고 하느님을 경외하는 여러분, 내 말을 들어 보십시오.","그래서 바울로는 일어나 손짓을 하며 이렇게 말하였다. \"이스라엘 동포 여러분, 그리고 하느님을 공경하는 여러분, 제 말을 들어보십시오.","바울이 일어나 손짓하며 말하되 이스라엘 사람들과 및 하나님을 경외하는 사람들아 들으라","바울이 일어나 손짓하며 말하되 이스라엘 사람들과 및 하나님을 경외하는 사람들아 들으라","그래서 바울이 일어나 모인 사람들에게 인사한 후에 설교를 시작하였다. \"이스라엘 동포 여러분, 그리고 이 자리에 계시는 하나님을 경외하는 여러분, 우선 우리 역사에 대한 이야기로 설교를 시작하겠습니다.","So Paul got up, motioned with his hand, and said, “Fellow Israelites and you others who are God-fearing, listen.","Then Paul stood up, and beckoning with his hand said, Men of Israel, and ye that fear God, give audience.","Standing up, Paul motioned with his hand and said: \"Men of Israel and you Gentiles who worship God, listen to me!","Surgens autem Paulus et manu silentium indicens ait:  “Viri Israelitae et qui timetis Deum, audite.","ויקם פולוס וינף ידו ויאמר אנשי ישראל ויראי אלהים שמעו׃"],["51","13","17","이 이스라엘 백성의 하느님께서는 우리 조상들을 선택하시고, 이집트 땅에서 나그네살이할 때에 그들을 큰 백성으로 키워 주셨으며, 권능의 팔로 그들을 거기에서 데리고 나오셨습니다.","우리 이스라엘 백성의 하느님께서는 우리 조상들을 택하셔서 그들이 이국 땅 이집트에 머물러 있는 동안에 강대한 민족으로 키워주셨을 뿐만 아니라 크신 능력으로써 그들을 이집트에서 데려내오셨습니다.","이 이스라엘 백성의 하나님이 우리 조상들을 택하시고 애굽 땅에서 나그네 된 그 백성을 높여 큰 권능으로 인도하여 내사","이 이스라엘 백성의 하나님이 우리 조상들을 택하시고 애굽 땅에서 나그네 된 그 백성을 높여 1)큰 권능으로 인도하여 내사 헬, 높이 드신 팔로","이스라엘 백성의 하나님께서는 우리 조상들을 가려 뽑으셨습니다. 그리고 그들이 이국 땅 애굽에서 이방인의 종살이를 하고 있는 그들을 높이셔서 영광스럽게 구출해 주셨습니다.","The God of this people Israel chose our ancestors and exalted the people during their sojourn in the land of Egypt. With uplifted arm he led them out of it","The God of this people of Israel chose our fathers, and exalted the people when they dwelt as strangers in the land of Egypt, and with an high arm brought he them out of it.","The God of the people of Israel chose our fathers; he made the people prosper during their stay in Egypt, with mighty power he led them out of that country,","Deus plebis huius Israel elegit patres nostros et plebem exaltavit, cum essent incolae in terra Aegypti, et in brachio excelso eduxit eos ex ea;","אלהי העם הזה אלהי ישראל בחר באבותינו וירומם את העם בהיותם גרים בארץ מצרים ובזרוע רמה הוציאם משם׃"],["51","13","18","그리고 약 사십 년 동안 광야에서 그들의 소행을 참아 주시고,","더구나 광야 생활 사십 년 동안은 1)그들이 저지른 온갖 잘못도 참아주셨습니다. 어떤 사본에는 \"그들을 먹여주셨습니다.\"로 되어 있다. 칠십인역 신명 1:31.","광야에서 약 사십 년간 그들의 소행을 참으시고","광야에서 약 사십 년간 2)저희 소행을 참으시고 어떤 사본에, 기르시고","그리고 ㄱ) 광야를 방황하던 40년 동안에도 그들을 양육하여 주셨습니다. (ㄱ. 70인역 신1:31)","and for about forty years he put up with them in the desert.","And about the time of forty years suffered he their manners in the wilderness.","he endured their conduct for about forty years in the desert,","et per quadraginta fere annorum tempus mores eorum sustinuit in deserto;","וישא אתם ויכלכלם במדבר כארבעים שנה׃"],["51","13","19","가나안 땅에서 일곱 민족을 멸하시어 그 땅을 그들의 상속 재산으로 주셨는데,","그리고 2)그들이 가나안 땅에 들어갔을 때에는 하느님께서 그 곳 일곱 민족을 쳐부수시고 그 땅을 그들에게 주셔서 신명 7:1.","가나안 땅 일곱 족속을 멸하사 그 땅을 기업으로 주시기까지 약 사백오십 년간이라","가나안 땅 일곱 족속을 멸하사 그 땅을 기업으로 주시고(약 사백 오십 년간)","그후에 하나님께서는 ㄴ) 가나안 일곱 민족을 멸망시키시고 그들의 땅을 이스라엘 민족에게 상속 재산으로 주셔서 약 450년 동안이나 사사들을 세워 다스리게 하셨습니다. 이렇게 해서 예언자 사무엘 때까지 이르렀습니다. (ㄴ. 신7:1)","When he had destroyed seven nations in the land of Canaan, he gave them their land as an inheritance","And when he had destroyed seven nations in the land of Chanaan, he divided their land to them by lot.","he overthrew seven nations in Canaan and gave their land to his people as their inheritance.","et destruens gentes septem in terra Chanaan sorte distribuit terram eorum,","וישמד שבעה גוים בארץ כנען ויחלק את ארצם להם לנחלה׃"],["51","13","20","그때까지 약 사백오십 년이 걸렸습니다. 그 뒤에 사무엘 예언자 때까지 판관들을 세워 주시고,","약 사백오십 년 동안 차지하게 하셨습니다. 그 뒤 판관들을 세워주셨고 예언자 사무엘 때에 이르러","그 후에 선지자 사무엘 때까지 사사를 주셨더니","그 후에 선지자 사무엘 때까지 사사를 주셨더니","(19절에 포함되어 있음)","at the end of about four hundred and fifty years. After these things he provided judges up to Samuel [the] prophet.","And after that he gave unto them judges about the space of four hundred and fifty years, until Samuel the prophet.","All this took about 450 years. \"After this, God gave them judges until the time of Samuel the prophet.","quasi quadringentos et quinquaginta annos. Et post haec dedit iudices usque ad Samuel prophetam.","ואחרי כן נתן להם שפטים כארבע מאות וחמשים שנה עד ימי שמואל הנביא׃"],["51","13","21","그다음에 그들이 임금을 요구하자, 하느님께서는 벤야민 지파 사람으로서 키스의 아들인 사울을 그들에게 사십 년 동안 임금으로 세워 주셨습니다.","그들이 왕을 요구하자 하느님께서는 베냐민 지파 사람 키스의 아들 사울을 왕으로 세워 사십 년 동안 다스리게 하시다가","그 후에 그들이 왕을 구하거늘 하나님이 베냐민 지파 사람 기스의 아들 사울을 사십 년간 주셨다가","그 후에 저희가 왕을 구하거늘 하나님이 베냐민 지파 사람 기스의 아들 사울을 사십 년간 주셨다가","이때 백성들이 왕을 세워 주실 것을 요구하자 하나님께서는 베냐민 지파 사람 기스의 아들 사울을 그들의 왕으로 세우셔서 40년 동안을 다스리게 하셨습니다.","Then they asked for a king. God gave them Saul, son of Kish, a man from the tribe of Benjamin, for forty years.","And afterward they desired a king: and God gave unto them Saul the son of Cis, a man of the tribe of Benjamin, by the space of forty years.","Then the people asked for a king, and he gave them Saul son of Kish, of the tribe of Benjamin, who ruled forty years.","Et exinde postulaverunt regem, et dedit illis Deus Saul filium Cis, virum de tribu Beniamin, annis quadraginta.","וישאלו מלך ויתן להם אלהים את שאול בן קיש איש משבט בנימן ארבעים שנה׃"],["51","13","22","그러고 나서 그를 물리치시고 그들에게 다윗을 임금으로 세우셨습니다. 그에 대해서는 ‘내가 이사이의 아들 다윗을 찾아냈으니, 그는 내 마음에 드는 사람으로 나의 뜻을 모두 실천할 것이다.’ 하고 증언해 주셨습니다.","그를 물리치시고 다윗을 왕으로 세우셨습니다. 이 다윗에 대해서는 '3)내가 이새의 아들 다윗을 찾아냈으니 그는 내 마음에 드는 사람이요, 내 뜻을 다 이루어줄 사람이다.' 하고 말씀하신 바가 있습니다. 시편 89:20; 1사무 13:14.","폐하시고 다윗을 왕으로 세우시고 증언하여 이르시되 ㄱ)내가 이새의 아들 다윗을 만나니 내 마음에 맞는 사람이라 내 뜻을 다 이루리라 하시더니","폐하시고 다윗을 왕으로 세우시고 증거하여 가라사대 ㄱ)내가 이새의 아들 다윗을 만나니 내 마음에 합한 사람이라 내 뜻을 다 이루게 하리라 하시더니 삼상 13:14, 시 89:20","그리고 그를 물러나게 하신 뒤에는 다윗을 왕으로 세우시고 ㄷ) \"내가 이새의 아들 다윗을 찾아냈으니 그는 내 마음에 드는 사람이다. 그가 내 뜻에 복종하기 때문이다\" 하고 칭찬하셨습니다. (ㄷ. 삼상13:14,시89:20)","Then he removed him and raised up David as their king; of him he testified, ‘I have found David, son of Jesse, a man after my own heart; he will carry out my every wish.’","And when he had removed him, he raised up unto them David to be their king; to whom also he gave their testimony, and said, I have found David the son of Jesse, a man after mine own heart, which shall fulfil all my will.","After removing Saul, he made David their king. He testified concerning him: 'I have found David son of Jesse a man after my own heart; he will do everything I want him to do.'","Et amoto illo, suscitavit illis David in regem, cui et testimonium perhibens dixit:  “Inveni David filium Iesse, virum secundum cor meum, qui faciet omnes voluntates meas “.","וכהסירו אותו ויקם את דוד למלך עליהם אשר גם העיד עליו לאמר מצאתי דוד את בן ישי איש כלבבי והוא יעשה את כל חפצי׃"],["51","13","23","이 다윗의 후손 가운데에서, 하느님께서는 약속하신 대로 예수님을 구원자로 이스라엘에 보내셨습니다.","하느님께서는 언약하신 대로 다윗의 후손 가운데서 이스라엘을 구원할 구세주 예수를 보내주셨습니다.","하나님이 약속하신 대로 이 사람의 후손에서 이스라엘을 위하여 구주를 세우셨으니 곧 예수라","하나님이 약속하신대로 이 사람의 씨에서 이스라엘을 위하여 구주를 세우셨으니 곧 예수라","이 다윗의 후손 가운데서 하나님께서 약속하신 대로 이스라엘의 구세주 예수께서 나신 것입니다.","From this man’s descendants God, according to his promise, has brought to Israel a savior, Jesus.","Of this man's seed hath God according to his promise raised unto Israel a Saviour, Jesus:","\"From this man's descendants God has brought to Israel the Savior Jesus, as he promised.","Huius Deus ex semine secundum promissionem eduxit Israel salvatorem Iesum,","וזה הוא אשר מזרעו הקים האלהים כפי ההבטחה גואל לישראל את ישוע׃"],["51","13","24","이분께서 오시기 전에 요한이 이스라엘 온 백성에게 회개의 세례를 미리 선포하였습니다.","그분이 오시기 전에 요한은 이스라엘 온 백성에게 회개하고 세례를 받으라고 선포하였습니다.","그가 오시기에 앞서 요한이 먼저 회개의 세례를 이스라엘 모든 백성에게 전파하니라","그 오시는 앞에 요한이 먼저 회개의 세례를 이스라엘 모든 백성에게 전파하니라","이분이 오시기 전에 침례 요한은 이스라엘의 모든 사람들에게 죄에서 떠나 하나님께로 돌아와야 한다고 선포하였습니다.","John heralded his coming by proclaiming a baptism of repentance to all the people of Israel;","When John had first preached before his coming the baptism of repentance to all the people of Israel.","Before the coming of Jesus, John preached repentance and baptism to all the people of Israel.","praedicante Ioanne ante adventum eius baptismum paenitentiae omni populo Israel.","אשר לפני בואו קדם יוחנן לקרא את טבילת התשובה אל כל עם ישראל׃"],["51","13","25","요한은 사명을 다 마칠 무렵 이렇게 말하였습니다. ‘너희는 내가 누구라고 생각하느냐? 나는 그분이 아니다. 그분께서는 내 뒤에 오시는데, 나는 그분의 신발 끈을 풀어 드리기에도 합당하지 않다.’","요한이 자기 사명을 다 마쳐갈 무렵에 '당신들은 나를 누구라고 생각합니까? 나는 그리스도가 아닙니다. 그분은 내 뒤에 오실 터인데 나는 그분의 신발 끈을 풀어드릴 자격조차 없는 사람입니다.' 하고 말하였습니다.","요한이 그 달려갈 길을 마칠 때에 말하되 너희가 나를 누구로 생각하느냐 나는 그리스도가 아니라 내 뒤에 오시는 이가 있으니 나는 그 발의 신발끈을 풀기도 감당하지 못하리라 하였으니","요한이 그 달려 갈 길을 마칠 때에 말하되 너희가 나를 누구로 생각하느냐 나는 그리스도가 아니라 내 뒤에 오시는 이가 있으니 나는 그 발의 신 풀기도 감당치 못하리라 하였으니","요한은 그의 생명이 거의 다해 가던 무렵에 이렇게 말하였습니다. \"여러분은 나를 메시야로 생각합니까? 나는 메시야가 아닙니다. 그분은 곧 오십니다. 나는 그분의 신발끈조차 풀어 드릴 만한 자격도 없는 사람입니다. 나는 그분과 비교조차 할 수 없는 참으로 아무 가치도 없는 사람이란 말입니다.\"","and as John was completing his course, he would say, ‘What do you suppose that I am? I am not he. Behold, one is coming after me; I am not worthy to unfasten the sandals of his feet.’","And as John fulfilled his course, he said, Whom think ye that I am? I am not he. But, behold, there cometh one after me, whose shoes of his feet I am not worthy to loose.","As John was completing his work, he said: 'Who do you think I am? I am not that one. No, but he is coming after me, whose sandals I am not worthy to untie.'","Cum impleret autem Ioannes cursum suum, dicebat:  “Quid me arbitramini esse? Non sum ego; sed ecce venit post me, cuius non sum dignus calceamenta pedum solvere “.","ויהי ככלות יוחנן את מרוצתו ויאמר למי תחשבוני לא אני הוא כי הנה הוא בא אחרי ואני נקלתי מהתיר את נעלי רגליו׃"],["51","13","26","형제 여러분, 아브라함의 후손 여러분, 그리고 하느님을 경외하는 여러분, 이 구원의 말씀이 바로 우리에게 파견되셨습니다.","아브라함의 후손인 형제 여러분, 그리고 하느님을 공경하는 이방인 형제 여러분, 이 구원의 말씀은 바로 우리에게 보내주신 것입니다.","형제들아 아브라함의 후손과 너희 중 하나님을 경외하는 사람들아 이 구원의 말씀을 우리에게 보내셨거늘","형제들 아브라함의 후예와 너희 중 하나님을 경외하는 사람들아 이 구원의 말씀을 우리에게 보내셨거늘","아브라함의 자손과 하나님을 경외하는 이방인 여러분, 이 구원은 우리 모두를 위한 것입니다.","“My brothers, children of the family of Abraham, and those others among you who are God-fearing, to us this word of salvation has been sent.","Men and brethren, children of the stock of Abraham, and whosoever among you feareth God, to you is the word of this salvation sent.","\"Brothers, children of Abraham, and you God-fearing Gentiles, it is to us that this message of salvation has been sent.","Viri fratres, filii generis Abraham et qui in vobis timent Deum, nobis verbum salutis huius missum est.","אנשים אחים בני משפחת אברהם ויראי אלהים אשר בקרבכם לכם שלוח דבר הישועה הזאת׃"],["51","13","27","그런데 예루살렘 주민들과 그들의 지도자들은 그분을 알아보지 못하고 단죄하여, 안식일마다 봉독되는 예언자들의 말씀이 이루어지게 하였습니다.","그런데 예루살렘에 사는 사람들과 지도자들은 예수를 알아보지 못하고 그를 단죄하였습니다. 그리하여 결국 안식일마다 읽는 예언서의 말씀을 성취시켰던 것입니다.","예루살렘에 사는 자들과 그들 관리들이 예수와 및 안식일마다 외우는 바 선지자들의 말을 알지 못하므로 예수를 정죄하여 선지자들의 말을 응하게 하였도다","예루살렘에 사는 자들과 저희 관원들이 예수와 및 안식일마다 외우는바 선지자들의 말을 알지 못하므로 예수를 정죄하여 선지자들의 말을 응하게 하였도다","그런데도 예루살렘에 있는 유대인들과 그들의 지도자들은 예수를 죽임으로써 예언자들의 예언이 이루어지게 하였습니다. 그들은 안식일마다 예언자의 말씀을 읽고서도 예수께서 바로 예언자들이 기록한 그분이라는 것을 깨닫지도 알아보지도 못한 것입니다.","The inhabitants of Jerusalem and their leaders failed to recognize him, and by condemning him they fulfilled the oracles of the prophets that are read sabbath after sabbath.","For they that dwell at Jerusalem, and their rulers, because they knew him not, nor yet the voices of the prophets which are read every sabbath day, they have fulfilled them in condemning him.","The people of Jerusalem and their rulers did not recognize Jesus, yet in condemning him they fulfilled the words of the prophets that are read every Sabbath.","Qui enim habitabant Ierusalem et principes eorum, hunc ignorantes et voces Prophetarum, quae per omne sabbatum leguntur, iudicantes impleverunt;","כי ישבי ירושלים וראשיהם יען אשר לא הכירהו מלאו במשפטם אשר שפטהו את דברי הנביאים הנקראים בכל שבת׃"],["51","13","28","그들은 사형에 처할 아무런 죄목도 찾아내지 못하였지만, 그분을 죽이라고 빌라도에게 요구하였습니다.","사실 그들은 예수를 죽일 만한 아무런 근거도 찾지 못했지만 빌라도를 졸라서 예수를 죽이게 하였습니다.","죽일 죄를 하나도 찾지 못하였으나 빌라도에게 죽여 달라 하였으니","죽일 죄를 하나도 찾지 못하였으나 빌라도에게 죽여 달라 하였으니","그들은 예수를 처형할 만한 아무런 정당한 근거도 없이 빌라도에게 강요하여 예수를 죽이게 하였습니다.","For even though they found no grounds for a death sentence, they asked Pilate to have him put to death,","And though they found no cause of death in him, yet desired they Pilate that he should be slain.","Though they found no proper ground for a death sentence, they asked Pilate to have him executed.","et nullam causam mortis invenientes petierunt a Pilato, ut interficeretur;","ואף כי לא מצאו בו משפט מות שאלו מאת פילטוס להמיתו׃"],["51","13","29","그리하여 그분에 관하여 성경에 기록된 모든 것을 그들이 그렇게 다 이행한 뒤, 사람들은 그분을 나무에서 내려 무덤에 모셨습니다.","이리하여 그분에 관한 모든 기록이 다 이루어진 뒤에 그들은 예수의 시체를 십자가에서 내려다가 무덤에 모셨습니다.","성경에 그를 가리켜 기록한 말씀을 다 응하게 한 것이라 후에 나무에서 내려다가 무덤에 두었으나","성경에 저를 가리켜 기록한 말씀을 다 응하게 한 것이라 후에 나무에서 내려다가 무덤에 두었으나","그분의 죽음에 관한 모든 예언대로 그들이 다 해치운 후에 그들은 예수의 시체를 십자가에서 내려다가 무덤에 장사하였습니다.","and when they had accomplished all that was written about him, they took him down from the tree and placed him in a tomb.","And when they had fulfilled all that was written of him, they took him down from the tree, and laid him in a sepulchre.","When they had carried out all that was written about him, they took him down from the tree and laid him in a tomb.","cumque consummassent omnia, quae de eo scripta erant, deponentes eum de ligno posuerunt in monumento.","וכאשר השלימו את כל הדברים הכתובים עליו הורידו אותו מן העץ ויניחהו בקבר׃"],["51","13","30","그러나 하느님께서는 그분을 죽은 이들 가운데에서 다시 일으키셨습니다.","그러나 하느님께서는 예수를 죽은 자들 가운데서 살리셨습니다.","하나님이 죽은 자 가운데서 그를 살리신지라","하나님이 죽은자 가운데서 저를 살리신지라","그러나 하나님께서는 죽었던 예수를 다시 살리셨습니다.","But God raised him from the dead,","But God raised him from the dead:","But God raised him from the dead,","Deus vero suscitavit eum a mortuis;","אבל האלהים הקימו מן המתים׃"],["51","13","31","그 뒤에 그분께서는 당신과 함께 갈릴래아에서 예루살렘으로 올라간 이들에게 여러 날 동안 나타나셨습니다. 이 사람들이 이제 백성 앞에서 그분의 증인이 된 것입니다.","그 뒤 예수께서는 갈릴래아에서 예루살렘으로 같이 올라간 사람들에게 여러 날 동안 나타내 보이셨습니다. 바로 이 사람들이 지금 우리 백성들 앞에서 예수의 증인이 된 것입니다.","갈릴리로부터 예루살렘에 함께 올라간 사람들에게 여러 날 보이셨으니 그들이 이제 백성 앞에서 그의 증인이라","갈릴리로부터 예루살렘에 함께 올라간 사람들에게 여러날 보이셨으니 저희가 이제 백성 앞에 그의 증인이라","그후 예수께서는 갈릴리에서 예루살렘까지 동행한 사람들에게 여러 번 모습을 나타내 보이셨습니다. 이 사람들이 계속해서 이 사실을 여러 사람들 앞에 증거하고 있는 것입니다.","and for many days he appeared to those who had come up with him from Galilee to Jerusalem. These are [now] his witnesses before the people.","And he was seen many days of them which came up with him from Galilee to Jerusalem, who are his witnesses unto the people.","and for many days he was seen by those who had traveled with him from Galilee to Jerusalem. They are now his witnesses to our people.","qui visus est per dies multos his, qui simul ascenderant cum eo de Galilaea in Ierusalem, qui nunc sunt testes eius ad plebem.","וירא ימים רבים אל העלים אתו מן הגליל ירושלימה והמה עתה עדיו אל העם׃"],["51","13","32","그래서 우리는 여러분에게 이 기쁜 소식을 전합니다. 우리 선조들에게 하신 약속을,","우리도 하느님께서 우리 조상들에게 약속하신 그 기쁜 소식을 여러분에게 전하러 왔습니다.","우리도 조상들에게 주신 약속을 너희에게 전파하노니","우리도 조상들에게 주신 약속을 너희에게 전파하노니","이제 바나바와 나도 기쁜 소식을 여러분에게 가지고 왔습니다. 그 기쁜 소식이란 하나님께서 예수를 다시 살리심으로써 우리 조상들에게 하신 하나님의 약속이 우리 때에 와서 실현되었다는 사실입니다. 시편 제 2편에서 ㄱ) \"오늘 내가 너를 내 아들로 세워 영광스럽게 하였다\"고 하신 그대로입니다. (ㄱ. 시2:7)","We ourselves are proclaiming this good news to you that what God promised our ancestors","And we declare unto you glad tidings, how that the promise which was made unto the fathers,","\"We tell you the good news: What God promised our fathers","Et nos vobis evangelizamus eam, quae ad patres promissio facta est,","ואנחנו מבשרים אתכם את בשורת ההבטחה אשר היתה לאבותינו כי אתה מלא האלהים לבנינו בהקימו את ישוע׃"],["51","13","33","하느님께서는 예수님을 다시 살리시어 그들의 후손인 우리에게 실현시켜 주셨습니다. 이는 시편 제이편에 기록된 그대로입니다. '너는 내 아들. 내가 오늘 너를 낳았노라.'","하느님께서는 예수를 다시 살리셔서 자녀 된 우리에게 그 약속을 이루어주셨기 때문입니다. 시편 제이편에도, '4)너는 내 아들, 내가 오늘 너를 낳았다.'라고 기록되어 있지 않습니까? 시편 2:7.","곧 하나님이 예수를 일으키사 우리 자녀들에게 이 약속을 이루게 하셨다 함이라 시편 둘째 편에 기록한 바와 같이 ㄴ)너는 내 아들이라 오늘 너를 낳았다 하셨고","곧 하나님이 예수를 일으키사 우리 자녀들에게 이 약속을 이루게 하셨다 함이라 시편 둘째 편에 기록한 바와 같이 ㄴ)너는 내 아들이라 오늘 너를 낳았다 하셨고 시 2:7","(32절에 포함되어 있음)","he has brought to fulfillment for us, (their) children, by raising up Jesus, as it is written in the second psalm, ‘You are my son; this day I have begotten you.’","God hath fulfilled the same unto us their children, in that he hath raised up Jesus again; as it is also written in the second psalm, Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee.","he has fulfilled for us, their children, by raising up Jesus. As it is written in the second Psalm: \"'You are my Son; today I have become your Father.'","quoniam hanc Deus adimplevit filiis eorum, nobis resuscitans Iesum, sicut et in Psalmo secundo scriptum est:  “Filius meus es tu; ego hodie genui te “.","ככתוב במזמור השני בני אתה היום ילדתיך׃"],["51","13","34","또 하느님께서는 그분을 죽은 이들 가운데에서 살리시어 다시는 죽음의 나라로 돌아가지 않게 하신 것을, 이렇게 미리 말씀하셨습니다. ‘나는 다윗에게 약속한 거룩하고 확실한 것들을 너희에게 주겠다.’","하느님께서는 예수를 죽은 자들 가운데서 살리시고 다시는 썩지 않게 하셨습니다. 이것은 예언서에,'5)내가 다윗에게 약속한 거룩하고 확실한 축복을 너희에게 주리라.' 하신 말씀과 이사 55:3.","또 하나님께서 죽은 자 가운데서 그를 일으키사 다시 썩음을 당하지 않게 하실 것을 가르쳐 이르시되 ㄷ)내가 다윗의 거룩하고 미쁜 은사를 너희에게 주리라 하셨으며","또 하나님께서 죽은 자 가운데서 저를 일으키사 다시 썩음을 당하지 않게 하실 것을 가르쳐 가라사대 ㄷ)내가 다윗의 거룩하고 미쁜 은사를 너희에게 주리라 하셨으니 사 55:3","하나님께서는 예수를 죽음에서 살려 내신 뒤 다시는 죽지 않게 하셨습니다. 이것은 성경에, ㄴ) \"내가 옛날에 다윗과 맺은 언약을 그대로 지켜서 그 모든 약속을 너희에게 이루어 주겠다\"고 하신 그대로 이루어진 것입니다. (ㄴ. 70인역 사55:3)","And that he raised him from the dead never to return to corruption he declared in this way, ‘I shall give you the benefits assured to David.’","And as concerning that he raised him up from the dead, now no more to return to corruption, he said on this wise, I will give you the sure mercies of David.","The fact that God raised him from the dead, never to decay, is stated in these words: \"'I will give you the holy and sure blessings promised to David.'","Quod autem suscitaverit eum a mortuis, amplius iam non reversurum in corruptionem, ita dixit:  “Dabo vobis sancta David fidelia “.","ועל אשר הקים אתו מן המתים לבלתי שוב עוד לשחת כה אמר אתן לכם חסדי דוד הנאמנים׃"],["51","13","35","그래서 다른 시편에서는 ‘당신께서는 당신의 거룩한 이가 죽음의 나라를 아니 보게 하실 것입니다.’ 하였습니다.","또 다른 시편에서, '6)주께서는 당신의 거룩한 이를 썩지 않게 하시리라.' 하고 말씀하신 대로 이루어진 것입니다. 시편 16:10.","또 다른 시편에 일렀으되 ㄹ)주의 거룩한 자로 썩음을 당하지 않게 하시리라 하셨느니라","그러므로 또 다른 편에 일렀으되 ㄹ)주의 거룩한 자로 썩음을 당하지 않게 하시리라 하셨느니라 시 16:10","다른 시편에서는, ㄷ) \"주께서 이 몸을 스올로 팽개치지 않으시고 주님만을 애타게 그리는 이 몸 버리지 않으시리라\"고 더 자세히 말씀하셨습니다. (ㄷ. 시16:10)","That is why he also says in another psalm, ‘You will not suffer your holy one to see corruption.’","Wherefore he saith also in another psalm, Thou shalt not suffer thine Holy One to see corruption.","So it is stated elsewhere: \"'You will not let your Holy One see decay.'","Ideoque et in alio dicit:  “Non dabis Sanctum tuum videre corruptionem “.","על כן הוא אמר גם במקום אחר לא תתן חסידך לראות שחת׃"],["51","13","36","다윗은 일생 동안 하느님의 뜻을 받들어 섬기고 나서 잠든 다음, 조상들 곁에 묻혀 죽음의 나라를 보았습니다.","다윗은 한평생 하느님의 뜻을 받들어 섬기면서 살았지만 죽은 다음에는 7)조상들 곁에 묻혀서 썩고 말았습니다. 1열왕 2:10.","다윗은 당시에 하나님의 뜻을 따라 섬기다가 잠들어 그 조상들과 함께 묻혀 썩음을 당하였으되","다윗은 당시에 하나님의 뜻을 좇아 섬기다가 잠들어 그 조상들과 함께 묻혀 썩음을 당하였으되","이 말씀은 다윗을 가리킨 것이 아닙니다. ㄹ) 다윗은 하나님의 뜻에 따라 섬기며 살다가 죽어서 땅에 묻혔고 그의 몸도 썩어 없어졌습니다. (ㄹ. 왕상2:10)","Now David, after he had served the will of God in his lifetime, fell asleep, was gathered to his ancestors, and did see corruption.","For David, after he had served his own generation by the will of God, fell on sleep, and was laid unto his fathers, and saw corruption:","\"For when David had served God's purpose in his own generation, he fell asleep; he was buried with his fathers and his body decayed.","David enim sua generatione cum administrasset voluntati Dei, dormivit et appositus est ad patres suos et vidit corruptionem;","כי דוד גוע אחרי שרתו בדורו לעצת האלהים ויאסף אל אבותיו וירא את השחת׃"],["51","13","37","그러나 하느님께서 다시 일으키신 그분께서는 죽음의 나라를 보지 않으셨습니다.","그러나 하느님께서 다시 살리신 그분은 썩지 않았습니다.","하나님께서 살리신 이는 썩음을 당하지 아니하였나니","하나님의 살리신 이는 썩음을 당하지 아니하였나니","그러므로 이 말씀은 다른 분을 가리킨 것입니다. 하나님께서 다시 살리신 분은 무덤 속에서 썩은 일이 없습니다.","But the one whom God raised up did not see corruption.","But he, whom God raised again, saw no corruption.","But the one whom God raised from the dead did not see decay.","quem vero Deus suscitavit, non vidit corruptionem.","ואשר האלהים הקים אותו הוא לא ראה השחת׃"],["51","13","38","그러므로 형제 여러분, 여러분은 이것을 알아야 합니다. 바로 그분을 통하여 여러분에게 죄의 용서가 선포됩니다. 모세의 율법으로는 여러분이 죄를 벗어나 의롭게 될 수 없었지만,","그러니 형제 여러분, 여러분은 바로 이분으로 말미암아 죄를 용서받을 수 있다는 복음이 여러분에게 선포되고 있다는 것을 알아야 합니다. 그리고 모세의 율법으로는 여러분이 죄에서 풀려날 수 없지만","그러므로 형제들아 너희가 알 것은 이 사람을 힘입어 죄 사함을 너희에게 전하는 이것이며","그러므로 형제들아 너희가 알 것은 이 사람을 힘입어 죄 사함을 너희에게 전하는 이것이며","형제들이여! 들으십시오. 그분이 바로 예수입니다. 이 예수로 말미암아 여러분의 죄를 용서받을 수 있습니다.","You must know, my brothers, that through him forgiveness of sins is being proclaimed to you, [and] in regard to everything from which you could not be justified under the law of Moses,","Be it known unto you therefore, men and brethren, that through this man is preached unto you the forgiveness of sins:","\"Therefore, my brothers, I want you to know that through Jesus the forgiveness of sins is proclaimed to you.","Notum igitur sit vobis, viri fratres, quia per hunc vobis remissio peccatorum annuntiatur; ab omnibus, quibus non potuistis in lege Moysi iustificari,","לכן אנשים אחים יודע לכם כי על ידי זה הגד לכם סליחת החטאים׃"],["51","13","39","믿는 사람은 누구나 그분 안에서 모든 죄를 벗어나 의롭게 됩니다.","이 예수를 믿는 사람은 누구나 모든 죄에서 풀려난다는 것을 알아야 합니다.","또 모세의 율법으로 너희가 의롭다 하심을 얻지 못하던 모든 일에도 이 사람을 힘입어 믿는 자마다 의롭다 하심을 얻는 이것이라","또 모세의 율법으로 너희가 의롭다 하심을 얻지 못하던 모든 일에도 이 사람을 힘입어 믿는 자마다 의롭다 하심을 얻는 이것이라","예수를 믿는 사람은 누구나 죄에서 해방되어 의롭다는 선언을 받을 수 있습니다. 이것은 율법이 절대로 해낼 수 없는 일입니다.","in him every believer is justified.","And by him all that believe are justified from all things, from which ye could not be justified by the law of Moses.","Through him everyone who believes is justified from everything you could not be justified from by the law of Moses.","in hoc omnis, qui credit, iustificatur.","ובכל אשר לא יכלתם להצטדק בתורת משה כל המאמין יצדק על ידו׃"],["51","13","40","그러니 예언서들에서 말하는 것이 여러분에게 미치지 않도록 조심하십시오.","그러므로 예언자들을 시켜 하신 말씀이 여러분에게 미치지 않도록 조심하십시오. 그것은,","그런즉 너희는 선지자들을 통하여 말씀하신 것이 너희에게 미칠까 삼가라","그런즉 너희는 선지자들로 말씀하신 것이 너희에게 미칠까 삼가라","이제 여러분은 예언자들이 ㅁ) \"너희 유다의 반역자들아, 너희는 똑똑히 보고 또 쳐다보고 어안이 벙벙하여 서로 얼굴만 보며 기가 막히게 놀라라. 왜냐하면 내가 너희의 시대에 그토록 무서운 일을 할 것이다. 이런 일은 누가 이야기를 해주어도 너희가 믿지 않을 것이니 너희가 직접 보고 겪어야 할 것이다\"라고 한 말이 여러분에게 적중되지 않도록 조심하십시오.\" (ㅁ. 70인역 합1:5)","Be careful, then, that what was said in the prophets not come about:","Beware therefore, lest that come upon you, which is spoken of in the prophets;","Take care that what the prophets have said does not happen to you:","Videte ergo, ne superveniat, quod dictum est in Prophetis:","לכן השמרו לכם פן יבוא עליכם הנאמר בנביאים׃"],["51","13","41","‘보아라, 너희 비웃는 자들아! 놀라다 망해 버려라. 내가 너희 시대에 한 가지 일을 하리라. 누가 너희에게 일러 주어도 너희가 도무지 믿지 못할 그런 일이다.’”","8)너희 비웃는 자들아, 질겁을 하고 죽어 없어져라. 나는 너희 시대에 한 가지 엄청난 일을 하리라. 누가 너희에게 일러줄지라도 너희는 결코 믿지 않으리라.' 하신 말씀입니다.\"칠십인역 하바 1:5.","일렀으되 ㅁ)보라 멸시하는 사람들아 너희는 놀라고 멸망하라 내가 너희 때를 당하여 한 일을 행할 것이니 사람이 너희에게 일러줄지라도 도무지 믿지 못할 일이라 하였느니라 하니라","일렀으되 ㅁ)보라 멸시하는 사람들아 너희는 놀라고 망하라 내가 너희 때를 당하여 한 일을 행할 것이니 사람이 너희에게 이를찌라도 도무지 믿지 못할 일이라 하였느니라 하니라 합 1:5","(40절에 포함되어 있음)","‘Look on, you scoffers, be amazed and disappear. For I am doing a work in your days, a work that you will never believe even if someone tells you.’”","Behold, ye despisers, and wonder, and perish: for I work a work in your days, a work which ye shall in no wise believe, though a man declare it unto you.","\"'Look, you scoffers, wonder and perish, for I am going to do something in your days that you would never believe, even if someone told you.'\"","Videte, contemptores, et admiramini et disperdimini, quia opus operor ego in diebus vestris, opus, quod non credetis, si quis enarraverit vobis! “.","ראו בגדים והתמהו ושמו כי פעל פעל אני בימיכם פעל אשר לא תאמינו כי יספר לכם׃"],["51","13","42","그들이 회당에서 나올 때, 사람들은 다음 안식일에도 이러한 말씀을 해 달라고 청하였다.","바울로와 바르나바가 회당에서 나올 때 사람들은 다음 안식일에도 그런 말씀을 더 들려달라고 간청하였다.","그들이 나갈새 사람들이 청하되 다음 안식일에도 이 말씀을 하라 하더라","저희가 나갈쌔 사람들이 청하되 다음 안식일에도 이 말씀을 하라 하더라","그날 사람들은 회당을 나오면서 바울에게 다음 안식일에도 와서 설교해 줄 것을 간청하였다.","As they were leaving, they invited them to speak on these subjects the following sabbath.","And when the Jews were gone out of the synagogue, the Gentiles besought that these words might be preached to them the next sabbath.","As Paul and Barnabas were leaving the synagogue, the people invited them to speak further about these things on the next Sabbath.","Exeuntibus autem illis, rogabant, ut sequenti sabbato loquerentur sibi verba haec.","ובצאת היהודים מבית הכנסת בקשו מהם הגוים לדבר אליהם את הדברים האלה בשבת הבאה׃"],["51","13","43","회중이 흩어진 뒤에 많은 유다인과 유다교로 개종하여 하느님을 섬기는 이들이 따라오자, 바오로와 바르나바는 그들에게 이야기하며 하느님의 은총에 계속 충실하라고 권하였다.","회중이 흩어진 뒤에는 많은 유다인들과 유다교에 입교한 이방인들이 따라왔으므로 바울로와 바르나바는 그들과 이야기를 나누며 항상 하느님의 은총을 입고 살아가라고 권하였다.","회당의 모임이 끝난 후에 유대인과 유대교에 입교한 경건한 사람들이 많이 바울과 바나바를 따르니 두 사도가 더불어 말하고 항상 하나님의 은혜 가운데 있으라 권하니라","폐회한 후에 유대인과 유대교에 입교한 경건한 사람들이 많이 바울과 바나바를 좇으니 두 사도가 더불어 말하고 항상 하나님의 은혜 가운데 있으라 권하니라","회당에서 예배를 드린 많은 유대인들과 신앙이 두터운 이방인들이 바울과 바나바를 따라 나서자 두 사람은 그들에게 하나님께서 베푸신 자비를 받아들이도록 권면하였다.","After the congregation had dispersed, many Jews and worshipers who were converts to Judaism followed Paul and Barnabas, who spoke to them and urged them to remain faithful to the grace of God.","Now when the congregation was broken up, many of the Jews and religious proselytes followed Paul and Barnabas: who, speaking to them, persuaded them to continue in the grace of God.","When the congregation was dismissed, many of the Jews and devout converts to Judaism followed Paul and Barnabas, who talked with them and urged them to continue in the grace of God.","Cumque dimissa esset synagoga, secuti sunt multi Iudaeorum et colentium proselytorum Paulum et Barnabam, qui loquentes suadebant eis, ut permanerent in gratia Dei.","ורבים מן היהודים ומגרי הצדק הלכו אחרי פולוס ובר נבא בהפרד הקהל והמה דברו על לבם ויזהירום לעמד בחסד האלהים׃"],["51","13","44","그다음 안식일에는 주님의 말씀을 들으려고 도시 사람들이 거의 다 모여들었다.","그 다음 안식일에는 온 동네 사람이 거의 다 주님의 말씀을 들으려고 모여들었다.","그 다음 안식일에는 온 시민이 거의 다 하나님의 말씀을 듣고자 하여 모이니","그 다음 안식일에는 온 성이 거의 다 하나님 말씀을 듣고자 하여 모이니","그 다음 안식일에는 온 동네 사람들이 하나님의 말씀을 들으려고 모여들었다.","On the following sabbath almost the whole city gathered to hear the word of the Lord.","And the next sabbath day came almost the whole city together to hear the word of God.","On the next Sabbath almost the whole city gathered to hear the word of the Lord.","Sequenti vero sabbato paene universa civitas convenit audire verbum Domini.","ובשבת השנית נקהלה כמעט כל העיר לשמע את דבר יהוה׃"],["51","13","45","그 군중을 보고 유다인들은 시기심으로 가득 차 모독하는 말을 하며 바오로의 말을 반박하였다.","그 군중을 본 유다인들은 시기심이 북받쳐서 바울로가 한 말을 반대하며 욕설을 퍼부었다.","유대인들이 그 무리를 보고 시기가 가득하여 바울이 말한 것을 반박하고 비방하거늘","유대인들이 그 무리를 보고 시기가 가득하여 바울의 말한 것을 변박하고 비방하거늘","유대인들은 수많은 사람들이 모여드는 것을 보자 질투가 생겨서 욕설을 퍼부으며 바울이 하는 말끝마다 반대를 하였다.","When the Jews saw the crowds, they were filled with jealousy and with violent abuse contradicted what Paul said.","But when the Jews saw the multitudes, they were filled with envy, and spake against those things which were spoken by Paul, contradicting and blaspheming.","When the Jews saw the crowds, they were filled with jealousy and talked abusively against what Paul was saying.","Videntes autem turbas Iudaei, repleti sunt zelo; et contradicebant his, quae a Paulo dicebantur, blasphemantes.","ויהי כראות היהודים את המון העם וימלאו קנאה ויכחישו את דברי פולוס הכחש וגדף׃"],["51","13","46","그러나 바오로와 바르나바는 담대히 말하였다. “우리는 하느님의 말씀을 먼저 여러분에게 전해야만 했습니다. 그러나 여러분이 그것을 배척하고 영원한 생명을 받기에 스스로 합당하지 못하다고 판단하니, 이제 우리는 다른 민족들에게 돌아섭니다.","그러나 바울로와 바르나바는 담대하게 이렇게 대꾸하였다. \"우리는 하느님의 말씀을 먼저 당신들에게 전하지 않을 수가 없었습니다. 그런데도 당신들은 그것을 거부하고 그 영원한 생명을 받을 만한 자격이 없다고 스스로 판단하고 있으니 우리는 당신들을 떠나서 이방인들에게로 갑니다.","바울과 바나바가 담대히 말하여 이르되 하나님의 말씀을 마땅히 먼저 너희에게 전할 것이로되 너희가 그것을 버리고 영생을 얻기에 합당하지 않은 자로 자처하기로 우리가 이방인에게로 향하노라","바울과 바나바가 담대히 말하여 가로되 하나님의 말씀을 마땅히 먼저 너희에게 전할 것이로되 너희가 버리고 영생 얻음에 합당치 않은 자로 자처하기로 우리가 이방인에게로 향하노라","바울과 바나바는 담대하게 그들에게 선언하였다. \"하나님의 이 기쁜 소식은 먼저 당신들 유대인들에게 전해져야 했소. 그런데도 당신들은 그것을 거부함으로써 당신들 스스로가 영원한 생명을 받을 자격이 없음을 증명해 보였소. 그러니 우리는 이제 이 기쁜 소식을 이방인들에게 전하는 것이오.","Both Paul and Barnabas spoke out boldly and said, “It was necessary that the word of God be spoken to you first, but since you reject it and condemn yourselves as unworthy of eternal life, we now turn to the Gentiles.","Then Paul and Barnabas waxed bold, and said, It was necessary that the word of God should first have been spoken to you: but seeing ye put it from you, and judge yourselves unworthy of everlasting life, lo, we turn to the Gentiles.","Then Paul and Barnabas answered them boldly: \"We had to speak the word of God to you first. Since you reject it and do not consider yourselves worthy of eternal life, we now turn to the Gentiles.","Tunc audenter Paulus et Barnabas dixerunt:  “Vobis oportebat primum loqui verbum Dei; sed quoniam repellitis illud et indignos vos iudicatis aeternae vitae, ecce convertimur ad gentes.","אז הגידו פולוס ובר נבא על פניהם לאמר בדין היה להשמיע אתכם בראשונה את דבר האלהים ועתה אחרי אשר מאסתם אותו ואינכם זכים בעיניכם לחיי העולם לכן הננו פנים אל הגוים׃"],["51","13","47","사실 주님께서 우리에게 이렇게 명령하셨습니다. ‘땅 끝까지 구원을 가져다주도록 내가 너를 다른 민족들의 빛으로 세웠다.’”","주께서 우리에게, '9)나는 너를 이방인의 빛으로 삼았으니 너는 땅 끝까지 구원의 등불이 되어라.' 하고 명령하셨습니다.\" 칠십인역 이사 49:6.","주께서 이같이 우리에게 명하시되 ㅂ)내가 너를 이방의 빛으로 삼아 너로 땅 끝까지 구원하게 하리라 하셨느니라 하니","주께서 이같이 우리를 명하시되 ㅂ)내가 너를 이방의 빛을 삼아 너로 땅 끝까지 구원하게 하리라 하셨느니라 하니 사 49:6","이미 주께서는 ㅂ) \"나는 너를 세계 만민의 빛으로 세워서 온 세상의 어둠과 혼란을 없애고 땅 끝까지 이르는 세계 만민이 너를 통하여 나의 구원과 해방이 무엇인지 분명히 알게 하겠다\" 하고 말씀하셨으니 주님의 말씀대로 된 것이오.\" (ㅂ. 70인역 사49:6)","For so the Lord has commanded us, ‘I have made you a light to the Gentiles, that you may be an instrument of salvation to the ends of the earth.’”","For so hath the Lord commanded us, saying, I have set thee to be a light of the Gentiles, that thou shouldest be for salvation unto the ends of the earth.","For this is what the Lord has commanded us: \"'I have made you a light for the Gentiles, that you may bring salvation to the ends of the earth.'\"","Sic enim praecepit nobis Dominus:  “Posui te in lumen gentium, ut sis in salutem usque ad extremum terrae “ “.","כי כן צוה עלינו האדון נתתיך לאור גוים להיות ישועתי עד קצה הארץ׃"],["51","13","48","다른 민족 사람들은 이 말을 듣고 기뻐하며 주님의 말씀을 찬양하였다. 그리고 영원한 생명을 얻도록 정해진 사람들은 모두 믿게 되었다.","바울로의 말을 듣고 이방인들은 기뻐하며 주님의 말씀을 찬양하였으며 영원한 생명을 얻도록 작정된 사람들은 모두 신도가 되었다.","이방인들이 듣고 기뻐하여 하나님의 말씀을 찬송하며 영생을 주시기로 작정된 자는 다 믿더라","이방인들이 듣고 기뻐하여 하나님의 말씀을 찬송하며 영생을 주시기로 작정된 자는 다 믿더라","이 말을 들은 이방 사람들은 기뻐 어쩔 줄 모르며 하나님의 말씀을 찬양하였다. 그리고 영원한 생명을 얻기 원하는 사람들은 다 신도가 되었다.","The Gentiles were delighted when they heard this and glorified the word of the Lord. All who were destined for eternal life came to believe,","And when the Gentiles heard this, they were glad, and glorified the word of the Lord: and as many as were ordained to eternal life believed.","When the Gentiles heard this, they were glad and honored the word of the Lord; and all who were appointed for eternal life believed.","Audientes autem gentes gaudebant et glorificabant verbum Domini, et crediderunt, quotquot erant praeordinati ad vitam aeternam;","וישמחו הגוים כשמעם ויהללו את דבר יהוה ויאמינו כל אשר היו מוכנים לחיי עולם׃"],["51","13","49","그리하여 주님의 말씀이 그 지방에 두루 퍼졌다.","이리하여 주님의 말씀이 그 지방에 두루 퍼져 나갔다.","주의 말씀이 그 지방에 두루 퍼지니라","주의 말씀이 그 지방에 두루 퍼지니라","하나님의 말씀이 온 지방에 퍼져 나갔다.","and the word of the Lord continued to spread through the whole region.","And the word of the Lord was published throughout all the region.","The word of the Lord spread through the whole region.","ferebatur autem verbum Domini per universam regionem.","ויפרץ דבר יהוה בכל המקום׃"],["51","13","50","그러나 유다인들은 하느님을 섬기는 귀부인들과 그 도시의 유지들을 선동하여, 바오로와 바르나바를 박해하게 만들고 그 지방에서 그들을 내쫓았다.","그러나 유다인들은 이방 출신으로서 하느님을 공경하는 귀부인들과 도시의 유지들을 선동하여 바울로와 바르나바를 박해하게 하고 그 지방에서 두 사람을 쫓아냈다.","이에 유대인들이 경건한 귀부인들과 그 시내 유력자들을 선동하여 바울과 바나바를 박해하게 하여 그 지역에서 쫓아내니","이에 유대인들이 경건한 귀부인들과 그 성내 유력자들을 선동하여 바울과 바나바를 핍박케 하여 그 지경에서 쫓아내니","그러자 유대인들은 율법에 충실하게 따르는 것이 하나님을 믿는 것이라고 생각하고 귀부인들과 그 도시의 유지들을 선동하여 바울과 바나바를 박해하여 쫓아냈다.","The Jews, however, incited the women of prominence who were worshipers and the leading men of the city, stirred up a persecution against Paul and Barnabas, and expelled them from their territory.","But the Jews stirred up the devout and honourable women, and the chief men of the city, and raised persecution against Paul and Barnabas, and expelled them out of their coasts.","But the Jews incited the God-fearing women of high standing and the leading men of the city. They stirred up persecution against Paul and Barnabas, and expelled them from their region.","Iudaei autem concitaverunt honestas inter colentes mulieres et primos civitatis et excitaverunt persecutionem in Paulum et Barnabam et eiecerunt eos de finibus suis.","אך היהודים הסיתו את הנשים החסידות והחשובות ואת אצילי העיר ויעוררו רדיפה על פולוס ובר נבא ויגרשום מגבולם׃"],["51","13","51","그들은 발의 먼지를 털어 버리고 나서 이코니온으로 갔다.","두 사도는 그들에게 항의하는 뜻으로 발의 먼지를 털어버리고 이고니온으로 갔다.","두 사람이 그들을 향하여 발의 티끌을 떨어 버리고 이고니온으로 가거늘","두 사람이 저희를 향하여 발에 티끌을 떨어 버리고 이고니온으로 가거늘","바울과 바나바는 그들에게 항의하는 뜻으로 발의 먼지를 털어 버리고 이고니온으로 떠났다.","So they shook the dust from their feet in protest against them and went to Iconium.","But they shook off the dust of their feet against them, and came unto Iconium.","So they shook the dust from their feet in protest against them and went to Iconium.","At illi, excusso pulvere pedum in eos, venerunt Iconium;","והמה נערו עליהם את העפר מעל רגליהם וילכו לאיקניון׃"],["51","13","52","제자들은 기쁨과 성령으로 가득 차 있었다.","안티오키아의 신도들은 기쁨과 성령으로 가득 차 있었다.","제자들은 기쁨과 성령이 충만하니라","제자들은 기쁨과 성령이 충만하니라","안디옥의 신도들은 기쁨과 성령으로 충만한 상태였다.","The disciples were filled with joy and the holy Spirit.","And the disciples were filled with joy, and with the Holy Ghost.","And the disciples were filled with joy and with the Holy Spirit.","discipuli quoque replebantur gaudio et Spiritu Sancto.","והתלמידים מלאו שמחה ורוח הקדש׃"],["51","14","1","바오로와 바르나바는 이코니온에서도 전과 마찬가지로 유다인들의 회당에 들어가 설교하였다. 그리하여 수많은 유다인과 그리스인이 믿게 되었다.","바울로와 바르나바는 안티오키아에서처럼 이고니온에서도 유다인의 회당에 들어가 설교했다. 이 설교를 듣고 수많은 유다인들과 이방인들이 신도가 되었다.","이에 이고니온에서 두 사도가 함께 유대인의 회당에 들어가 말하니 유대와 헬라의 허다한 무리가 믿더라","이에 이고니온에서 두 사도가 함께 유대인의 회당에 들어가 말하니 유대와 헬라의 허다한 무리가 믿더라","바울과 바나바는 이고니온에서도 함께 회당에 들어가서 설교를 하였다. 그들의 설교를 들은 많은 유대인들과 이방인들이 신도가 되었다.","In Iconium they entered the Jewish synagogue together and spoke in such a way that a great number of both Jews and Greeks came to believe,","And it came to pass in Iconium, that they went both together into the synagogue of the Jews, and so spake, that a great multitude both of the Jews and also of the Greeks believed.","At Iconium Paul and Barnabas went as usual into the Jewish synagogue. There they spoke so effectively that a great number of Jews and Gentiles believed.","Factum est autem Iconii, ut eodem modo introirent syna gogam Iudaeorum et ita loquerentur, ut crederet Iudaeorum et Graecorum copiosa multitudo.","ויהי באיקניון ויבאו יחדו אל בית כנסת היהודים וידברו שם עד כי האמין המון רב מן היהודים ומן היונים׃"],["51","14","2","그러나 믿기를 거부한 유다인들은 다른 민족 사람들을 자극하여 형제들에게 나쁜 감정을 품게 만들었다.","예수를 믿으려 하지 않는 유다인들은 이방인들을 선동하여 믿는 형제들에게 악의를 품게 하였다.","그러나 순종하지 아니하는 유대인들이 이방인들의 마음을 선동하여 형제들에게 악감을 품게 하거늘","그러나 순종치 아니하는 유대인들이 이방인들의 마음을 선동하여 형제들에게 악감을 품게 하거늘","그러나 하나님의 말씀을 대수롭지 않게 여기는 유대인들은 이방인들을 선동하여 바울과 바나바를 헐뜯고 터무니없는 악담을 퍼부어 댔다.","although the disbelieving Jews stirred up and poisoned the minds of the Gentiles against the brothers.","But the unbelieving Jews stirred up the Gentiles, and made their minds evil affected against the brethren.","But the Jews who refused to believe stirred up the Gentiles and poisoned their minds against the brothers.","Qui vero increduli fuerunt Iudaei, suscitaverunt et exacerbaverunt animas gentium adversus fratres.","אך היהודים אשר לא האמינו עוררו והכעיסו את נפשות הגוים על האחים׃"],["51","14","3","그래서 바오로와 바르나바는 그곳에 오랫동안 머무르면서 주님을 의지하며 담대히 설교하였다. 주님께서는 그들의 손을 통하여 표징과 이적들이 일어나게 해 주시어, 당신 은총에 관한 그들의 말을 확인해 주셨다.","그러나 주께서는 그들에게 기적과 놀라운 일들을 행하게 하셔서 하느님의 은총에 관하여 그들이 전하는 말이 참되다는 것을 증명해 주셨다. 그래서 바울로와 바르나바는 오랫동안 거기에 머무르면서 주님께 힘입어 대담하게 말씀을 전하였다.","두 사도가 오래 있어 주를 힘입어 담대히 말하니 주께서 그들의 손으로 표적과 기사를 행하게 하여 주사 자기 은혜의 말씀을 증언하시니","두 사도가 오래 있어 주를 힘입어 담대히 말하니 주께서 저희 손으로 1)표적과 기사를 행하게 하여 주사 자기 은혜의 말씀을 증거하시니 혹 이적","바울과 바나바는 그에 굴하지 않고 오랫동안 그곳에 머물러 있으면서 담대하게 하나님의 말씀을 전하였다. 주께서는 그들이 전하는 말씀이 참되다는 것을 증명해 주시려고 그들에게 큰 기적을 이루게 하셨다.","So they stayed for a considerable period, speaking out boldly for the Lord, who confirmed the word about his grace by granting signs and wonders to occur through their hands.","Long time therefore abode they speaking boldly in the Lord, which gave testimony unto the word of his grace, and granted signs and wonders to be done by their hands.","So Paul and Barnabas spent considerable time there, speaking boldly for the Lord, who confirmed the message of his grace by enabling them to do miraculous signs and wonders.","Multo igitur tempore demorati sunt, fiducialiter agentes in Domino, testimonium perhibente verbo gratiae suae, dante signa et prodigia fieri per manus eorum.","וישבו שם ימים רבים וילמדו בבטחונם ביהוה העמיד על דבר חסדו בעשותו על ידם אתות ומופתים׃"],["51","14","4","그리하여 그 도시 사람들이 둘로 갈라져, 한쪽은 유다인들의 편을 들고 다른 쪽은 사도들의 편을 들었다.","그 도시 사람들은 두 갈래로 나뉘어서 한 쪽은 유다인들을 지지하고 다른 쪽은 사도들을 지지하였다.","그 시내의 무리가 나뉘어 유대인을 따르는 자도 있고 두 사도를 따르는 자도 있는지라","그 성내 무리가 나뉘어 유대인을 좇는 자도 있고 두 사도를 좇는 자도 있는지라","그러자 그 도시 사람들의 의견은 둘로 갈라져 유대인 지도자들을 따르는 사람들이 있는가 하면 바울과 바나바의 편이 된 사람들도 있었다.","The people of the city were divided: some were with the Jews; others, with the apostles.","But the multitude of the city was divided: and part held with the Jews, and part with the apostles.","The people of the city were divided; some sided with the Jews, others with the apostles.","Divisa est autem multitudo civitatis: et quidam quidem erant cum Iudaeis, quidam vero cum apostolis.","ויחלק המון העיר לחצי אלה נטו אחרי היהודים ואלה אחרי השליחים׃"],["51","14","5","그런데 다른 민족 사람들과 유다인들이 저희 지도자들과 더불어 사도들을 괴롭히고 또 돌을 던져 죽이려고 하였다.","그러나 이방인들과 유다인들은 그들의 지도자들과 한데 어울려 사도들을 학대하고 돌로 쳐죽이려는 움직임을 보였다.","이방인과 유대인과 그 관리들이 두 사도를 모욕하며 돌로 치려고 달려드니","이방인과 유대인과 그 관원들이 두 사도를 능욕하며 돌로 치려고 달려드니","이방인들과 유대인들이 그들의 지도자들과 한패가 되어 두 사람을 습격하여 돌로 쳐죽이려고 모의하고 있다는 소식을 듣고 바울과 바나바는 곧 몸을 피하여 루가오니아 지방에 있는 루스드라와 더베와 그 인근 마을에 가서","When there was an attempt by both the Gentiles and the Jews, together with their leaders, to attack and stone them,","And when there was an assault made both of the Gentiles, and also of the Jews with their rulers, to use them despitefully, and to stone them,","There was a plot afoot among the Gentiles and Jews, together with their leaders, to mistreat them and stone them.","Cum autem factus esset impetus gentilium et Iudaeorum cum principibus suis, ut contumeliis afficerent et lapidarent eos,","ויהי רגשת הגוים והיהודים עם ראשיהם להתעלל בהם ולסקלם׃"],["51","14","6","바오로와 바르나바는 그 일을 알아채고 리카오니아 지방의 도시 리스트라와 데르베와 그 근방으로 피해 갔다.","사도들은 이 낌새를 알아채고 리가오니아 지방에 있는 도시 리스트라와 데르베와 그 근방으로 피해 가서","그들이 알고 도망하여 루가오니아의 두 성 루스드라와 더베와 그 근방으로 가서","저희가 알고 도망하여 루가오니아의 두 성 루스드라와 더베와 및 그 근방으로 가서","(5절에 포함되어 있음)","they realized it and fled to the Lycaonian cities of Lystra and Derbe and to the surrounding countryside,","They were ware of it, and fled unto Lystra and Derbe, cities of Lycaonia, and unto the region that lieth round about:","But they found out about it and fled to the Lycaonian cities of Lystra and Derbe and to the surrounding country,","intellegentes confugerunt ad civitates Lycaoniae, Lystram et Derben et ad regionem in circuitu","ויודע להם ויברחו לערי לוקוניא אל לוסטרא ודרבי וסביבותן׃"],["51","14","7","그들은 거기에서도 복음을 전하였다.","복음을 전하였다.","거기서 복음을 전하니라","거기서 복음을 전하니라","복음을 전하였다.","where they continued to proclaim the good news.","And there they preached the gospel.","where they continued to preach the good news.","et ibi evangelizantes erant.","ויבשרו שם הבשורה׃"],["51","14","8","리스트라에는 두 발을 쓰지 못하는 사람이 하나 있었는데, 그는 앉은뱅이로 태어나 한 번도 걸어 본 적이 없었다.","리스트라에는 나면서부터 앉은뱅이가 되어 한 번도 걸어본 적이 없는 불구자 한 사람이 살고 있었다.","루스드라에 발을 쓰지 못하는 한 사람이 앉아 있는데 나면서 걷지 못하게 되어 걸어 본 적이 없는 자라","루스드라에 발을 쓰지 못하는 한 사람이 있어 앉았는데 나면서 앉은뱅이 되어 걸어 본 적이 없는 자라","두 사람이 루스드라에 있을 때 나면서부터 한 번도 걸어본 일이 없는 앉은뱅이를 만났다.","At Lystra there was a crippled man, lame from birth, who had never walked.","And there sat a certain man at Lystra, impotent in his feet, being a cripple from his mother's womb, who never had walked:","In Lystra there sat a man crippled in his feet, who was lame from birth and had never walked.","Et quidam vir in Lystris infirmus pedibus sedebat, claudus ex utero matris suae, qui numquam ambulaverat.","ואיש נכה רגלים היה בלוסטרא והוא ישב פסח מבטן אמו ולא הלך מימיו׃"],["51","14","9","그가 바오로의 설교를 듣고 있었는데, 그를 유심히 바라본 바오로가 그에게 구원받을 만한 믿음이 있음을 알고,","그가 하루는 바울로의 설교를 듣고 있었는데 바울로가 그를 눈여겨보더니 그에게 몸이 성해질 만한 믿음이 있는 것을 알고는","바울이 말하는 것을 듣거늘 바울이 주목하여 구원 받을 만한 믿음이 그에게 있는 것을 보고","바울의 말하는 것을 듣거늘 바울이 주목하여 구원받을만한 믿음이 그에게 있는것을 보고","바울은 자신의 설교를 듣고 있는 그를 바라보고 그에게 고침받을 만한 믿음이 있다는 것을 알자","He listened to Paul speaking, who looked intently at him, saw that he had the faith to be healed,","The same heard Paul speak: who stedfastly beholding him, and perceiving that he had faith to be healed,","He listened to Paul as he was speaking. Paul looked directly at him, saw that he had faith to be healed","Hic audivit Paulum loquentem; qui intuitus eum et videns quia haberet fidem, ut salvus fieret,","וישמע את פולוס מדבר והוא הסתכל בו וירא כי אמונה בו להושע׃"],["51","14","10","“두 발로 똑바로 일어서시오.” 하고 큰 소리로 말하였다. 그러자 그가 벌떡 일어나 걷기 시작하였다.","큰소리로 \"일어나 똑바로 서보시오.\" 하고 말하였다. 그러자 그는 벌떡 일어나서 걷기 시작하였다.","큰 소리로 이르되 네 발로 바로 일어서라 하니 그 사람이 일어나 걷는지라","큰 소리로 가로되 네 발로 바로 일어서라 하니 그 사람이 뛰어 걷는지라","그에게 \"일어서시오\" 하고 말하였다. 그러자 그가 벌떡 일어나 걷기 시작하였다.","and called out in a loud voice, “Stand up straight on your feet.” He jumped up and began to walk about.","Said with a loud voice, Stand upright on thy feet. And he leaped and walked.","and called out, \"Stand up on your feet!\" At that, the man jumped up and began to walk.","dixit magna voce:  “Surge super pedes tuos rectus! “. Et exsilivit et ambulabat.","ויאמר בקול גדול עמד הכן על רגליך וידלג ויתהלך׃"],["51","14","11","군중은 바오로가 한 일을 보고 리카오니아 말로 목소리를 높여, “신들이 사람 모습을 하고 우리에게 내려오셨다.” 하고 말하였다.","사람들은 바울로가 한 일을 보고 리가오니아말로 \"저 사람들은 사람 모양을 하고 우리에게 내려온 신들이다.\" 하고 떠들었다.","무리가 바울이 한 일을 보고 루가오니아 방언으로 소리 질러 이르되 신들이 사람의 형상으로 우리 가운데 내려오셨다 하여","무리가 바울의 행한 일을 보고 루가오니아 방언으로 소리질러 가로되 신들이 사람의 형상으로 우리 가운데 내려 오셨다 하여","바울이 이룬 이적을 본 사람들은 루기오니아 말로 \"이들이야말로 사람의 모습을 하고 온 신이다\" 하고 소리쳤다.","When the crowds saw what Paul had done, they cried out in Lycaonian, “The gods have come down to us in human form.”","And when the people saw what Paul had done, they lifted up their voices, saying in the speech of Lycaonia, The gods are come down to us in the likeness of men.","When the crowd saw what Paul had done, they shouted in the Lycaonian language, \"The gods have come down to us in human form!\"","Turbae autem cum vidissent, quod fecerat Paulus, levaverunt vocem suam Lycaonice dicentes:  “Dii similes facti hominibus descenderunt ad nos! “;","והמון העם כראותם את אשר עשה פולוס נשאו את קולם ויאמרו בלשון לוקונית ירדו אלינו האלהים בדמות אנשים׃"],["51","14","12","그들은 바르나바를 제우스라 부르고 바오로를 헤르메스라 불렀는데, 바오로가 주로 말하였기 때문이다.","바르나바는 제우스 신이요, 주로 설교를 맡아서 한 바울로는 헤르메스 신이라고 불렀다.","바나바는 제우스라 하고 바울은 그 중에 말하는 자이므로 헤르메스라 하더라","바나바는 쓰스라 하고 바울은 그 중에 말하는 자이므로 허메라 하더라","그러고는 바나바를 헬라신 제우스라 부르고 바울은 주로 설교를 하였다 해서 헤르메스라고 불렀다.","They called Barnabas “Zeus” and Paul “Hermes,” because he was the chief speaker.","And they called Barnabas, Jupiter; and Paul, Mercurius, because he was the chief speaker.","Barnabas they called Zeus, and Paul they called Hermes because he was the chief speaker.","et vocabant Barnabam Iovem, Paulum vero Mercurium, quoniam ipse erat dux verbi.","ויקראו לבר נבא בל ולפולוס קראו הרמיס באשר הוא ראש המדברים׃"],["51","14","13","도시 앞에 있는 제우스 신전의 사제는 황소 몇 마리와 화환을 문으로 가지고 와서, 군중과 함께 제물을 바치려고 하였다.","성밖에 있는 제우스 신당의 사제는 황소 몇 마리와 화환을 성문 앞으로 가지고 나와서 사람들과 함께 사도들에게 제사를 지내려고 하였다.","시외 제우스 신당의 제사장이 소와 화환들을 가지고 대문 앞에 와서 무리와 함께 제사하고자 하니","성밖 쓰스신당의 제사장이 소와 화관들을 가지고 대문 앞에 와서 무리와 함께 제사하고자 하니","그 도시의 성문 밖에 있는 제우스 신당의 사제는 황소 몇 마리와 화관을 가지고 와서 성문에서 군중들과 함께 두 사람에게 제사를 지내려고 하였다.","And the priest of Zeus, whose temple was at the entrance to the city, brought oxen and garlands to the gates, for he together with the people intended to offer sacrifice.","Then the priest of Jupiter, which was before their city, brought oxen and garlands unto the gates, and would have done sacrifice with the people.","The priest of Zeus, whose temple was just outside the city, brought bulls and wreaths to the city gates because he and the crowd wanted to offer sacrifices to them.","Sacerdos quoque templi Iovis, quod erat ante civitatem, tauros et coronas ad ianuas afferens cum populis, volebat sacrificare.","וכהן בית בל אשר מחוץ לעירם הביא השערה שורים ועטרות ויחפץ לזבח הוא והמון העם׃"],["51","14","14","바르나바와 바오로 두 사도는 그 말을 듣고서 자기들의 옷을 찢고 군중 속으로 뛰어들어 소리를 지르며","이 소문을 들은 바르나바와 바울로 두 사도는 옷을 찢으며 군중 속에 뛰어들어 이렇게 외쳤다.","두 사도 바나바와 바울이 듣고 옷을 찢고 무리 가운데 뛰어 들어가서 소리 질러","두 사도 바나바와 바울이 듣고 옷을 찢고 무리 가운데 뛰어 들어가서 소리질러","이 광경을 본 바나바와 바울이 자기들의 옷을 찢으며 군중 속으로 뛰어 들어가 외쳤다.","The apostles Barnabas and Paul tore their garments when they heard this and rushed out into the crowd, shouting,","Which when the apostles, Barnabas and Paul, heard of, they rent their clothes, and ran in among the people, crying out,","But when the apostles Barnabas and Paul heard of this, they tore their clothes and rushed out into the crowd, shouting:","Quod ubi audierunt apostoli Barnabas et Paulus, conscissis tunicis suis, exsilierunt in turbam clamantes","ויהי כשמע זאת השליחים פולוס ובר נבא ויקרעו את בגדיהם וירוצו אל תוך העם׃"],["51","14","15","말하였다. “여러분, 왜 이런 짓을 하십니까? 우리도 여러분과 똑같은 사람입니다. 우리는 다만 여러분에게 복음을 전할 따름입니다. 여러분이 이런 헛된 것들을 버리고 하늘과 땅과 바다와 또 그 안에 있는 모든 것을 만드신 살아 계신 하느님께로 돌아서게 하려는 것입니다.","\"여러분, 이게 무슨 짓입니까? 우리도 여러분과 똑같은 사람입니다. 우리는 다만 여러분에게 복음을 전하여 여러분이 이런 헛된 우상을 버리고 살아 계신 하느님께 돌아오게 하려고 왔을 따름입니다. 이 1)하느님은 하늘과 땅과 바다와 그 안에 있는 모든 것을 만드신 분입니다. 출애 20:11; 시편 146:6.","이르되 여러분이여 어찌하여 이러한 일을 하느냐 우리도 여러분과 같은 성정을 가진 사람이라 여러분에게 복음을 전하는 것은 이런 헛된 일을 버리고 천지와 바다와 그 가운데 만물을 지으시고 살아 계신 하나님께로 돌아오게 함이라","가로되 여러분이여 어찌하여 이러한 일을 하느냐 우리도 너희와 같은 성정을 가진 사람이라 너희에게 복음을 전하는 것은 이 헛된 일을 버리고 천지와 바다와 그 가운데 만유를 지으시고 살아 계신 하나님께로 돌아 오라 함이라","\"여러분, 무슨 짓을 하고 있소? 우리도 여러분과 똑같은 사람이란 걸 모르시오? 우리는 다만 여러분에게 기쁜 소식을 전하여 이런 헛된 일을 버리고 살아 계신 하나님께 돌아오게 하려고 왔을 따름입니다. ㄱ) 하나님은 하늘과 땅과 바다와 그 안에 있는 모든 것을 만드신 분입니다. (ㄱ. 출20:11(참조,시146:6))","“Men, why are you doing this? We are of the same nature as you, human beings. We proclaim to you good news that you should turn from these idols to the living God, ‘who made heaven and earth and sea and all that is in them.’","And saying, Sirs, why do ye these things? We also are men of like passions with you, and preach unto you that ye should turn from these vanities unto the living God, which made heaven, and earth, and the sea, and all things that are therein:","\"Men, why are you doing this? We too are only men, human like you. We are bringing you good news, telling you to turn from these worthless things to the living God, who made heaven and earth and sea and everything in them.","et dicentes:  “Viri, quid haec facitis? Et nos mortales sumus similes vobis homines, evangelizantes vobis ab his vanis converti ad Deum vivum, qui fecit caelum et terram et mare et omnia, quae in eis sunt.","ויצעקו לאמר אנשים למה תעשו כזאת גם אנחנו בני אדם חלשים כמוכם ונבשרה אתכם למען שוב תשובו מן הבליכם אלה אל אלהים חיים אשר עשה את השמים ואת הארץ ואת הים ואת כל אשר בם׃"],["51","14","16","지난날에는 하느님께서 다른 모든 민족들이 제 길을 가도록 내버려 두셨습니다.","지난 날에는 하느님께서 모든 나라 사람을 제멋대로 살게 내버려두셨습니다.","하나님이 지나간 세대에는 모든 민족으로 자기들의 길들을 가게 방임하셨으나","하나님이 지나간 세대에는 모든 족속으로 자기의 길들을 다니게 묵인하셨으나","지나간 시대에는 하나님께서 모든 민족이 제멋대로 살게 내버려 두셨습니다.","In past generations he allowed all Gentiles to go their own ways;","Who in times past suffered all nations to walk in their own ways.","In the past, he let all nations go their own way.","Qui in praeteritis generationibus permisit omnes gentes ambulare in viis suis;","ואשר בדרות קדם הניח לכל הגוים ללכת בדרכיהם׃"],["51","14","17","그러면서도 좋은 일을 해 주셨으니, 당신 자신을 드러내 보이지 않으신 것은 아닙니다. 곧 하늘에서 비와 열매 맺는 절기를 내려 주시고 여러분을 양식으로, 여러분의 마음을 기쁨으로 채워 주셨습니다.”","그러면서도 하느님께서는 은혜를 베푸셔서 하늘에서 비를 내려주시고 철을 따라 열매를 맺게 하시고 먹을 것을 주셔서 여러분의 마음을 흡족하게 채워주셨습니다. 이렇게 하느님께서는 항상 당신 자신을 알려주셨습니다.\"","그러나 자기를 증언하지 아니하신 것이 아니니 곧 여러분에게 하늘로부터 비를 내리시며 결실기를 주시는 선한 일을 하사 음식과 기쁨으로 여러분의 마음에 만족하게 하셨느니라 하고","그러나 자기를 증거하지 아니하신 것이 아니니 곧 너희에게 하늘로서 비를 내리시며 결실기를 주시는 선한 일을 하사 음식과 기쁨으로 너희 마음에 만족케 하셨느니라 하고","그렇다고 해서 하나님을 모르고 살도록 내버려 두신 것은 아닙니다. 하나님을 알게 하는 것이 언제나 우리 주위에 있었습니다. 비를 내려 주신 분도 하나님이시고 철따라 열매를 맺게 해주시고 먹을 것을 풍성하게 하여 여러분을 즐겁게 해주신 분도 하나님이십니다.\"","yet, in bestowing his goodness, he did not leave himself without witness, for he gave you rains from heaven and fruitful seasons, and filled you with nourishment and gladness for your hearts.”","Nevertheless he left not himself without witness, in that he did good, and gave us rain from heaven, and fruitful seasons, filling our hearts with food and gladness.","Yet he has not left himself without testimony: He has shown kindness by giving you rain from heaven and crops in their seasons; he provides you with plenty of food and fills your hearts with joy.\"","et quidem non sine testimonio semetipsum reliquit benefaciens, de caelo dans vobis pluvias et tempora fructifera, implens cibo et laetitia corda vestra “.","וגם לא חדל להעיד על עצמו וייטב לנו בתתו מטר מן השמים ועתות שבע וימלא לבותינו מזון וששון׃"],["51","14","18","그들은 이렇게 말하면서 군중이 자기들에게 제물을 바치지 못하도록 겨우 말렸다.","두 사도는 이렇게 말하면서 사람들이 자기들에게 제사를 지내지 못하도록 겨우 말렸다.","이렇게 말하여 겨우 무리를 말려 자기들에게 제사를 못하게 하니라","이렇게 말하여 겨우 무리를 말려 자기들에게 제사를 못하게 하니라","이렇게 해서 바울과 바나바는 사람들이 자기들에게 제사 지내려는 것을 간신히 말렸다.","Even with these words, they scarcely restrained the crowds from offering sacrifice to them.","And with these sayings scarce restrained they the people, that they had not done sacrifice unto them.","Even with these words, they had difficulty keeping the crowd from sacrificing to them.","Et haec dicentes vix sedaverunt turbas, ne sibi immolarent.","ואף בדברים האלה כמעט לא עצרו כח לכלוא את העם מזבח להם׃"],["51","14","19","그런데 안티오키아와 이코니온에서 유다인들이 몰려와 군중을 설득하고 바오로에게 돌을 던졌다. 그리고 그가 죽은 줄로 생각하고 도시 밖으로 끌어내다 버렸다.","그 때에 안티오키아와 이고니온에서 유다인들이 몰려와 군중을 설득하고 바울로를 돌로 쳤다. 그리고 그가 죽은 줄 알고 성밖으로 끌어내다 버렸다.","유대인들이 안디옥과 이고니온에서 와서 무리를 충동하니 그들이 돌로 바울을 쳐서 죽은 줄로 알고 시외로 끌어 내치니라","유대인들이 안디옥과 이고니온에서 와서 무리를 초인하여 돌로 바울을 쳐서 죽은 줄로 알고 성밖에 끌어 내치니라","그러나 그로부터 불과 며칠 후에 안디옥과 이고니온에서 몰려온 유대인들이 그 도시 사람들을 선동하여 폭동을 일으켰다. 그들은 바울을 돌로 쳐서 쓰러뜨린 후 성밖으로 끌어다 버렸다. 죽은 줄 알았던 것이다.","However, some Jews from Antioch and Iconium arrived and won over the crowds. They stoned Paul and dragged him out of the city, supposing that he was dead.","And there came thither certain Jews from Antioch and Iconium, who persuaded the people, and having stoned Paul, drew him out of the city, supposing he had been dead.","Then some Jews came from Antioch and Iconium and won the crowd over. They stoned Paul and dragged him outside the city, thinking he was dead.","Supervenerunt autem ab Antiochia et Iconio Iudaei et persuasis turbis lapidantesque Paulum trahebant extra civitatem aestimantes eum mortuum esse.","ויבאו שמה יהודים מן אנטיוכיא ומן איקניון ויסיתו את העם וירגמו את פולוס באבנים ויסחבהו חוצה לעיר בחשבם כי מת׃"],["51","14","20","그러나 제자들이 둘러싸자 그는 일어나 도시 안으로 들어갔다. 이튿날 그는 바르나바와 함께 데르베로 떠나갔다.","그러나 신도들이 달려와 둘러섰을 때에 바울로는 깨어나 성안으로 들어갔다가 이튿날 바르나바와 함께 데르베로 떠났다.","제자들이 둘러섰을 때에 바울이 일어나 그 성에 들어갔다가 이튿날 바나바와 함께 더베로 가서","제자들이 둘러 섰을 때에 바울이 일어나 성에 들어갔다가 이튿날 바나바와 함께 더베로 가서","신도들은 마음을 졸이며 바울을 둘러쌌다. 그러나 바울은 자리에서 일어나더니 아무 일도 없었다는 듯이 성으로 들어갔다.  이튿날이 되자 바울은 바나바와 함께 더베로 갔다.","But when the disciples gathered around him, he got up and entered the city. On the following day he left with Barnabas for Derbe.","Howbeit, as the disciples stood round about him, he rose up, and came into the city: and the next day he departed with Barnabas to Derbe.","But after the disciples had gathered around him, he got up and went back into the city. The next day he and Barnabas left for Derbe.","Circumdantibus autem eum discipulis, surgens intravit civitatem. Et postera die profectus est cum Barnaba in Derben.","ויסבו אתו התלמידים ויקם ויבא העירה וממחרת יצא אל דרבי הוא ובר נבא׃"],["51","14","21","바오로와 바르나바는 그 도시에서 복음을 전하고 수많은 사람을 제자로 삼은 다음, 리스트라와 이코니온으로 갔다가 이어서 안티오키아로 돌아갔다.","바울로와 바르나바는 데르베에서 복음을 전하여 많은 신도들을 얻고 리스트라와 이고니온을 거쳐 안티오키아로 되돌아갔다.","복음을 그 성에서 전하여 많은 사람을 제자로 삼고 루스드라와 이고니온과 안디옥으로 돌아가서","복음을 그 성에서 전하여 많은 사람을 제자로 삼고 루스드라와 이고니온과 안디옥으로 돌아가서","그곳에서 복음을 전하고 많은 신도들을 얻은 후에 루스드라와 이고니온을 거쳐 안디옥으로 되돌아왔다.","After they had proclaimed the good news to that city and made a considerable number of disciples, they returned to Lystra and to Iconium and to Antioch.","And when they had preached the gospel to that city, and had taught many, they returned again to Lystra, and to Iconium, and Antioch,","They preached the good news in that city and won a large number of disciples. Then they returned to Lystra, Iconium and Antioch,","Cumque evangelizassent civitati illi et docuissent multos, reversi sunt Lystram et Iconium et Antiochiam","ויבשרו את הבשורה בעיר ההיא ואחרי העמידם תלמידים הרבה שבו אל לוסטרא ואיקניון ואנטיוכיא׃"],["51","14","22","그들은 제자들의 마음에 힘을 북돋아 주고 계속 믿음에 충실하라고 격려하면서, “우리가 하느님의 나라에 들어가려면 많은 환난을 겪어야 합니다.” 하고 말하였다.","그들은 각 도시에서 신도들의 용기를 북돋우며 끝까지 믿음을 지키라고 격려하면서 \"우리가 하느님 나라에 들어가려면 반드시 많은 어려움을 겪어야 합니다.\" 하고 말하였다.","제자들의 마음을 굳게 하여 이 믿음에 머물러 있으라 권하고 또 우리가 하나님의 나라에 들어가려면 많은 환난을 겪어야 할 것이라 하고","제자들의 마음을 굳게 하여 이 믿음에 거하라 권하고 또 우리가 하나님 나라에 들어가려면 많은 환난을 겪어야 할 것이라 하고","두 사람은 들르는 도시마다 모든 신도들에게 하나님을 사랑하고 서로 사랑하는 마음을 북돋아 주었다. 그리고 어떠한 박해가 오더라도 믿음을 지키라고 격려하였고 하나님 나라에 들어가려면 많은 어려움을 겪어야 한다고 가르쳤다.","They strengthened the spirits of the disciples and exhorted them to persevere in the faith, saying, “It is necessary for us to undergo many hardships to enter the kingdom of God.”","Confirming the souls of the disciples, and exhorting them to continue in the faith, and that we must through much tribulation enter into the kingdom of God.","strengthening the disciples and encouraging them to remain true to the faith. \"We must go through many hardships to enter the kingdom of God,\" they said.","confirmantes animas discipulorum, exhortantes, ut permanerent in fide, et quoniam per multas tribulationes oportet nos intrare in regnum Dei.","ויחזקו את נפשות התלמידים ויזהירו אתם לעמד באמונה וכי רק בצרות רבות בוא נבוא אל מלכות האלהים׃"],["51","14","23","그리고 교회마다 제자들을 위하여 원로들을 임명하고, 단식하며 기도한 뒤에, 그들이 믿게 된 주님께 그들을 의탁하였다.","그리고 각 교회에서 신도들을 위하여 원로들을 뽑아 세우고 단식하며 기도한 뒤에 그들이 믿는 주님께 원로들을 보호해 주시기를 빌고 떠났다.","각 교회에서 장로들을 택하여 금식 기도 하며 그들이 믿는 주께 그들을 위탁하고","각교회에서 장로들을 택하여 금식 기도하며 저희를 그 믿은바 주께 부탁하고","바울과 바나바는 모든 교회에 장로를 임명하고 그들을 위해서 금식기도를 드린 후에 그들이 믿음으로 의지하는 주께 장로들을 맡겼다.","They appointed presbyters for them in each church and, with prayer and fasting, commended them to the Lord in whom they had put their faith.","And when they had ordained them elders in every church, and had prayed with fasting, they commended them to the Lord, on whom they believed.","Paul and Barnabas appointed elders for them in each church and, with prayer and fasting, committed them to the Lord, in whom they had put their trust.","Et cum ordinassent illis per singulas ecclesias presbyteros et orassent cum ieiunationibus, commendaverunt eos Domino, in quem crediderant.","ויבחרו להם זקנים בכל קהלה וקהלה ויתפללו ויצומו ויפקידום ביד האדון אשר האמינו בו׃"],["51","14","24","바오로와 바르나바는 피시디아를 가로질러 팜필리아에 다다라,","두 사도는 비시디아 지방을 거쳐 밤필리아에 이르러","비시디아 가운데로 지나서 밤빌리아에 이르러","비시디아 가운데로 지나가서 밤빌리아에 이르러","그러고 나서 두 사람은 비시디아 지방을 거쳐 밤빌리아로 갔다.","Then they traveled through Pisidia and reached Pamphylia.","And after they had passed throughout Pisidia, they came to Pamphylia.","After going through Pisidia, they came into Pamphylia,","Transeuntesque Pisidiam venerunt Pamphyliam;","ויעברו בפיסדיא ויבאו אל פמפוליא׃"],["51","14","25","페르게에서 말씀을 전하고서 아탈리아로 내려갔다.","베르게에서 말씀을 전한 다음 아딸리아로 내려가","말씀을 버가에서 전하고 앗달리아로 내려가서","도를 버가에서 전하고 앗달리아로 내려가서","버가에서 다시 복음을 전한 후에 앗달리아로 내려갔다.","After proclaiming the word at Perga they went down to Attalia.","And when they had preached the word in Perga, they went down into Attalia:","and when they had preached the word in Perga, they went down to Attalia.","et loquentes in Perge verbum descenderunt in Attaliam.","וישמיעו את דבר יהוה בפרגי וירדו אל אטליא׃"],["51","14","26","거기에서 배를 타고 안티오키아로 갔다. 바로 그곳에서 그들은 선교 활동을 위하여 하느님의 은총에 맡겨졌었는데, 이제 그들이 그 일을 완수한 것이다.","거기에서 배를 타고 시리아의 안티오키아로 향하였다. 안티오키아는 원래 온 교회가 두 사도에게 하느님의 은총을 빌어주며 전도의 임무를 맡겨 내보냈던 곳인데 지금 그들은 그 임무를 마치고 돌아오게 된 것이다.","거기서 배 타고 안디옥에 이르니 이 곳은 두 사도가 이룬 그 일을 위하여 전에 하나님의 은혜에 부탁하던 곳이라","거기서 배 타고 안디옥에 이르니 이곳은 두 사도의 이룬 그 일을 위하여 전에 하나님의 은혜에 부탁하던 곳이라","그곳에서 배를 타고 그들은 드디어 안디옥으로 돌아올 수 있었다. 안디옥은 복음을 전하라는 하나님의 분부를 받고 그들이 처음 길을 떠났던 곳이다.","From there they sailed to Antioch, where they had been commended to the grace of God for the work they had now accomplished.","And thence sailed to Antioch, from whence they had been recommended to the grace of God for the work which they fulfilled.","From Attalia they sailed back to Antioch, where they had been committed to the grace of God for the work they had now completed.","Et inde navigaverunt Antiochiam, unde erant traditi gratiae Dei in opus, quod compleverunt.","ומשם באו באניה אל אנטיוכיא אשר נמסרו שם לחסד אלהים על המלאכה אשר מלאו אתה׃"],["51","14","27","그들은 도착하자마자 교회 신자들을 불러, 하느님께서 자기들과 함께 해 주신 모든 일과 또 다른 민족들에게 믿음의 문을 열어 주신 것을 보고하였다.","두 사도는 안티오키아에 이르자 온 교회 신도들을 모아놓고 하느님께서 그들을 도와 이루어주신 모든 일과 또 이방인들에게 믿음의 문을 열어주신 일을 보고하였다.","그들이 이르러 교회를 모아 하나님이 함께 행하신 모든 일과 이방인들에게 믿음의 문을 여신 것을 보고하고","이르러 교회를 모아 하나님이 함께 행하신 모든 일과 이방인들에게 믿음의 문을 여신 것을 고하고","두 사람은 신도들을 모아 놓고 전도여행 보고를 하는 한편 하나님께서는 이방인들에게도 신앙의 문을 열어 주셨음을 알렸다.","And when they arrived, they called the church together and reported what God had done with them and how he had opened the door of faith to the Gentiles.","And when they were come, and had gathered the church together, they rehearsed all that God had done with them, and how he had opened the door of faith unto the Gentiles.","On arriving there, they gathered the church together and reported all that God had done through them and how he had opened the door of faith to the Gentiles.","Cum autem venissent et congregassent ecclesiam, rettulerunt quanta fecisset Deus cum illis et quia aperuisset gentibus ostium fidei.","ובבאם שמה הקהילו את העדה ויגידו את כל אשר עשה אתם האלהים ואת אשר פתח לגוים פתח האמונה׃"],["51","14","28","그리고 제자들과 함께 오래 머물렀다.","그리고 거기에 있는 신도들과 오랫동안 함께 지냈다.","제자들과 함께 오래 있으니라","제자들과 함께 오래 있으니라","그리고 오랫동안 안디옥에서 신도들과 함께 지냈다.","Then they spent no little time with the disciples.","And there they abode long time with the disciples.","And they stayed there a long time with the disciples.","Morati sunt autem tempus non modicum cum discipulis.","וישבו שם עם התלמידים ימים לא מעטים׃"],["51","15","1","유다에서 어떤 사람들이 내려와, “모세의 관습에 따라 할례를 받지 않으면 여러분은 구원을 받을 수 없습니다.” 하고 형제들을 가르쳤다.","그 무렵 유다에서 몇몇 사람이 안티오키아에 내려와 교우들에게 모세의 율법이 명하는 할례를 받지 않으면 구원을 받지 못한다고 가르치고 있었다.","어떤 사람들이 유대로부터 내려와서 형제들을 가르치되 너희가 모세의 법대로 할례를 받지 아니하면 능히 구원을 받지 못하리라 하니","어떤 사람들이 유대로부터 내려와서 형제들을 가르치되 너희가 모세의 법대로 할례를 받지 아니하면 능히 구원을 얻지 못하리라 하니","바울과 바나바가 안디옥에 있을 때였다. 유대에서 온 사람들 몇이 여전히 신도들에게 유대의 옛 관습대로 할례받지 않으면 구원받을 수 없다고 가르치자","Some who had come down from Judea were instructing the brothers, “Unless you are circumcised according to the Mosaic practice, you cannot be saved.”","And certain men which came down from Judaea taught the brethren, and said, Except ye be circumcised after the manner of Moses, ye cannot be saved.","Some men came down from Judea to Antioch and were teaching the brothers: \"Unless you are circumcised, according to the custom taught by Moses, you cannot be saved.\"","Et quidam descendentes de Iudaea docebant fratres:  “Nisi circumcidamini secundum morem Moysis, non potestis salvi fieri “.","ואנשים ירדו מיהודה וילמדו את האחים לאמר אם לא תמולו כדת משה לא תושעון׃"],["51","15","2","그리하여 바오로와 바르나바 두 사람과 그들 사이에 적지 않은 분쟁과 논란이 일어나, 그 문제 때문에 바오로와 바르나바와 신자들 가운데 다른 몇 사람이 예루살렘에 있는 사도들과 원로들에게 올라가기로 하였다.","그래서 바울로와 바르나바 두 사도와 그들 사이에 격렬한 의견 충돌과 논쟁이 벌어졌다. 그러다가 결국 교회는 바울로와 바르나바와 몇몇 신도들을 예루살렘에 보내어 다른 사도들과 원로들에게 이 문제를 의논하게 하였다.","바울 및 바나바와 그들 사이에 적지 아니한 다툼과 변론이 일어난지라 형제들이 이 문제에 대하여 바울과 바나바와 및 그 중의 몇 사람을 예루살렘에 있는 사도와 장로들에게 보내기로 작정하니라","바울과 바나바와 저희 사이에 적지 아니한 다툼과 변론이 일어난지라 형제들이 이 문제에 대하여 바울과 바나바와 및 그 중에 몇 사람을 예루살렘에 있는 사도와 장로들에게 보내기로 작정하니라","바울과 바나바는 그들과 큰 논쟁을 벌였다. 그래서 신도들은 그 지방 사람 몇을 동행시켜 바울과 바나바를 예루살렘으로 보냈다. 그 문제를 사도나 장로들과 함께 협의하여 해결하기 위해서였다.","Because there arose no little dissension and debate by Paul and Barnabas with them, it was decided that Paul, Barnabas, and some of the others should go up to Jerusalem to the apostles and presbyters about this question.","When therefore Paul and Barnabas had no small dissension and disputation with them, they determined that Paul and Barnabas, and certain other of them, should go up to Jerusalem unto the apostles and elders about this question.","This brought Paul and Barnabas into sharp dispute and debate with them. So Paul and Barnabas were appointed, along with some other believers, to go up to Jerusalem to see the apostles and elders about this question.","Facta autem seditione et conquisitione non minima Paulo et Barnabae adversum illos, statuerunt, ut ascenderent Paulus et Barnabas et quidam alii ex illis ad apostolos et presbyteros in Ierusalem super hac quaestione.","ויהי על זאת ריב ומחלקת לא קלה לפולוס ולבר נבא עמהם ויגזרו כי פולוס ובר נבא ואחרים מהם יעלו ירושלים אל השליחים והזקנים על אדות השאלה הזאת׃"],["51","15","3","이렇게 안티오키아 교회에서 파견된 그들은 페니키아와 사마리아를 거쳐 가면서, 다른 민족들이 하느님께 돌아선 이야기를 해 주어 모든 형제에게 큰 기쁨을 주었다.","그들은 교회의 전송을 받고 떠나 페니키아와 사마리아를 거쳐가면서 이방인들이 개종한 이야기를 들려주었다. 그리하여 그 곳 모든 교우들에게 큰 기쁨을 주었다.","그들이 교회의 전송을 받고 베니게와 사마리아로 다니며 이방인들이 주께 돌아온 일을 말하여 형제들을 다 크게 기쁘게 하더라","저희가 교회의 전송을 받고 베니게와 사마리아로 다녀가며 이방인들의 주께 돌아온 일을 말하여 형제들을 다 크게 기쁘게 하더라","온 교회가 바울 일행을 전송하였다. 그들은 베니게와 사마리아를 거쳐 가는 동안 이방 사람들이 믿게 된 소식을 모든 신도들에게 알려 기쁨을 함께 나눴다.","They were sent on their journey by the church, and passed through Phoenicia and Samaria telling of the conversion of the Gentiles, and brought great joy to all the brothers.","And being brought on their way by the church, they passed through Phenice and Samaria, declaring the conversion of the Gentiles: and they caused great joy unto all the brethren.","The church sent them on their way, and as they traveled through Phoenicia and Samaria, they told how the Gentiles had been converted. This news made all the brothers very glad.","Illi igitur deducti ab ecclesia pertransiebant Phoenicen et Samariam narrantes conversionem gentium et faciebant gaudium magnum omnibus fratribus.","ותלוה אתם הקהלה ויעברו את פינוקיא ואת שמרון מספרים את תשובת הגוים וישמחו את כל האחים שמחה גדולה׃"],["51","15","4","그들은 예루살렘에 도착하여 교회와 사도들과 원로들의 영접을 받고, 하느님께서 자기들과 함께 해 주신 모든 일을 보고하였다.","예루살렘에 도착한 그들은 사도들과 원로들을 비롯한 온 교회의 환영을 받았다. 그리고 하느님께서 그들을 도와 이루어주신 일들을 모두 보고하였다.","예루살렘에 이르러 교회와 사도와 장로들에게 영접을 받고 하나님이 자기들과 함께 계셔 행하신 모든 일을 말하매","예루살렘에 이르러 교회와 사도와 장로들에게 영접을 받고 하나님이 자기들과 함께 계셔 행하신 모든 일을 말하매","예루살렘에 도착한 그들은 신도들과 교회의 지도자들인 모든 사도와 장로들의 환영을 받았다. 바울과 바나바는 전도여행 중에 하나님께서 어떻게 도와주셨는가를 그대로 보고하였다.","When they arrived in Jerusalem, they were welcomed by the church, as well as by the apostles and the presbyters, and they reported what God had done with them.","And when they were come to Jerusalem, they were received of the church, and of the apostles and elders, and they declared all things that God had done with them.","When they came to Jerusalem, they were welcomed by the church and the apostles and elders, to whom they reported everything God had done through them.","Cum autem venissent Hierosolymam, suscepti sunt ab ecclesia et apostolis et presbyteris et annuntiaverunt quanta Deus fecisset cum illis.","ויהי כבאם ירושלים ויקבלו אתם הקהלה והשליחים והזקנים ויגידו להם את אשר הגדיל האלהים לעשות עמהם׃"],["51","15","5","그런데 바리사이파에 속하였다가 믿게 된 사람 몇이 나서서, “그들에게 할례를 베풀고 또 모세의 율법을 지키라고 명령해야 합니다.” 하고 말하였다.","그런데 바리사이파에 속했다가 신도가 된 사람 몇이 나서서 \"이방인들에게도 할례를 주고 모세의 율법을 지키도록 일러주어야 합니다.\" 하고 말하였다.","바리새파 중에 어떤 믿는 사람들이 일어나 말하되 이방인에게 할례를 행하고 모세의 율법을 지키라 명하는 것이 마땅하다 하니라","바리새파 중에 믿는 어떤 사람들이 일어나 말하되 이방인에게 할례 주고 모세의 율법을 지키라 명하는 것이 마땅하다 하니라","그때 원래는 바리새파에 속해 있다가 신도가 된 사람들 몇이 일어서서 이방인이라 할지라도 신도가 된 이상 모세의 가르침대로 할례를 받고 유대인의 관습과 의식을 빠짐없이 다 지켜야 한다고 주장하였다.","But some from the party of the Pharisees who had become believers stood up and said, “It is necessary to circumcise them and direct them to observe the Mosaic law.”","But there rose up certain of the sect of the Pharisees which believed, saying, That it was needful to circumcise them, and to command them to keep the law of Moses.","Then some of the believers who belonged to the party of the Pharisees stood up and said, \"The Gentiles must be circumcised and required to obey the law of Moses.\"","Surrexerunt autem quidam de haeresi pharisaeorum, qui crediderant, dicentes:  “Oportet circumcidere eos, praecipere quoque servare legem Moysis! “.","ויקומו אנשים מאמינים מכת הפרושים ויאמרו כי חובה היא למול אתם ולצותם לשמר את תורת משה׃"],["51","15","6","사도들과 원로들이 이 문제를 검토하려고 모였다.","사도들과 원로들은 이 문제를 검토하려고 회의를 열었다.","사도와 장로들이 이 일을 의논하러 모여","사도와 장로들이 이 일을 의논하러 모여","사도들과 교회 장로들은 이 문제를 결정하고자 회의를 열었다.","The apostles and the presbyters met together to see about this matter.","And the apostles and elders came together for to consider of this matter.","The apostles and elders met to consider this question.","Conveneruntque apostoli et presbyteri videre de verbo hoc.","ויקהלו השליחים והזקנים לעין בדבר הזה׃"],["51","15","7","오랜 논란 끝에 베드로가 일어나 그들에게 말하였다. “형제 여러분, 다른 민족들도 내 입을 통하여 복음의 말씀을 들어 믿게 하시려고 하느님께서 일찍이 여러분 가운데에서 나를 뽑으신 사실을 여러분은 알고 있습니다.","오랜 토론 끝에 베드로가 일어나서 그들에게 이렇게 말하였다. \"형제 여러분, 여러분이 아시는 바와 같이 하느님께서는 내 입을 빌려 이방인들도 복음을 듣고 믿게 하시려고 일찍이 여러분 가운데서 나를 뽑아주셨습니다.","많은 변론이 있은 후에 베드로가 일어나 말하되 형제들아 너희도 알거니와 하나님이 이방인들로 내 입에서 복음의 말씀을 들어 믿게 하시려고 오래 전부터 너희 가운데서 나를 택하시고","많은 변론이 있은 후에 베드로가 일어나 말하되 형제들아 너희도 알거니와 하나님이 이방인들로 내 입에서 복음의 말씀을 들어 믿게 하시려고 오래 전부터 너희 가운데서 나를 택하시고","토의가 끝없이 거듭되자 베드로가 일어서서 말하였다. \"형제 여러분, 하나님께서는 이방사람들에게 복음을 전하여 믿음을 갖게하려고 오래 전에 여러분 가운데서 나를 가려 뽑으신 줄을 다 알고 계실 것입니다.","After much debate had taken place, Peter got up and said to them, “My brothers, you are well aware that from early days God made his choice among you that through my mouth the Gentiles would hear the word of the gospel and believe.","And when there had been much disputing, Peter rose up, and said unto them, Men and brethren, ye know how that a good while ago God made choice among us, that the Gentiles by my mouth should hear the word of the gospel, and believe.","After much discussion, Peter got up and addressed them: \"Brothers, you know that some time ago God made a choice among you that the Gentiles might hear from my lips the message of the gospel and believe.","Cum autem magna conquisitio fieret, surgens Petrus dixit ad eos:  “Viri fratres, vos scitis quoniam ab antiquis diebus in vobis elegit Deus per os meum audire gentes verbum evangelii et credere;","ויהי ברבות המחלקת קם פטרוס ויאמר אליהם אנשים אחים אתם ידעתם כי מימים ראשים בי בחר האלהים מכלנו אשר ישמעו הגוים מפי את דבר הבשורה ויאמינו׃"],["51","15","8","사람의 마음을 아시는 하느님께서는 우리에게 하신 것처럼 그들에게도 성령을 주시어 그들을 인정해 주셨습니다.","그리고 사람의 마음속을 아시는 하느님께서는 성령을 그들에게도 내리셔서 우리와 똑같이 인정해 주셨습니다.","또 마음을 아시는 하나님이 우리에게와 같이 그들에게도 성령을 주어 증언하시고","또 마음을 아시는 하나님이 우리에게와 같이 저희에게도 성령을 주어 증거하시고","인간의 마음을 환하게 알고 계시는 하나님께서는 이방인들도 받아들이고 계시다는 것을 알게 하시려고 우리들에게 주셨던 것과 똑같이 그들에게도 성령을 주셨습니다.","And God, who knows the heart, bore witness by granting them the holy Spirit just as he did us.","And God, which knoweth the hearts, bare them witness, giving them the Holy Ghost, even as he did unto us;","God, who knows the heart, showed that he accepted them by giving the Holy Spirit to them, just as he did to us.","et qui novit corda, Deus, testimonium perhibuit illis dans Spiritum Sanctum sicut et nobis;","והאלהים ידע הלבבות העיד עליהם בתתו גם להם את רוח הקדש כאשר נתן לנו׃"],["51","15","9","그리고 그들의 믿음으로 그들의 마음을 정화하시어, 우리와 그들 사이에 아무런 차별도 두지 않으셨습니다.","그리고 그들의 믿음을 보시고 그들의 마음을 깨끗하게 하셔서 우리와 그들 사이에 아무런 차별도 두지 않으셨습니다.","믿음으로 그들의 마음을 깨끗이 하사 그들이나 우리나 차별하지 아니하셨느니라","믿음으로 저희 마음을 깨끗이 하사 저희나 우리나 분간치 아니하셨느니라","하나님께서는 그들과 우리 사이에 아무런 차별도 두시지 않았고 우리들에게 하셨던 것과 똑같이 그들도 믿음으로 깨끗함을 받게 하셨습니다.","He made no distinction between us and them, for by faith he purified their hearts.","And put no difference between us and them, purifying their hearts by faith.","He made no distinction between us and them, for he purified their hearts by faith.","et nihil discrevit inter nos et illos fide purificans corda eorum.","ולא הבדיל בינינו וביניהם כי טהר את לבבם על ידי האמונה׃"],["51","15","10","그런데 지금 여러분은 왜 우리 조상들도 우리도 다 감당할 수 없던 멍에를 형제들의 목에 씌워 하느님을 시험하는 것입니까?","그런데 지금 여러분은 왜 우리의 조상들이나 우리가 다 감당하지 못했던 멍에를 그 신도들의 목에 메워서 하느님께서 하시는 일을 간섭하려 드는 것입니까?","그런데 지금 너희가 어찌하여 하나님을 시험하여 우리 조상과 우리도 능히 메지 못하던 멍에를 제자들의 목에 두려느냐","그런데 지금 너희가 어찌하여 하나님을 시험하여 우리 조상과 우리도 능히 메지 못하던 멍에를 제자들의 목에 두려느냐","그런데 지금 여러분은 어째서 우리 조상들이나 우리가 다 질 수 없었던 무거운 짐을 그들에게 지워서 하나님께서 하신 일을 마음대로 뜯어고치려 듭니까?","Why, then, are you now putting God to the test by placing on the shoulders of the disciples a yoke that neither our ancestors nor we have been able to bear?","Now therefore why tempt ye God, to put a yoke upon the neck of the disciples, which neither our fathers nor we were able to bear?","Now then, why do you try to test God by putting on the necks of the disciples a yoke that neither we nor our fathers have been able to bear?","Nunc ergo quid tentatis Deum imponere iugum super cervicem discipulorum, quod neque patres nostri neque nos portare potuimus?","ועתה מה תנסו את האלהים לשום על על צוארי התלמידים אשר גם אבותינו גם אנחנו לא יכלנו לשאת׃"],["51","15","11","우리는 그들과 마찬가지로 우리도 주 예수님의 은총으로 구원을 받는다고 믿습니다.”","그들의 경우와 마찬가지로 우리가 구원받는 것도 주 예수의 은총으로 되는 것이라고 믿습니다.\"","그러나 우리는 그들이 우리와 동일하게 주 예수의 은혜로 구원 받는 줄을 믿노라 하니라","우리가 저희와 동일하게 주 예수의 은혜로 구원 받는 줄을 믿노라 하니라","여러분은 주 예수께서 값없이 주시는 은혜로 모든 사람을 똑같이 구원하신다는 것을 믿지 않습니까?\"","On the contrary, we believe that we are saved through the grace of the Lord Jesus, in the same way as they.”","But we believe that through the grace of the LORD Jesus Christ we shall be saved, even as they.","No! We believe it is through the grace of our Lord Jesus that we are saved, just as they are.\"","Sed per gratiam Domini Iesu credimus salvari quemadmodum et illi “.","אבל בחסד ישוע המשיח אדנינו נאמין להושע כמוהם כמונו׃"],["51","15","12","그러자 온 회중이 잠잠해졌다. 그리고 바르나바와 바오로가 하느님께서 자기들을 통하여 다른 민족들 가운데에서 일으키신 표징과 이적들에 대하여 이야기하는 것을 들었다.","이 말을 듣고 온 회중은 조용해졌다. 그리고 바르나바와 바울로가 하느님께서 자기들을 통하여 이방인들 가운데서 행하신 여러 가지 기적과 놀라운 일들에 대하여 보고하는 것을 들었다.","온 무리가 가만히 있어 바나바와 바울이 하나님께서 자기들로 말미암아 이방인 중에서 행하신 표적과 기사에 관하여 말하는 것을 듣더니","온 무리가 가만히 있어 바나바와 바울이 하나님이 자기들로 말미암아 이방인 중에서 행하신 1)표적과 기사 고하는 것을 듣더니 혹 이적","이 말을 듣자 더 이상 아무도 반론을 펴지 않았다. 그리고 바나바와 바울을 통해 하나님께서 이방 사람들에게 베푸신 여러 이적에 대한 이야기를 들었다.","The whole assembly fell silent, and they listened while Paul and Barnabas described the signs and wonders God had worked among the Gentiles through them.","Then all the multitude kept silence, and gave audience to Barnabas and Paul, declaring what miracles and wonders God had wrought among the Gentiles by them.","The whole assembly became silent as they listened to Barnabas and Paul telling about the miraculous signs and wonders God had done among the Gentiles through them.","Tacuit autem omnis multitudo, et audiebant Barnabam et Paulum narrantes quanta fecisset Deus signa et prodigia in gentibus per eos.","ויחרישו כל הקהל וישמעו אל בר נבא ואל פולוס מספרים את האתות והמופתים אשר הרבה האלהים לעשות על ידיהם בקרב הגוים׃"],["51","15","13","그들이 말을 마치자 야고보가 이렇게 말하였다. “형제 여러분, 내 말을 들어 보십시오.","두 사도가 말을 마치자 야고보가 나서서 이렇게 말하였다. \"형제 여러분, 내가 한 말씀 드리겠습니다.","말을 마치매 야고보가 대답하여 이르되 형제들아 내 말을 들으라","말을 마치매 야고보가 대답하여 가로되 형제들아 내 말을 들으라","두 사람의 말이 끝나자 야고보가 자리에서 일어나 말하였다. \"형제 여러분, 제 말씀을 들어 보십시오.","After they had fallen silent, James responded, “My brothers, listen to me.","And after they had held their peace, James answered, saying, Men and brethren, hearken unto me:","When they finished, James spoke up: \"Brothers, listen to me.","Et postquam tacuerunt, respondit Iacobus dicens:  “Viri fratres, audite me.","ויכלו לדבר ויען יעקב ויאמר אנשים אחים שמעו אלי׃"],["51","15","14","하느님께서 처음에 다른 민족들 가운데에서 당신의 이름을 위한 백성을 모으시려고 어떻게 배려하셨는지, 시몬이 이야기해 주었습니다.","하느님께서 이방인들을 돌보시어 그들 가운데서 처음에 당신의 백성을 뽑아주시게 된 경위를 시몬이 말해 주었습니다.","하나님이 처음으로 이방인 중에서 자기 이름을 위할 백성을 취하시려고 그들을 돌보신 것을 시므온이 말하였으니","하나님이 처음으로 이방인 중에서 자기 이름을 위할 백성을 취하시려고 저희를 권고하신 것을 시므온이 고하였으니","조금 전 베드로는 하나님께서 처음으로 이방 사람들을 찾아가 그들 중에서 하나님의 이름을 높이 찬양하는 자들을 불러 주셨던 때의 이야기를 들려주었습니다.","Symeon has described how God first concerned himself with acquiring from among the Gentiles a people for his name.","Simeon hath declared how God at the first did visit the Gentiles, to take out of them a people for his name.","Simon has described to us how God at first showed his concern by taking from the Gentiles a people for himself.","Simeon narravit quemadmodum primum Deus visitavit sumere ex gentibus populum nomini suo;","שמעון ספר איך האלהים ראה לו בראשונה לקחת מבין הגוים עם לשמו׃"],["51","15","15","이는 예언자들의 말과도 일치하는데, 성경에 이렇게 기록되어 있습니다.","이 사실은 예언자들의 말과도 일치합니다. 예언서에는 이렇게 기록되어 있습니다.","선지자들의 말씀이 이와 일치하도다 기록된 바","선지자들의 말씀이 이와 합하도다 기록된바","이방 사람들이 돌아와 믿음의 한 식구가 된 이 사실은 예언자들의 예언과도 일치합니다. 예언자 아모스의 예언에 나오는 이 구절을 들어 보십시오.","The words of the prophets agree with this, as is written:","And to this agree the words of the prophets; as it is written,","The words of the prophets are in agreement with this, as it is written:","et huic concordant verba Prophetarum, sicut scriptum est:","ולזאת מסכימים דברי הנביאים ככתוב׃"],["51","15","16","그 뒤에 나는 돌아와 무너진 다윗의 초막을 다시 지으리라. 그곳의 허물어진 것들을 다시 지어 그 초막을 바로 세우리라.","1)그 뒤에 내가 다시 돌아와 무너진 다윗의 집을 다시 지으리니 허물어진 곳을 다시 고치고 그것을 바로 세우리라. 칠십인역 아모 9:11-12.","ㄱ)이 후에 내가 돌아와서 다윗의 무너진 장막을 다시 지으며 또 그 허물어진 것을 다시 지어 일으키리니","ㄱ)이 후에 내가 돌아와서 다윗의 무너진 장막을 다시 지으며 또 그 퇴락한 것을 다시 지어 일으키리니 암 9:11, 12","ㄱ) \"그 뒤에 내가 다시 돌아와 무너진 다윗의 도성을 다시 세우겠다. 내가 폐허가 된 그곳을 보수하고 다시 세우겠다. (ㄱ. 70인역 암9:11-12)","‘After this I shall return and rebuild the fallen hut of David; from its ruins I shall rebuild it and raise it up again,","After this I will return, and will build again the tabernacle of David, which is fallen down; and I will build again the ruins thereof, and I will set it up:","\"'After this I will return and rebuild David's fallen tent. Its ruins I will rebuild, and I will restore it,","Post haec revertar et reaedificabo tabernaculum David, quod decidit, et diruta eius reaedificabo et erigam illud.","אחרי זאת אשוב ואקים את סכת דויד הנפלת והרסותיה אקים ובניתיה׃"],["51","15","17","그리하여 나머지 다른 사람들도, 내 이름으로 불리는 다른 모든 민족들도 주님을 찾게 되리라. 주님이 이렇게 말하고 이 일들을 실행하니","그리하여 살아 남은 백성들이 다 주를 찾고 내 백성이 된 모든 이방인들까지도 모두 주를 찾게 되리라.","이는 그 남은 사람들과 내 이름으로 일컬음을 받는 모든 이방인들로 주를 찾게 하려 함이라 하셨으니","이는 그 남은 사람들과 내 이름으로 일컬음을 받는 모든 이방인들로 주를 찾게 하려 함이라 하셨으니","그래서 남은 백성이 다 주를 찾으며 내게 복종하는 이방인들까지도 다 주를 찾을 것이다.","so that the rest of humanity may seek out the Lord, even all the Gentiles on whom my name is invoked. Thus says the Lord who accomplishes these things,","That the residue of men might seek after the Lord, and all the Gentiles, upon whom my name is called, saith the Lord, who doeth all these things.","that the remnant of men may seek the Lord, and all the Gentiles who bear my name, says the Lord, who does these things'","ut requirant reliqui hominum Dominum et omnes gentes, super quas invocatum est nomen meum, dicit Dominus faciens haec 18 nota a saeculo “.","למען ידרשו שארית אדם את יהוה וכל הגוים אשר נקרא שמי עליהם נאם יהוה עשה כל אלה׃"],["51","15","18","예로부터 알려진 일들이다.’","오래 전부터 이것을 알게 해주시는 주께서 이렇게 말씀하신다.'","즉 예로부터 이것을 알게 하시는 주의 말씀이라 함과 같으니라","즉 예로부터 이것을 알게 하시는 주의 말씀이라 함과 같으니라","오래전부터 이것을 알려 주신 주께서 이렇게 말씀하셨다.\"","known from of old.’","Known unto God are all his works from the beginning of the world.","that have been known for ages.",null,"נודעים לאלהים מעולם כל מעשיו׃"],["51","15","19","그러므로 내 판단으로는, 다른 민족들 가운데에서 하느님께 돌아선 이들에게 어려움을 주지 말고,","그러므로 내 의견은 하느님께로 돌아오는 이방인들을 괴롭힐 것이 아니라","그러므로 내 의견에는 이방인 중에서 하나님께로 돌아오는 자들을 괴롭게 하지 말고","그러므로 내 의견에는 이방인 중에서 하나님께로 돌아 오는 자들을 괴롭게 말고","그러므로 내 의견으로는 하나님께로 돌아오는 이방 사람들에게 우리 유대인의 율법에 복종해야한다고 강요해서는 안된다고 생각합니다.","It is my judgment, therefore, that we ought to stop troubling the Gentiles who turn to God,","Wherefore my sentence is, that we trouble not them, which from among the Gentiles are turned to God:","\"It is my judgment, therefore, that we should not make it difficult for the Gentiles who are turning to God.","Propter quod ego iudico non inquietari eos, qui ex gentibus convertuntur ad Deum,","ועל כן אני דן שלא להחמיר על השבים מן הגוים לאלהים׃"],["51","15","20","다만 그들에게 편지를 보내어, 우상에게 바쳐 더러워진 음식과 불륜과 목 졸라 죽인 짐승의 고기와 피를 멀리하라고 해야 합니다.","다만 우상에게 바쳐서 더러워진 것을 먹지 말고 음란한 행동을 하지 말고 목 졸라 죽인 짐승의 고기와 피를 먹지 말라고 편지를 띄웠으면 합니다.","다만 우상의 더러운 것과 음행과 목매어 죽인 것과 피를 멀리하라고 편지하는 것이 옳으니","다만 우상의 더러운 것과 음행과 목매어 죽인 것과 피를 멀리 하라고 편지하는 것이 가하니","다만 우상에게 제물로 바쳤던 고기를 먹지 말고, 모든 음란한 행동을 하지 말고, 목졸라 죽인 짐승의 고기와 피를 먹지 말라고 써서 보내는 것이 좋으리라고 봅니다.","but tell them by letter to avoid pollution from idols, unlawful marriage, the meat of strangled animals, and blood.","But that we write unto them, that they abstain from pollutions of idols, and from fornication, and from things strangled, and from blood.","Instead we should write to them, telling them to abstain from food polluted by idols, from sexual immorality, from the meat of strangled animals and from blood.","sed scribere ad eos, ut abstineant se a contaminationibus simulacrorum et fornicatione et suffocato et sanguine.","רק לכתב אליהם אשר ירחקו מטמאת האלילים ומן הזנות ומבשר הנחנק ומן הדם׃"],["51","15","21","사실 예로부터 각 고을에는, 안식일마다 회당에서 모세의 율법을 봉독하며 선포하는 이들이 있었습니다.”","예로부터 어느 도시에나 모세의 율법을 풀이하는 사람들이 있어서 그 율법을 안식일마다 회당에서 읽어왔습니다.\"","이는 예로부터 각 성에서 모세를 전하는 자가 있어 안식일마다 회당에서 그 글을 읽음이라 하더라","이는 예로부터 각 성에서 모세를 전하는 자가 있어 안식일마다 회당에서 그 글을 읽음이니라 하더라","예전부터 대대로 모든 도시의 유대인 회당에서는 안식일마다 이런 것을 금하는 글을 읽어 왔으니 말입니다.\"","For Moses, for generations now, has had those who proclaim him in every town, as he has been read in the synagogues every sabbath.”","For Moses of old time hath in every city them that preach him, being read in the synagogues every sabbath day.","For Moses has been preached in every city from the earliest times and is read in the synagogues on every Sabbath.\"","Moyses enim a generationibus antiquis habet in singulis civitatibus, qui eum praedicent in synagogis, ubi per omne sabbatum legitur “.","כי משה מדרת עולם יש לו מגידיו בכל עיר ועיר ויקרא בבתי הכנסיות מדי שבת בשבתו׃"],["51","15","22","그때에 사도들과 원로들은 온 교회와 더불어, 자기들 가운데에서 사람들을 뽑아 바오로와 바르나바와 함께 안티오키아에 보내기로 결정하였다. 뽑힌 사람들은 형제들 가운데 지도자인 바르사빠스라고 하는 유다와 실라스였다.","그래서 사도들과 원로들은 교회의 모든 신도들과 의논하여 대표들을 뽑아 바울로와 바르나바와 함께 안티오키아로 보내기로 작정하였다. 거기에서 뽑힌 사람들은 교우들 가운데서 지도적인 위치에 있던 바르사빠라는 유다와 실라였다.","이에 사도와 장로와 온 교회가 그 중에서 사람들을 택하여 바울과 바나바와 함께 안디옥으로 보내기를 결정하니 곧 형제 중에 인도자인 바사바라 하는 유다와 실라더라","이에 사도와 장로와 온 교회가 그 중에서 사람을 택하여 바울과 바나바와 함께 안디옥으로 보내기를 가결하니 곧 형제 중에 인도자인 바사바라 하는 유다와 실라더라","사도와 장로들과 온 교회는 바울과 바나바와 함께 그들이 뽑은 대표를 안디옥으로 보내 이 결정된 사항을 알리기로 결의하였다. 그 자리에서 대표로 뽑힌 사람은 신도들 가운데서 지도적인 위치에 있던 바사바라고도 불리는 유다와 실라였다.","Then the apostles and presbyters, in agreement with the whole church, decided to choose representatives and to send them to Antioch with Paul and Barnabas. The ones chosen were Judas, who was called Barsabbas, and Silas, leaders among the brothers.","Then pleased it the apostles and elders with the whole church, to send chosen men of their own company to Antioch with Paul and Barnabas; namely, Judas surnamed Barsabas and Silas, chief men among the brethren:","Then the apostles and elders, with the whole church, decided to choose some of their own men and send them to Antioch with Paul and Barnabas. They chose Judas (called Barsabbas) and Silas, two men who were leaders among the brothers.","Tunc placuit apostolis et presbyteris cum omni ecclesia electos viros ex eis mittere Antiochiam cum Paulo et Barnaba: Iudam, qui cognominatur Barsabbas, et Silam, viros primos in fratribus,","וייטב בעיני השליחים והזקנים עם כל הקהל לבחר מהם אנשים ולשלח אתם אל אנטיוכיא עם פולוס ובר נבא את יהודה המכנה בר שבא ואת סילא אנשי שם בין האחים׃"],["51","15","23","그들 편에 이러한 편지를 보냈다. “여러분의 형제인 사도들과 원로들이 안티오키아와 시리아와 킬리키아에 있는 다른 민족 출신 형제들에게 인사합니다.","그들이 이 사람들 편에 부친 편지는 다음과 같다. \"여러분과 한 형제가 된 우리 사도와 원로들은 안티오키아와 시리아와 길리기아에 있는 이방인 형제들에게 문안을 드립니다.","그 편에 편지를 부쳐 이르되 사도와 장로 된 형제들은 안디옥과 수리아와 길리기아에 있는 이방인 형제들에게 문안하노라","그 편에 편지를 부쳐 이르되 사도와 장로된 형제들은 안디옥과 수리아와 길리기아에 있는 이방인 형제들에게 문안하노라","그들이 가지고 간 편지의 내용은 다음과 같았다. \"안디옥과 수리아와 길리기아에 계시는 이방인 형제 여러분에게 예루살렘에 있는 사도들과 장로들과 형제들이 문안을 드립니다.","This is the letter delivered by them: “The apostles and the presbyters, your brothers, to the brothers in Antioch, Syria, and Cilicia of Gentile origin: greetings.","And they wrote letters by them after this manner; The apostles and elders and brethren send greeting unto the brethren which are of the Gentiles in Antioch and Syria and Cilicia.","With them they sent the following letter: The apostles and elders, your brothers, To the Gentile believers in Antioch, Syria and Cilicia: Greetings.","scribentes per manum eorum:  “Apostoli et presbyteri fratres his, qui sunt Antiochiae et Syriae et Ciliciae, fratribus ex gentibus, salutem!","ויכתבו וישלחו על ידם לאמר אנחנו השליחים והזקנים והאחים שאלים לשלום האחים אשר מן הגוים באנטיוכיא ובסוריא ובקיליקיא׃"],["51","15","24","우리 가운데 몇 사람이 우리에게서 지시를 받지도 않고 여러분에게 가서, 여러 가지 말로 여러분을 놀라게 하고 정신을 어지럽게 하였다는 말을 들었습니다.","우리 신도 중 몇몇이 여러분에게 가서 엉뚱한 말로 여러분을 괴롭히고 어리둥절하게 만들었다는 이야기를 들었는데 그것은 우리가 시킨 일이 아닙니다.","들은즉 우리 가운데서 어떤 사람들이 우리의 지시도 없이 나가서 말로 너희를 괴롭게 하고 마음을 혼란하게 한다 하기로","들은즉 우리 가운데서 어떤 사람들이 우리의 시킨 것도 없이 나가서 말로 너희를 괴롭게 하고 마음을 혹하게 한다 하기로","여기서 간 신도 몇 명이 여러분을 당황하게 만들고 여러분이 구원받는 일에 대해서까지 의문을 가지게 했다는 말을 들었습니다. 그러나 그들은 우리가 보낸 사람들이 아닙니다.","Since we have heard that some of our number [who went out] without any mandate from us have upset you with their teachings and disturbed your peace of mind,","Forasmuch as we have heard, that certain which went out from us have troubled you with words, subverting your souls, saying, Ye must be circumcised, and keep the law: to whom we gave no such commandment:","We have heard that some went out from us without our authorization and disturbed you, troubling your minds by what they said.","Quoniam audivimus quia quidam ex nobis, quibus non mandavimus, exeuntes turbaverunt vos verbis evertentes animas vestras,","יען וביען שמענו כי יצאו מאתנו מבלבלים אתכם ומקלקלים נפשתיכם בדברים באמרם לכם להמול ולשמר את התורה אשר לא צוינו אותם׃"],["51","15","25","그래서 우리는 사람들을 뽑아 우리가 사랑하는 바르나바와 바오로와 함께 여러분에게 보내기로 뜻을 모아 결정하였습니다.","그래서 우리는 대표 몇을 뽑아 사랑하는 바르나바와 바울로와 함께 여러분에게 보내기로 뜻을 모았습니다.","사람을 택하여 우리 주 예수 그리스도의 이름을 위하여 생명을 아끼지 아니하는 자인 우리가 사랑하는 바나바와 바울과 함께 너희에게 보내기를 만장일치로 결정하였노라","사람을 택하여 우리 주 예수 그리스도의 이름을 위하여 생명을 아끼지 아니하는 자인 우리의 사랑하는 바나바와 바울과 함께 너희에게 보내기를 일치 가결하였노라","그래서 우리는 이 기회에 공식적인 대표 두 사람을 사랑하는 바나바와 바울과 함께 여러분에게 보내는 것이 좋겠다고 만장일치로 결의하였습니다.","we have with one accord decided to choose representatives and to send them to you along with our beloved Barnabas and Paul,","It seemed good unto us, being assembled with one accord, to send chosen men unto you with our beloved Barnabas and Paul,","So we all agreed to choose some men and send them to you with our dear friends Barnabas and Paul--","placuit nobis collectis in unum eligere viros et mittere ad vos cum carissimis nobis Barnaba et Paulo,","לכן טוב בעיני כלנו יחדו לבחר אנשים לשלחם אליכם עם חביבינו בר נבא ופולוס׃"],["51","15","26","바르나바와 바오로는 우리 주 예수 그리스도의 이름을 위하여 목숨을 내놓은 사람들입니다.","그런데 이 바르나바와 바울로는 우리 주 예수 그리스도를 위하여 목숨을 내어놓은 사람들입니다.",null,null,"대표인 유다와 실라는 우리 주님 예수 그리스도를 위해서 목숨을 내놓은 사람들입니다. 여러분의 질문에 대해서 우리가 결정한 바를 이분들이 직접 구두로 전해 드릴 것입니다.","who have dedicated their lives to the name of our Lord Jesus Christ.","Men that have hazarded their lives for the name of our Lord Jesus Christ.","men who have risked their lives for the name of our Lord Jesus Christ.","hominibus, qui tradiderunt animas suas pro nomine Domini nostri Iesu Christi.","אנשים אשר מסרו נפשם על שם אדנינו ישוע המשיח׃"],["51","15","27","우리는 또 유다와 실라스를 보냅니다. 이들이 이 글의 내용을 말로도 전할 것입니다.","이제 우리 대표로 가는 유다와 실라가 이 편지의 사연을 직접 말로도 전해 드릴 것입니다마는","그리하여 유다와 실라를 보내니 그들도 이 일을 말로 전하리라","그리하여 유다와 실라를 보내니 저희도 이 일을 말로 전하리라","우상에게 제물로 바쳤던 것을 먹지 말고, 목졸라 죽인 짐승의 고기와 피를 먹지 말고, 또 음란한 행동을 하지 마십시오. 그러나 그 이외의 유대인의 율법을 여러분에게 짐 지우는 것은 성령의 뜻이 아니라는 것이 우리의 결정입니다. 이것만 지켜 주신다면 충분합니다. 안녕히 계십시오.\"","So we are sending Judas and Silas who will also convey this same message by word of mouth:","We have sent therefore Judas and Silas, who shall also tell you the same things by mouth.","Therefore we are sending Judas and Silas to confirm by word of mouth what we are writing.","Misimus ergo Iudam et Silam, qui et ipsi verbis referent eadem.","על כן שלחנו את יהודה ואת סילא אשר גם המה יגידו זאת בפיהם׃"],["51","15","28","성령과 우리는 다음의 몇 가지 필수 사항 외에는 여러분에게 다른 짐을 지우지 않기로 결정하였습니다.","다음 몇 가지 긴요한 사항 외에는 여러분에게 다른 짐을 더 지우지 않으려는 것이 성령과 우리의 결정입니다.","성령과 우리는 이 요긴한 것들 외에는 아무 짐도 너희에게 지우지 아니하는 것이 옳은 줄 알았노니","성령과 우리는 이 요긴한 것들 외에 아무 짐도 너희에게 지우지 아니하는 것이 가한줄 알았노니","(27절에 포함되어 있음)","‘It is the decision of the holy Spirit and of us not to place on you any burden beyond these necessities,","For it seemed good to the Holy Ghost, and to us, to lay upon you no greater burden than these necessary things;","It seemed good to the Holy Spirit and to us not to burden you with anything beyond the following requirements:","Visum est enim Spiritui Sancto et nobis nihil ultra imponere vobis oneris quam haec necessario:","כי טוב לפני רוח הקדש ולפנינו לבלתי שום עליכם משא אחר לבד מאלה הדברים הצריכים׃"],["51","15","29","곧 우상에게 바쳤던 제물과 피와 목 졸라 죽인 짐승의 고기와 불륜을 멀리하라는 것입니다. 여러분이 이것들만 삼가면 올바로 사는 것입니다. 안녕히 계십시오.”","여러분은 우상에게 바쳤던 제물을 먹지 말고 피나 목 졸라 죽인 짐승도 먹지 마시오. 그리고 음란한 행동을 하지 마시오. 여러분이 이런 몇 가지만 삼가면 다 잘될 것입니다. 안녕히 계십시오.\"","우상의 제물과 피와 목매어 죽인 것과 음행을 멀리할지니라 이에 스스로 삼가면 잘되리라 평안함을 원하노라 하였더라","우상의 제물과 피와 목매어 죽인 것과 음행을 멀리 할찌니라 이에 스스로 삼가면 잘 되리라 평안함을 원하노라 하였더라","(27절에 포함되어 있음)","namely, to abstain from meat sacrificed to idols, from blood, from meats of strangled animals, and from unlawful marriage. If you keep free of these, you will be doing what is right. Farewell.’”","That ye abstain from meats offered to idols, and from blood, and from things strangled, and from fornication: from which if ye keep yourselves, ye shall do well. Fare ye well.","You are to abstain from food sacrificed to idols, from blood, from the meat of strangled animals and from sexual immorality. You will do well to avoid these things. Farewell.","abstinere ab idolothytis et sanguine et suffocatis et fornicatione; a quibus custodientes vos bene agetis. Valete “.","אשר תרחקו מזבחי אלילים ומן הדם ומבשר הנחנק ומן הזנות אם מאלה תשמרו את נפשתיכם תיטיבו לעשות ושלום לכם׃"],["51","15","30","사람들이 이렇게 그들을 떠나보내자, 그들은 안티오키아로 내려가 공동체를 모아 놓고 편지를 전하였다.","그들 일행은 길을 떠나 안티오키아로 내려가서 회중을 다 모아놓고 그 편지를 전해 주었다.","그들이 작별하고 안디옥에 내려가 무리를 모은 후에 편지를 전하니","저희가 작별하고 안디옥에 내려가 무리를 모은 후에 편지를 전하니","보냄을 받은 네 사람은 곧 안디옥으로 내려가 총회를 소집하고 편지를 전달하였다.","And so they were sent on their journey. Upon their arrival in Antioch they called the assembly together and delivered the letter.","So when they were dismissed, they came to Antioch: and when they had gathered the multitude together, they delivered the epistle:","The men were sent off and went down to Antioch, where they gathered the church together and delivered the letter.","Illi igitur dimissi descenderunt Antiochiam et, congregata multitudine, tradiderunt epistulam;","וישלחו האנשים ויבאו אל אנטיוכיא ויקהילו את העם ויתנו להם את האגרת׃"],["51","15","31","공동체는 편지를 읽고 그 격려 말씀에 기뻐하였다.","회중은 그 편지를 읽고 격려를 받았으며 또한 기뻐하였다.","읽고 그 위로한 말을 기뻐하더라","읽고 그 2)위로한 말을 기뻐하더라 혹 권면","편지를 읽은 모든 사람들이 크게 기뻐하였다.","When the people read it, they were delighted with the exhortation.","Which when they had read, they rejoiced for the consolation.","The people read it and were glad for its encouraging message.","quam cum legissent, gavisi sunt super consolatione.","ויקראו אתה וישמחו על הנחמה׃"],["51","15","32","예언자이기도 한 유다와 실라스는 여러 가지 말로 형제들을 격려하고 힘을 북돋아 주었다.","예언자인 유다와 실라도 교우들을 여러 말로 격려하며 힘을 북돋아주었다.","유다와 실라도 선지자라 여러 말로 형제를 권면하여 굳게 하고","유다와 실라도 선지자라 여러 말로 형제를 3)권면하여 굳게 하고 혹 위로","ㄱ) 말씀 전하는 은사를 받은 유다와 실라의 설교는 신도들에게 신앙을 더욱 북돋아 주었다. (ㄱ. 혹은 \"예언의 은사\")","Judas and Silas, who were themselves prophets, exhorted and strengthened the brothers with many words.","And Judas and Silas, being prophets also themselves, exhorted the brethren with many words, and confirmed them.","Judas and Silas, who themselves were prophets, said much to encourage and strengthen the brothers.","Iudas quoque et Silas, cum et ipsi essent prophetae, verbo plurimo consolati sunt fratres et confirmaverunt.","ויהודה וסילא אשר גם הם נביאים נחמו האחים בדברים רבים ויחזקום׃"],["51","15","33","그들은 거기에서 한동안 지낸 뒤, 형제들에게 평화의 인사를 받으며 자기들을 파견한 이들에게로 떠나갔다.","그리고 거기에서 얼마 동안 지내다가 평안을 비는 교우들의 작별 인사를 받으며 그 곳을 떠나 자기들을 파견한 사람들에게로 돌아갔다.2) 어떤 사본에는 34절에 다음과 같은 말이 있다. \"실라는 거기에 머무르기로 작정하였다.\" 혹은 \"유다만이 예루살렘으로 떠나고 실라는 거기에 머무르기로 작정하였다.\"","얼마 있다가 평안히 가라는 전송을 형제들에게 받고 자기를 보내던 사람들에게로 돌아가되","얼마 있다가 평안히 가라는 전송을 형제들에게 받고 자기를 보내던 사람들에게로 돌아가되","그래서 거기서 얼마 동안 머무른 후에 예루살렘 교회로 보내는 감사의 편지를 가지고 돌아갔다.","After they had spent some time there, they were sent off with greetings of peace from the brothers to those who had commissioned them.","And after they had tarried there a space, they were let go in peace from the brethren unto the apostles.","After spending some time there, they were sent off by the brothers with the blessing of peace to return to those who had sent them.","Facto autem tempore, dimissi sunt cum pace a fratribus ad eos, qui miserant illos.","ויהיו שם ימים אחדים וישלחום האחים בשלום אל השליחים׃"],["51","15","34","그러나 실라스는 그곳에 머물기로 결정하였다. 그래서 유다만 떠났다.",null,"(없음)","4)(없음) 어떤 사본에, 34「실라는 저희와 함께 유하기를 작정하고」가 있고 또 35「바울과 바나 바도」라 하였음","ㄴ) (없음) (ㄴ. 어떤 사본에는 34절에 \"실라는 거기에 남아 있기로 작정하였다\"는 말이 들어 있다)","(empty)","Notwithstanding it pleased Silas to abide there still.","(None)",null,"וייטב בעיני סילא לשבת שם׃"],["51","15","35","그러나 바오로와 바르나바는 안티오키아에 머물면서, 다른 많은 사람과 함께 주님의 말씀을 가르치고 선포하였다.","그러나 바울로와 바르나바는 계속해서 안티오키아에 머물러 있으면서 다른 여러 사람들과 함께 주님의 말씀을 가르치고 전하였다.","바울과 바나바는 안디옥에서 유하며 수다한 다른 사람들과 함께 주의 말씀을 가르치며 전파하니라","바울과 바나바는 안디옥에서 유하며 다수한 다른 사람들과 함께 주의 말씀을 가르치며 전파하니라","바울과 바나바는 그대로 안디옥에 머물러 주님의 말씀을 가르치며 설교하였다.","But Paul and Barnabas remained in Antioch, teaching and proclaiming with many others the word of the Lord.","Paul also and Barnabas continued in Antioch, teaching and preaching the word of the Lord, with many others also.","But Paul and Barnabas remained in Antioch, where they and many others taught and preached the word of the Lord.","Paulus autem et Barnabas demorabantur Antiochiae docentes et evangelizantes cum aliis pluribus verbum Domini.","ופולוס ובר נבא ישבו באנטיוכיא וילמדו ויבשרו את דבר יהוה המה וגם רבים אחרים עמם׃"],["51","15","36","며칠 뒤에 바오로가 바르나바에게, “자, 우리가 주님의 말씀을 전한 모든 고을로 형제들을 찾아가 그들이 어떻게 지내고 있는지 살펴봅시다.” 하고 말하였다.","며칠 뒤에 바울로는 바르나바에게 \"우리가 주님의 말씀을 전한 모든 도시를 두루 찾아다니며 교우들이 어떻게 지내고 있는지 살펴봅시다.\" 하고 제언하였다.","며칠 후에 바울이 바나바더러 말하되 우리가 주의 말씀을 전한 각 성으로 다시 가서 형제들이 어떠한가 방문하자 하고","수일 후에 바울이 바나바더러 말하되 우리가 주의 말씀을 전한 각 성으로 다시 가서 형제들이 어떠한가 방문하자 하니","얼마 후에 바울은 바나바에게 다시 그 전에 전도한 여러 도시를 방문하여 새로 신도가 된 이들이 어떻게 지내고 있는가를 보자고 제의하였다.","After some time, Paul said to Barnabas, “Come, let us make a return visit to see how the brothers are getting on in all the cities where we proclaimed the word of the Lord.”","And some days after Paul said unto Barnabas, Let us go again and visit our brethren in every city where we have preached the word of the LORD, and see how they do.","Some time later Paul said to Barnabas, \"Let us go back and visit the brothers in all the towns where we preached the word of the Lord and see how they are doing.\"","Post aliquot autem dies dixit ad Barnabam Paulus:  “Revertentes visitemus fratres per universas civitates, in quibus praedicavimus verbum Domini, quomodo se habeant “.","ויהי מקץ ימים ויאמר פולוס אל בר נבא לכה ונשובה ונפקדה את אחינו בכל עיר ועיר אשר קראנו שם את דבר יהוה ונראה מה המה׃"],["51","15","37","그런데 바르나바는 마르코라고 하는 요한도 같이 데려가려고 하였다.","그 때 바르나바는 마르코라는 요한도 같이 데려가자고 하였다.","바나바는 마가라 하는 요한도 데리고 가고자 하나","바나바는 마가라 하는 요한도 데리고 가고자 하나","바나바도 찬성하였다. 그리고 요한 마가도 데리고 가기를 원하였다.","Barnabas wanted to take with them also John, who was called Mark,","And Barnabas determined to take with them John, whose surname was Mark.","Barnabas wanted to take John, also called Mark, with them,","Barnabas autem volebat secum assumere et Ioannem, qui cognominatur Marcus;","ובר נבא יעץ לקחת אתם את יוחנן המכנה מרקוס׃"],["51","15","38","그러나 바오로는 팜필리아에서 자기들을 버리고 떠나 함께 일하러 다니지 않은 그 사람을 데리고 갈 수 없다고 주장하였다.","그러나 바울로는 자기들과 함께 가서 일하지 않고 밤필리아에서 떨어져 나갔던 사람을 데리고 갈 수는 없다고 생각하였다.","바울은 밤빌리아에서 자기들을 떠나 함께 일하러 가지 아니한 자를 데리고 가는 것이 옳지 않다 하여","바울은 밤빌리아에서 자기들을 떠나 한가지로 일하러 가지 아니한 자를 데리고 가는 것이 옳지 않다 하여","그러나 바울은 요한이 밤빌리아에서 혼자 먼저 돌아가 버린 일을 생각하고 찬성하지 않았다.","but Paul insisted that they should not take with them someone who had deserted them at Pamphylia and who had not continued with them in their work.","But Paul thought not good to take him with them, who departed from them from Pamphylia, and went not with them to the work.","but Paul did not think it wise to take him, because he had deserted them in Pamphylia and had not continued with them in the work.","Paulus autem iudicabat eum, qui discessisset ab eis a Pamphylia et non isset cum eis in opus, non debere recipi eum.","אך פולוס לא אבה לקחת אתם את האיש אשר סר מעליהם בפמפוליא ולא הלך אתם במלאכתם׃"],["51","15","39","그리하여 그들은 감정이 격해져서 서로 갈라졌다. 바르나바는 마르코를 데리고서 배를 타고 키프로스로 떠나갔다.","그래서 그 두 사람은 심한 언쟁 끝에 서로 헤어졌는데 바르나바는 마르코를 데리고 배를 타고 키프로스로 떠나가 버렸다.","서로 심히 다투어 피차 갈라서니 바나바는 마가를 데리고 배 타고 구브로로 가고","서로 심히 다투어 피차 갈라 서니 바나바는 마가를 데리고 배 타고 구브로로 가고","두 사람은 끝까지 대립하다가 헤어져 바나바는 배를 타고 마가와 함께 구브로로 가고","So sharp was their disagreement that they separated. Barnabas took Mark and sailed to Cyprus.","And the contention was so sharp between them, that they departed asunder one from the other: and so Barnabas took Mark, and sailed unto Cyprus;","They had such a sharp disagreement that they parted company. Barnabas took Mark and sailed for Cyprus,","Facta est autem exacerbatio, ita ut discederent ab invicem, et Barnabas, assumpto Marco, navigaret Cyprum.","ויהי רגז עד אשר נפרדו איש מאחיו ויקח בר נבא את מרקוס ויסע באניה אל קפרוס׃"],["51","15","40","바오로는 실라스를 선택하여 떠났는데, 형제들은 바오로를 주님의 은총에 맡긴다고 기도해 주었다.","한편 바울로는 실라를 택하여 주님의 은총을 비는 교우들의 인사를 받으며 안티오키아를 떠났다.","바울은 실라를 택한 후에 형제들에게 주의 은혜에 부탁함을 받고 떠나","바울은 실라를 택한 후에 형제들에게 주의 은혜에 부탁함을 받고 떠나","바울은 실라를 택하여 신도들이 주님의 은총을 빌어 주는 가운데 안디옥을 떠나 육로로 수리아와 길리기아 지방을 두루 다니며 여러 교회에 힘을 북돋아 주었다.","But Paul chose Silas and departed after being commended by the brothers to the grace of the Lord.","And Paul chose Silas, and departed, being recommended by the brethren unto the grace of God.","but Paul chose Silas and left, commended by the brothers to the grace of the Lord.","Paulus vero, electo Sila, profectus est, traditus gratiae Domini a fratribus;","ופולוס בחר לו את סילא וימסרהו האחים אל חסד יהוה ויצא׃"],["51","15","41","그는 시리아와 킬리키아를 두루 다니며 그곳 교회들을 굳건하게 만들었다.","그리고 시리아와 길리기아 지방을 두루 다니며 모든 교회에 힘을 북돋아주었다.","수리아와 길리기아로 다니며 교회들을 견고하게 하니라","수리아와 길리기아로 다녀가며 교회들을 굳게 하니라","(40절에 포함되어 있음)","He traveled through Syria and Cilicia bringing strength to the churches.","And he went through Syria and Cilicia, confirming the churches.","He went through Syria and Cilicia, strengthening the churches.","perambulabat autem Syriam et Ciliciam confirmans ecclesias.","ויעבר בסוריא ובקיליקיא ויחזק את הקהלות׃"],["51","16","1","바오로는 데르베를 거쳐 리스트라에 당도하였다. 그곳에 티모테오라는 제자가 있었는데, 그는 신자가 된 유다 여자와 그리스인 아버지 사이에 태어난 아들로서,","그 뒤 바울로는 데르베에 들렀다가 리스트라로 갔다. 그런데 리스트라에는 디모테오라는 신도가 있었다. 그의 어머니는 예수를 믿는 유다 여자였으나 아버지는 그리스 사람이었다.","바울이 더베와 루스드라에도 이르매 거기 디모데라 하는 제자가 있으니 그 어머니는 믿는 유대 여자요 아버지는 헬라인이라","바울이 더베와 루스드라에도 이르매 거기 디모데라 하는 제자가 있으니 그 모친은 믿는 유대 여자요 부친은 헬라인이라","바울과 실라는 더베에 들렀다가 루스드라로 갔는데 거기서 디모데라는 신도를 만났다. 그리스도인이 된 유대인 어머니와 헬라 태생의 아버지 사이에서 태어난","He reached (also) Derbe and Lystra where there was a disciple named Timothy, the son of a Jewish woman who was a believer, but his father was a Greek.","Then came he to Derbe and Lystra: and, behold, a certain disciple was there, named Timotheus, the son of a certain woman, which was a Jewess, and believed; but his father was a Greek:","He came to Derbe and then to Lystra, where a disciple named Timothy lived, whose mother was a Jewess and a believer, but whose father was a Greek.","Pervenit autem in Derben et Lystram. Et ecce discipulus quidam erat ibi nomine Timotheus, filius mulieris Iudaeae fidelis, patre autem Graeco;","ויבא אל דרבי ואל לוסטרא והנה שם תלמיד אחד ושמו טימותיוס והוא בן אשה יהודית מאמנת ואביו יוני׃"],["51","16","2","리스트라와 이코니온에 있는 형제들에게 좋은 평판을 받고 있었다.","디모테오는 리스트라와 이고니온에 있는 교우들 사이에서 평판이 좋은 사람이었다.","디모데는 루스드라와 이고니온에 있는 형제들에게 칭찬 받는 자니","디모데는 루스드라와 이고니온에 있는 형제들에게 칭찬 받는 자니","디모데는 루스드라와 이고니온에 있는 신도들 사이에 칭찬이 자자한 사람이었다.","The brothers in Lystra and Iconium spoke highly of him,","Which was well reported of by the brethren that were at Lystra and Iconium.","The brothers at Lystra and Iconium spoke well of him.","huic testimonium reddebant, qui in Lystris erant et Iconii fratres.","ויהי לו שם טוב בין האחים אשר בלוסטרא ובאיקניון׃"],["51","16","3","바오로는 티모테오와 동행하기를 원하였다. 그래서 그 고장에 사는 유다인들을 생각하여 그를 데려다가 할례를 베풀었다. 그의 아버지가 그리스인이라는 것을 그들이 모두 알고 있었기 때문이다.","그래서 바울로는 이 디모테오를 데리고 떠날 생각이었다. 그러나 그 고장에 있는 모든 유다인들이 디모테오의 아버지가 그리스 사람이라는 것을 알고 있었기 때문에 혹시 말썽이 날까봐 먼저 디모테오를 데려다가 할례를 베풀었다.","바울이 그를 데리고 떠나고자 할새 그 지역에 있는 유대인으로 말미암아 그를 데려다가 할례를 행하니 이는 그 사람들이 그의 아버지는 헬라인인 줄 다 앎이러라","바울이 그를 데리고 떠나고자 할쌔 그 지경에 있는 유대인을 인하여 그를 데려다가 할례를 행하니 이는 그 사람들이 그의 부친은 헬라인인줄 다 앎이러라","그래서 바울은 자기들의 전도여행에 동참해 줄 것을 청하였다. 그러나 그 지방에 있는 모든 유대인들이 디모데의 아버지가 헬라 사람이라는 것을 알고 있는 점을 고려하여 출발하기 전에 그들이 보는 앞에서 할례를 받게 하였다.","and Paul wanted him to come along with him. On account of the Jews of that region, Paul had him circumcised, for they all knew that his father was a Greek.","Him would Paul have to go forth with him; and took and circumcised him because of the Jews which were in those quarters: for they knew all that his father was a Greek.","Paul wanted to take him along on the journey, so he circumcised him because of the Jews who lived in that area, for they all knew that his father was a Greek.","Hunc voluit Paulus secum proficisci et assumens circumcidit eum propter Iudaeos, qui erant in illis locis; sciebant enim omnes quod pater eius Graecus esset.","בו בחר פולוס אשר יצא אתו ויקח וימל אתו בעבור היהודים אשר במקמות ההם כי כלם ידעו את אביו כי יוני הוא׃"],["51","16","4","바오로 일행은 여러 고을을 두루 다니며, 예루살렘에 있는 사도들과 원로들이 정한 규정들을 신자들에게 전해 주며 지키게 하였다.","바울로 일행은 여러 도시를 두루 다니면서 예루살렘에 있는 사도들과 원로들이 정한 규정들을 전해 주며 지키라고 하였다.","여러 성으로 다녀 갈 때에 예루살렘에 있는 사도와 장로들이 작정한 규례를 그들에게 주어 지키게 하니","여러 성으로 다녀 갈 때에 예루살렘에 있는 사도와 장로들의 작정한 규례를 저희에게 주어 지키게 하니","그러고나서 그들은 도시마다 두루다니면서 사도들과 장로들이 결의한 이방인들에 대한 사항을 전달하였다.","As they traveled from city to city, they handed on to the people for observance the decisions reached by the apostles and presbyters in Jerusalem.","And as they went through the cities, they delivered them the decrees for to keep, that were ordained of the apostles and elders which were at Jerusalem.","As they traveled from town to town, they delivered the decisions reached by the apostles and elders in Jerusalem for the people to obey.","Cum autem pertransirent civitates, tradebant eis custodire dogmata, quae erant decreta ab apostolis et presbyteris, qui essent Hierosolymis.","ויהי בעברם בערים וימסרו להם לשמר את הפקודים אשר גזרו השליחים והזקנים אשר בירושלים׃"],["51","16","5","그리하여 그곳 교회들은 믿음이 굳건해지고 신자들의 수도 나날이 늘어 갔다.","그래서 교회들은 믿음이 점점 더 굳건해졌으며 신도의 수효는 나날이 늘어갔다.","이에 여러 교회가 믿음이 더 굳건해지고 수가 날마다 늘어가니라","이에 여러 교회가 믿음이 더 굳어지고 수가 날마다 더하니라","교회는 날이 갈수록 믿음이 자라고 신도가 점점 늘어갔다.","Day after day the churches grew stronger in faith and increased in number.","And so were the churches established in the faith, and increased in number daily.","So the churches were strengthened in the faith and grew daily in numbers.","Ecclesiae quidem confirmabantur fide et abundabant numero cotidie.","ותתחזקנה הקהלות באמונה וירב מספרן יום יום׃"],["51","16","6","성령께서 아시아에 말씀을 전하는 것을 막으셨으므로, 그들은 프리기아와 갈라티아 지방을 가로질러 갔다.","그들은 성령께서 아시아에서 말씀을 전하지 못하게 하시므로 프리기아와 갈라디아 지방을 두루 다니다가","성령이 아시아에서 말씀을 전하지 못하게 하시거늘 그들이 브루기아와 갈라디아 땅으로 다녀가","성령이 아시아에서 말씀을 전하지 못하게 하시거늘 브루기아와 갈라디아 땅으로 다녀가","그 다음에 그들은 브루기아와 갈라디아 지방을 그냥 통과하였다. 성령께서 아시아 지방에는 가지 말라고 지시하셨기 때문이다.","They traveled through the Phrygian and Galatian territory because they had been prevented by the holy Spirit from preaching the message in the province of Asia.","Now when they had gone throughout Phrygia and the region of Galatia, and were forbidden of the Holy Ghost to preach the word in Asia,","Paul and his companions traveled throughout the region of Phrygia and Galatia, having been kept by the Holy Spirit from preaching the word in the province of Asia.","Transierunt autem Phrygiam et Galatiae regionem, vetati a Sancto Spiritu loqui verbum in Asia;","ויעברו בפרוגיא ובארץ גלטיא כי מנעם רוח הקדש מהשמיע את הדבר באסיא׃"],["51","16","7","그리고 미시아에 이르러 비티니아로 가려고 하였지만, 예수님의 영께서 허락하지 않으셨다.","미시아에 이르러 비티니아 지방으로 들어가려고 하였으나 예수의 성령이 그것을 허락하지 않으셨다.","무시아 앞에 이르러 비두니아로 가고자 애쓰되 예수의 영이 허락하지 아니하시는지라","무시아 앞에 이르러 비두니아로 가고자 애쓰되 예수의 영이 허락지 아니하시는지라","그들이 무시아 지경 가까이 이르러 북쪽 비두니아 지방으로 들어가려고 하자 또다시 예수의 영이 허락하시지 않았다.","When they came to Mysia, they tried to go on into Bithynia, but the Spirit of Jesus did not allow them,","After they were come to Mysia, they assayed to go into Bithynia: but the Spirit suffered them not.","When they came to the border of Mysia, they tried to enter Bithynia, but the Spirit of Jesus would not allow them to.","cum venissent autem circa Mysiam, tentabant ire Bithyniam, et non permisit eos Spiritus Iesu;","וכבאם אל מוסיא הואילו ללכת אל ביתוניא ולא הניח להם הרוח׃"],["51","16","8","그리하여 미시아를 지나 트로아스로 내려갔다.","그래서 미시아를 그냥 지나쳐서 트로아스로 내려갔다.","무시아를 지나 드로아로 내려갔는데","무시아를 지나 드로아로 내려갔는데","그래서 무시아 지방을 통과하여 곧장 드로아로 갔다.","so they crossed through Mysia and came down to Troas.","And they passing by Mysia came down to Troas.","So they passed by Mysia and went down to Troas.","cum autem praeterissent Mysiam, descenderunt Troadem.","ויחלפו ממוסיא וירדו אל טרואס׃"],["51","16","9","그런데 어느 날 밤 바오로가 환시를 보았다. 마케도니아 사람 하나가 바오로 앞에 서서, “마케도니아로 건너와 저희를 도와주십시오.” 하고 청하는 것이었다.","어느 날 밤 바울로는 거기에서 신비로운 영상을 보았다. 마케도니아 사람 하나가 바울로 앞에 서서 \"마케도니아로 건너와서 우리를 도와주십시오.\" 하고 간청하였던 것이다.","밤에 환상이 바울에게 보이니 마게도냐 사람 하나가 서서 그에게 청하여 이르되 마게도냐로 건너와서 우리를 도우라 하거늘","밤에 환상이 바울에게 보이니 마게도냐 사람 하나가 서서 그에게 청하여 가로되 마게도냐로 건너와서 우리를 도우라 하거늘","그날 밤에 바울은 바다 건너 마게도냐에 사는 사람 하나가 \"이리로 건너와서 우리를 도와주십시오\" 하고 간청하는 환상을 보았다.","During [the] night Paul had a vision. A Macedonian stood before him and implored him with these words, “Come over to Macedonia and help us.”","And a vision appeared to Paul in the night; There stood a man of Macedonia, and prayed him, saying, Come over into Macedonia, and help us.","During the night Paul had a vision of a man of Macedonia standing and begging him, \"Come over to Macedonia and help us.\"","Et visio per noctem Paulo ostensa est: vir Macedo quidam erat stans et deprecans eum et dicens:  “Transiens in Macedoniam, adiuva nos! “.","וחזון נראה אל פולוס בלילה והנה איש מוקדון נצב והוא מבקש ממנו לאמר עבר אל מקדוניא ועזרנו׃"],["51","16","10","바오로가 그 환시를 보고 난 뒤, 우리는 곧 마케도니아로 떠날 방도를 찾았다. 마케도니아 사람들에게 복음을 전하도록 하느님께서 우리를 부르신 것이라고 확신하였기 때문이다.","바울로가 그 영상을 보고 난 뒤에 우리는 곧 마케도니아로 떠날 채비를 서둘렀다. 마케도니아 사람들에게 복음을 전하게 하시려고 하느님께서 우리를 부르신 것이라고 믿었기 때문이다.","바울이 그 환상을 보았을 때 우리가 곧 마게도냐로 떠나기를 힘쓰니 이는 하나님이 저 사람들에게 복음을 전하라고 우리를 부르신 줄로 인정함이러라","바울이 이 환상을 본 후에 우리가 곧 마게도냐로 떠나기를 힘쓰니 이는 하나님이 저 사람들에게 복음을 전하라고 우리를 부르신 줄로 인정함이러라","우리는 곧 마게도냐로 가기로 결정하였다. 하나님께서 그곳 사람들에게 복음을 전하시고자 우리를 보내시는 것으로 생각했기 때문이다.","When he had seen the vision, we sought passage to Macedonia at once, concluding that God had called us to proclaim the good news to them.","And after he had seen the vision, immediately we endeavoured to go into Macedonia, assuredly gathering that the Lord had called us for to preach the gospel unto them.","After Paul had seen the vision, we got ready at once to leave for Macedonia, concluding that God had called us to preach the gospel to them.","Ut autem visum vidit, statim quaesivimus proficisci in Macedoniam, certi facti quia vocasset nos Deus evangelizare eis.","וכראתו את המחזה מיד בקשנו ללכת אל מקדוניא בהביננו כי האלהים קראנו שמה לבשר אתם הבשורה׃"],["51","16","11","우리는 배를 타고 트로아스를 떠나 사모트라케로 직행하여 이튿날 네아폴리스로 갔다.","우리는 배를 타고 트로아스를 떠나 사모드라게로 직행하여 이튿날 네아폴리스로 갔다가","우리가 드로아에서 배로 떠나 사모드라게로 직행하여 이튿날 네압볼리로 가고","드로아에서 배로 떠나 사모드라게로 직행하여 이튿날 네압볼리로 가고","우리는 드로아에서 배를 타고 사모드라게로 직행하여 이튿날 네압볼리로 갔다가","We set sail from Troas, making a straight run for Samothrace, and on the next day to Neapolis,","Therefore loosing from Troas, we came with a straight course to Samothracia, and the next day to Neapolis;","From Troas we put out to sea and sailed straight for Samothrace, and the next day on to Neapolis.","Navigantes autem a Troade recto cursu venimus Samothraciam et sequenti die Neapolim","ונצא מן טרואס ונרד באניה ונבא דרך ישרה אל סמותרקיא וממחרת אל נפוליס׃"],["51","16","12","거기에서 또 필리피로 갔는데, 그곳은 마케도니아 지역에서 첫째가는 도시로 로마 식민시였다. 우리는 그 도시에서 며칠을 보냈는데,","거기에서 다시 필립비로 갔다. 그 곳은 마케도니아의 1)첫 지방의 도시로서 로마의 식민지였다. 우리는 며칠 동안 이 도시에 머물러 있었다. 마케도니아는 네 지방으로 나누어져 있었다.","거기서 빌립보에 이르니 이는 마게도냐 지방의 첫 성이요 또 로마의 식민지라 이 성에서 수일을 유하다가","거기서 빌립보에 이르니 이는 마게도냐 지경 1)첫성이요 또 로마의 식민지라 이 성에서 수일을 유하다가 혹 첫째가는 성이요","거기서 드디어 빌립보에 도착하였다. 빌립보는 마게도냐 국경에서 조금 들어간 곳에 위치한 로마의 식민지였다. 우리는 거기서 며칠을 지냈다.","and from there to Philippi, a leading city in that district of Macedonia and a Roman colony. We spent some time in that city.","And from thence to Philippi, which is the chief city of that part of Macedonia, and a colony: and we were in that city abiding certain days.","From there we traveled to Philippi, a Roman colony and the leading city of that district of Macedonia. And we stayed there several days.","et inde Philippos, quae est prima partis Macedoniae civitas, colonia. Eramus autem in hac urbe diebus aliquot commorantes.","ומשם אל פילפי ראשית ערי הפלך של מקדוניא והיא בת חורין ונשב בעיר הזאת ימים אחדים׃"],["51","16","13","안식일에는 유다인들의 기도처가 있다고 생각되는 성문 밖 강가로 나갔다. 그리고 거기에 앉아 그곳에 모여 있는 여자들에게 말씀을 전하였다.","안식일이 되어 우리는 성문 밖으로 나가 유다인의 기도처가 있으리라고 짐작되는 강가에 이르렀다. 그리고 거기에 앉아서 모여든 여자들에게 말씀을 전하였다.","안식일에 우리가 기도할 곳이 있을까 하여 문 밖 강가에 나가 거기 앉아서 모인 여자들에게 말하는데","안식일에 우리가 기도처가 있는가 하여 문밖 강 가에 나가 거기 앉아서 모인 여자들에게 말하더니","안식일이 되자 우리는 사람들이 기도하러 모이는 곳이라고 생각되는 교외의 강가로 갔다. 그리고 거기 모인 여자들에게 성경을 가르쳤다.","On the sabbath we went outside the city gate along the river where we thought there would be a place of prayer. We sat and spoke with the women who had gathered there.","And on the sabbath we went out of the city by a river side, where prayer was wont to be made; and we sat down, and spake unto the women which resorted thither.","On the Sabbath we went outside the city gate to the river, where we expected to find a place of prayer. We sat down and began to speak to the women who had gathered there.","Die autem sabbatorum egressi sumus foras portam iuxta flumen, ubi putabamus orationem esse, et sedentes loquebamur mulieribus, quae convenerant.","וביום השבת יצאנו אל מחוץ לעיר אל יד הנהר אשר שם מקום תפלה כמנהגם ונשב ונדבר אל הנשים הנקהלות שמה׃"],["51","16","14","티아티라 시 출신의 자색 옷감 장수로 이미 하느님을 섬기는 이였던 리디아라는 여자도 듣고 있었는데, 바오로가 하는 말에 귀 기울이도록 하느님께서 그의 마음을 열어 주셨다.","그들 가운데는 리디아라는 여자가 있었는데 그는 티아디라 출신으로 자색 옷감 장수였고 하느님을 공경하는 여자였다. 주께서는 그 여자의 마음을 열어 바울로의 말을 귀담아듣게 하셨다.","두아디라 시에 있는 자색 옷감 장사로서 하나님을 섬기는 루디아라 하는 한 여자가 말을 듣고 있을 때 주께서 그 마음을 열어 바울의 말을 따르게 하신지라","두아디라성의 자주 장사로서 하나님을 공경하는 루디아라 하는 한 여자가 들었는데 주께서 그 마음을 열어 바울의 말을 청종하게 하신지라","그들 가운데는 두아디라 시에서 온 자색 옷감 장수 루디아라는 여자도 있었다. 그 여자는 오래전부터 하나님을 공경해 오고 있었다. 그래서 루디아가 귀를 기울이고 있을 때에 주께서 그 마음을 열어 주셔서 바울이 말하는 것을 다 받아들이게 하셨다.","One of them, a woman named Lydia, a dealer in purple cloth, from the city of Thyatira, a worshiper of God, listened, and the Lord opened her heart to pay attention to what Paul was saying.","And a certain woman named Lydia, a seller of purple, of the city of Thyatira, which worshipped God, heard us: whose heart the Lord opened, that she attended unto the things which were spoken of Paul.","One of those listening was a woman named Lydia, a dealer in purple cloth from the city of Thyatira, who was a worshiper of God. The Lord opened her heart to respond to Paul's message.","Et quaedam mulier nomine Lydia, purpuraria civitatis Thyatirenorum colens Deum, audiebat, cuius Dominus aperuit cor intendere his, quae dicebantur a Paulo.","ואשה יראת אליהם ושמה לודיא מכרת ארגמן מעיר תיאטירא שמעה ויפתח יהוה את לבה להקשיב אל דברי פולוס׃"],["51","16","15","리디아는 온 집안과 함께 세례를 받고 나서, “저를 주님의 신자로 여기시면 저의 집에 오셔서 지내십시오.” 하고 청하며 우리에게 강권하였다.","리디아는 온 집안 식구와 함께 세례를 받고 나서 \"정말 저를 주님의 충실한 신도로 여기신다면 제 집에 오셔서 머물러주십시오.\" 하고 간청하면서 우리를 자기 집으로 데리고 갔다.","그와 그 집이 다 세례를 받고 우리에게 청하여 이르되 만일 나를 주 믿는 자로 알거든 내 집에 들어와 유하라 하고 강권하여 머물게 하니라","저와 그 집이 다 세례를 받고 우리에게 청하여 가로되 만일 나를 주 믿는 자로 알거든 내 집에 들어와 유하라 하고 강권하여 있게 하니라","루디아가 온 집안 식구들과 함께 침례를 받고나서 말하였다. \"만일 저를 주님의 충실한 신도로 여기신다면 제 집에 오셔서 머물러 주십시오.\" 그 여자가 무척 간곡하게 청하였으므로 우리는 그 초대를 받아들였다.","After she and her household had been baptized, she offered us an invitation, “If you consider me a believer in the Lord, come and stay at my home,” and she prevailed on us.","And when she was baptized, and her household, she besought us, saying, If ye have judged me to be faithful to the Lord, come into my house, and abide there. And she constrained us.","When she and the members of her household were baptized, she invited us to her home. \"If you consider me a believer in the Lord,\" she said, \"come and stay at my house.\" And she persuaded us.","Cum autem baptizata esset et domus eius, deprecata est dicens:  “Si iudicastis me fidelem Domino esse, introite in domum meam et manete “; et coegit nos.","ותטבל היא ובני ביתה ותבקש ממנו לאמר אם חשבתם אתי נאמנה לאדון באו נא אל ביתי ושבו בו ותפצר בנו׃"],["51","16","16","우리가 기도처로 갈 때에 점 귀신 들린 하녀 하나를 만났는데, 그는 점을 쳐서 주인들에게 큰 돈벌이를 해 주고 있었다.","어느 날 우리가 그 기도처로 가는 도중에 점귀신이 들린 여종 하나를 만났는데 그 여종은 점을 쳐서 자기 주인들에게 많은 돈을 벌어주던 여자였다.","우리가 기도하는 곳에 가다가 점치는 귀신 들린 여종 하나를 만나니 점으로 그 주인들에게 큰 이익을 주는 자라","우리가 기도하는 곳에 가다가 점하는 귀신 들린 여종 하나를 만나니 점으로 그 주인들을 크게 이하게 하는 자라","어느 날 여느 때와 마찬가지로 강가에 있는 기도처로 가다가 우리는 악령에 사로잡힌 나이 어린 여종 하나를 만났다. 그 여종은 점을 쳐서 자기 주인들에게 많은 돈을 벌어 주고 있었다.","As we were going to the place of prayer, we met a slave girl with an oracular spirit, who used to bring a large profit to her owners through her fortune-telling.","And it came to pass, as we went to prayer, a certain damsel possessed with a spirit of divination met us, which brought her masters much gain by soothsaying:","Once when we were going to the place of prayer, we were met by a slave girl who had a spirit by which she predicted the future. She earned a great deal of money for her owners by fortune-telling.","Factum est autem, euntibus nobis ad orationem, puellam quandam habentem spiritum pythonem obviare nobis, quae quaestum magnum praestabat dominis suis divinando.","ויהי בלכתנו למקום התפלה ותפגע בנו שפחה בעלת אוב אשר עשתה הון רב לאדניה בקסמיה׃"],["51","16","17","그 여자가 바오로와 우리를 쫓아오면서, “이 사람들은 지극히 높으신 하느님의 종으로서 지금 여러분에게 구원의 길을 선포하고 있습니다.” 하고 소리 질렀다.","이 여자가 바울로와 우리를 따라오면서 \"이분들은 지극히 높으신 하느님의 종으로서 지금 여러분에게 구원받는 길을 선포하고 있소.\" 하고 큰소리로 외쳤다.","그가 바울과 우리를 따라와 소리 질러 이르되 이 사람들은 지극히 높은 하나님의 종으로서 구원의 길을 너희에게 전하는 자라 하며","바울과 우리를 좇아와서 소리질러 가로되 이 사람들은 지극히 높은 하나님의 종으로 구원의 길을 너희에게 전하는 자라 하며","그런데 그 여자가 따라오면서 \"하나님의 종이신 이분들은 여러분의 죄를 용서받을 길을 알려 주러 오셨다!\" 하고 큰소리로 외쳐 댔다.","She began to follow Paul and us, shouting, “These people are slaves of the Most High God, who proclaim to you a way of salvation.”","The same followed Paul and us, and cried, saying, These men are the servants of the most high God, which shew unto us the way of salvation.","This girl followed Paul and the rest of us, shouting, \"These men are servants of the Most High God, who are telling you the way to be saved.\"","Haec subsecuta Paulum et nos clamabat dicens:  “Isti homines servi Dei Altissimi sunt, qui annuntiant vobis viam salutis “.","ותלך אחרי פולוס ואחרינו הלוך וקרוא לאמר האנשים האלה עבדי אל עליון המה המודיעים אתנו ארח הישועה׃"],["51","16","18","여러 날을 두고 그렇게 하는 바람에 언짢아진 바오로가 돌아서서 그 귀신에게, “내가 예수 그리스도의 이름으로 너에게 명령하니 그 여자에게서 나가라.” 하고 일렀다. 그러자 그 순간에 귀신이 나갔다.","그 여자가 매일같이 이렇게 하므로 바울로는 괴로움을 참다 못해 돌아서서 그 악령더러 \"예수 그리스도의 이름으로 명령하니 그 여자에게서 썩 나가거라.\" 하고 말하였다. 그러자 악령은 곧 그 여자에게서 나가버렸다.","이같이 여러 날을 하는지라 바울이 심히 괴로워하여 돌이켜 그 귀신에게 이르되 예수 그리스도의 이름으로 내가 네게 명하노니 그에게서 나오라 하니 귀신이 즉시 나오니라","이같이 여러 날을 하는지라 바울이 심히 괴로와하여 돌이켜 그 귀신에게 이르되 예수 그리스도의 이름으로 내가 네게 명하노니 그에게서 나오라 하니 귀신이 즉시 나오니라","그 여자가 매일같이 이렇게 따라다니며 소리 지르자 바울은 더 참지 못하고 그 여자에게 붙어 있는 악령에게 호통을 쳤다. \"예수 그리스도의 이름으로 네게 명령한다. 이 여자에게서 나가라!\" 그러자 그 순간에 악령이 나가 버렸다.","She did this for many days. Paul became annoyed, turned, and said to the spirit, “I command you in the name of Jesus Christ to come out of her.” Then it came out at that moment.","And this did she many days. But Paul, being grieved, turned and said to the spirit, I command thee in the name of Jesus Christ to come out of her. And he came out the same hour.","She kept this up for many days. Finally Paul became so troubled that he turned around and said to the spirit, \"In the name of Jesus Christ I command you to come out of her!\" At that moment the spirit left her.","Hoc autem faciebat multis diebus. Dolens autem Paulus et conversus spiritui dixit:  “Praecipio tibi in nomine Iesu Christi exire ab ea “; et exiit eadem hora.","וכן עשתה ימים רבים וירע בעיני פולוס הדבר הזה ויפן ויאמר אל הרוח אנכי מצוך בשם ישוע המשיח לצאת ממנה ויצא בשעה ההיא׃"],["51","16","19","그 여자의 주인들은 돈벌이할 희망이 사라진 것을 보고 바오로와 실라스를 붙잡아 광장으로 관리들에게 끌고 갔다.","그 여종의 주인들은 돈벌이할 길이 막힌 것을 알고 바울로와 실라를 잡아 광장 법정으로 끌고 가서","여종의 주인들은 자기 수익의 소망이 끊어진 것을 보고 바울과 실라를 붙잡아 장터로 관리들에게 끌어 갔다가","종의 주인들은 자기 이익의 소망이 끊어진 것을 보고 바울과 실라를 잡아 가지고 저자로 관원들에게 끌어 갔다가","이제 돈벌이 할 희망이 사라져 버린 그 여종의 주인들은 바울과 실라를 붙잡아서 광장에 있는 법정으로 끌고 가서 고발하였다.","When her owners saw that their hope of profit was gone, they seized Paul and Silas and dragged them to the public square before the local authorities.","And when her masters saw that the hope of their gains was gone, they caught Paul and Silas, and drew them into the marketplace unto the rulers,","When the owners of the slave girl realized that their hope of making money was gone, they seized Paul and Silas and dragged them into the marketplace to face the authorities.","Videntes autem domini eius quia exivit spes quaestus eorum, apprehendentes Paulum et Silam traxerunt in forum ad principes;","ויראו אדניה כי אזלה תוחלת בצעם ויתפשו את פולוס ואת סילא ויסחבום אל הרחוב לפני זקני העיר׃"],["51","16","20","그리고 그들을 행정관들 앞에 데려다 놓고 말하였다. “이 사람들은 유다인인데 우리 도시에 소동을 일으키면서,","치안관들 앞에 세워놓고 \"이자들은 유다인들인데 우리 도시에서 큰 소란을 일으키고 있습니다.","상관들 앞에 데리고 가서 말하되 이 사람들이 유대인인데 우리 성을 심히 요란하게 하여","상관들 앞에 데리고 가서 말하되 이 사람들이 유대인인데 우리 성을 심히 요란케 하여","그들이 소리쳤다. \"이 유대놈들이 우리의 도시를 망치고 있소. 이자들은 로마 법률에 위반되는 것들만 가르친단 말이오.\"","They brought them before the magistrates and said, “These people are Jews and are disturbing our city","And brought them to the magistrates, saying, These men, being Jews, do exceedingly trouble our city,","They brought them before the magistrates and said, \"These men are Jews, and are throwing our city into an uproar","et producentes eos magistratibus dixerunt:  “Hi homines conturbant civitatem nostram, cum sint Iudaei,","ויביאום אל השרים ויאמרו האנשים האלה עכרים את עירנו והם יהודים׃"],["51","16","21","우리 로마인으로서는 받아들이기에도 지키기에도 부당한 관습을 퍼뜨리고 있습니다.”","우리 로마 사람으로서는 받아들일 수도 없고 실행할 수도 없는 잘못된 풍속을 선전하고 있습니다.\" 하고 말하였다.","로마 사람인 우리가 받지도 못하고 행하지도 못할 풍속을 전한다 하거늘","로마 사람인 우리가 받지도 못하고 행치도 못할 풍속을 전한다 하거늘","(20절에 포함되어 있음)","and are advocating customs that are not lawful for us Romans to adopt or practice.”","And teach customs, which are not lawful for us to receive, neither to observe, being Romans.","by advocating customs unlawful for us Romans to accept or practice.\"","et annuntiant mores, quos non licet nobis suscipere neque facere, cum simus Romani “.","ומודיעים חקות אשר לא נכון לנו לקבלם ולעשתם כי רומיים אנחנו׃"],["51","16","22","군중도 합세하여 바오로와 실라스를 공격하자, 행정관들은 그 두 사람의 옷을 찢어 벗기고 매로 치라고 지시하였다.","군중까지 합세해서 그들을 공격하자 치안관들은 부하를 시켜 바울로와 실라의 옷을 찢고 매질을 하게 하였다.","무리가 일제히 일어나 고발하니 상관들이 옷을 찢어 벗기고 매로 치라 하여","무리가 일제히 일어나 송사하니 상관들이 옷을 찢어 벗기고 매로 치라 하여","갑자기 몰려든 군중이 광장을 가득 메웠다. 그리고 그들과 합세하여 바울과 실라에게 욕설을 퍼붓자 치안관들은 바울과 실라의 옷을 벗기고 채찍으로 매질을 하라고 부하에게 명령하였다.","The crowd joined in the attack on them, and the magistrates had them stripped and ordered them to be beaten with rods.","And the multitude rose up together against them: and the magistrates rent off their clothes, and commanded to beat them.","The crowd joined in the attack against Paul and Silas, and the magistrates ordered them to be stripped and beaten.","Et concurrit plebs adversus eos; et magistratus, scissis tunicis eorum, iusserunt virgis caedi","ויקם גם העם עליהם והשרים קרעו את בגדיהם מעליהם ויצוו להכותם בשוטים׃"],["51","16","23","그렇게 매질을 많이 하게 한 뒤 그들을 감옥에 가두고, 간수에게 단단히 지키라고 명령하였다.","이렇게 몹시 때리고 나서는 그들을 감옥에 가두고 간수에게 단단히 지키라고 명령하였다.","많이 친 후에 옥에 가두고 간수에게 명하여 든든히 지키라 하니","많이 친 후에 옥에 가두고 간수에게 분부하여 든든히 지키라 하니","사정없이 내리치는 채찍에 등이 벗겨지고 피가 흘러 내렸다. 치안관은 두 사람을 감옥에 처넣으면서 만약 그들을 놓쳐 버리는 날에는 목숨이 붙어나지 못할 것이라고 간수에게 을러 댔다. 간수는","After inflicting many blows on them, they threw them into prison and instructed the jailer to guard them securely.","And when they had laid many stripes upon them, they cast them into prison, charging the jailor to keep them safely:","After they had been severely flogged, they were thrown into prison, and the jailer was commanded to guard them carefully.","et, cum multas plagas eis imposuissent, miserunt eos in carcerem, praecipientes custodi, ut caute custodiret eos;","ויהי אחרי הכות אתם מכה רבה וישליכום במשמר ויצוו את שומר האסורים לשמרם היטב׃"],["51","16","24","이러한 명령을 받은 간수는 그들을 가장 깊은 감방에 가두고 그들의 발에 차꼬를 채웠다.","명령을 받은 간수는 그들을 깊숙한 감방에 집어넣고 발목을 차꼬로 단단히 채워두었다.","그가 이러한 명령을 받아 그들을 깊은 옥에 가두고 그 발을 차꼬에 든든히 채웠더니","그가 이러한 영을 받아 저희를 깊은 옥에 가두고 그 발을 착고에 든든히 채웠더니","바울과 실라를 제일 안쪽에 있는 깊숙한 감방에 집어넣고 발을 차꼬로 채워 놓았다.","When he received these instructions, he put them in the innermost cell and secured their feet to a stake.","Who, having received such a charge, thrust them into the inner prison, and made their feet fast in the stocks.","Upon receiving such orders, he put them in the inner cell and fastened their feet in the stocks.","qui cum tale praeceptum accepisset, misit eos in interiorem carcerem et pedes eorum strinxit in ligno.","והוא כאשר צוה כן השליכם בחדר המשמר הפנימי וישם את רגליהם בסד׃"],["51","16","25","자정 무렵에 바오로와 실라스는 하느님께 찬미가를 부르며 기도하고, 다른 수인들은 거기에 귀를 기울이고 있었다.","때는 한밤중이었다. 바울로와 실라는 기도하면서 하느님을 찬미하고 있었고 다른 죄수들은 그것을 듣고 있었다.","한밤중에 바울과 실라가 기도하고 하나님을 찬송하매 죄수들이 듣더라","밤중쯤 되어 바울과 실라가 기도하고 하나님을 찬미하매 죄수들이 듣더라","한밤중에 다른 죄수들이 듣고 있는 가운데 바울과 실라가 주께 기도와 찬송을 드리고 있을 때였다.","About midnight, while Paul and Silas were praying and singing hymns to God as the prisoners listened,","And at midnight Paul and Silas prayed, and sang praises unto God: and the prisoners heard them.","About midnight Paul and Silas were praying and singing hymns to God, and the other prisoners were listening to them.","Media autem nocte, Paulus et Silas orantes laudabant Deum, et audiebant eos, qui in custodia erant;","ויהי כחצות הלילה ויתפללו פולוס וסילא ויזמרו לאלהים והאסורים מקשיבים אליהם׃"],["51","16","26","그런데 갑자기 큰 지진이 일어나 감옥의 기초가 뒤흔들렸다. 그리고 즉시 문들이 모두 열리고 사슬이 다 풀렸다.","그 때 갑자기 큰 지진이 일어나 감옥을 기초부터 온통 뒤흔들어놓는 바람에 문이 모두 열리고 죄수들을 묶어두었던 쇠사슬이 다 풀리고 말았다.","이에 갑자기 큰 지진이 나서 옥터가 움직이고 문이 곧 다 열리며 모든 사람의 매인 것이 다 벗어진지라","이에 홀연히 큰 지진이 나서 옥터가 움직이고 문이 곧 다 열리며 모든 사람의 매인 것이 다 벗어진지라","갑자기 큰 지진이 일어나듯 감옥이 밑바닥부터 흔들리더니 문들이 모두 열렸다. 그리고 죄수들을 묶어 두었던 쇠사슬도 다 풀렸다.","there was suddenly such a severe earthquake that the foundations of the jail shook; all the doors flew open, and the chains of all were pulled loose.","And suddenly there was a great earthquake, so that the foundations of the prison were shaken: and immediately all the doors were opened, and every one's bands were loosed.","Suddenly there was such a violent earthquake that the foundations of the prison were shaken. At once all the prison doors flew open, and everybody's chains came loose.","subito vero terraemotus factus est magnus, ita ut moverentur fundamenta carceris, et aperta sunt statim ostia omnia, et universorum vincula soluta sunt.","ופתאם היה רעש גדול עד אשר זעו מוסדות בית הכלא וכרגע נפתחו כל הדלתות ומוסרות כלם נתקו׃"],["51","16","27","잠에서 깨어난 간수는 감옥 문들이 열려 있는 것을 보고 칼을 빼어 자결하려고 하였다. 수인들이 달아났으려니 생각하였던 것이다.","간수가 잠을 깨어 감옥 문들이 열려 있는 것을 보고는 죄수들이 다 도망쳤으려니 하고 칼을 빼어 자살하려고 하였다.","간수가 자다가 깨어 옥문들이 열린 것을 보고 죄수들이 도망한 줄 생각하고 칼을 빼어 자결하려 하거늘","간수가 자다가 깨어 옥문들이 열린 것을 보고 죄수들이 도망한줄 생각하고 검을 빼어 자결하려 하거늘","잠이 깨어 문이 열려 있는 것을 본 간수는 죄수들이 도망 친 줄 알고 칼을 빼어 자결하려고 하였다.","When the jailer woke up and saw the prison doors wide open, he drew [his] sword and was about to kill himself, thinking that the prisoners had escaped.","And the keeper of the prison awaking out of his sleep, and seeing the prison doors open, he drew out his sword, and would have killed himself, supposing that the prisoners had been fled.","The jailer woke up, and when he saw the prison doors open, he drew his sword and was about to kill himself because he thought the prisoners had escaped.","Expergefactus autem custos carceris et videns apertas ianuas carceris, evaginato gladio volebat se interficere, aestimans fugisse vinctos.","ושומר האסורים נעור משנתו ויהי כראתו את דלתות המשמר נפתחות וישלף חרבו ויבקש לאבד את עצמו בחשבו כי ברחו האסורים׃"],["51","16","28","그때에 바오로가 큰 소리로, “자신을 해치지 마시오. 우리가 다 여기에 있소.” 하고 말하였다.","그 때에 바울로가 큰소리로 \"당신의 몸을 해치지 마시오. 우리가 다 여기 있소.\" 하고 알렸다.","바울이 크게 소리 질러 이르되 네 몸을 상하지 말라 우리가 다 여기 있노라 하니","바울이 크게 소리질러 가로되 네 몸을 상하지 말라 우리가 다 여기 있노라 하니","그때 바울이 소리쳤다. \"당신의 몸을 해치지 마시오. 우리는 모두 여기 있소.\"","But Paul shouted out in a loud voice, “Do no harm to yourself; we are all here.”","But Paul cried with a loud voice, saying, Do thyself no harm: for we are all here.","But Paul shouted, \"Don't harm yourself! We are all here!\"","Clamavit autem Paulus magna voce dicens:  “Nihil feceris tibi mali; universi enim hic sumus “.","ויקרא פולוס בקול גדול לאמר אל תעש לך מאומה רע כי פה אנחנו כלנו׃"],["51","16","29","그러자 간수가 횃불을 달라고 하여 안으로 뛰어 들어가 무서워 떨면서 바오로와 실라스 앞에 엎드렸다.","간수는 등불을 찾아 들고 뛰어들어가 무서워 떨면서 바울로와 실라 앞에 엎드렸다.","간수가 등불을 달라고 하며 뛰어 들어가 무서워 떨며 바울과 실라 앞에 엎드리고","간수가 등불을 달라고 하며 뛰어 들어가 무서워 떨며 바울과 실라 앞에 부복하고","간수는 무서워 온 몸을 떨면서 등불을 가져오게 하여 지하감방으로 뛰어 내려가 바울과 실라 앞에 엎드렸다.","He asked for a light and rushed in and, trembling with fear, he fell down before Paul and Silas.","Then he called for a light, and sprang in, and came trembling, and fell down before Paul and Silas,","The jailer called for lights, rushed in and fell trembling before Paul and Silas.","Petitoque lumine, intro cucurrit et tremefactus procidit Paulo et Silae;","וישאל נרות וידלג פנימה והוא מרעיד ויפל לרגלי פולוס וסילא׃"],["51","16","30","그리고 그들을 밖으로 데리고 나가, “두 분 선생님, 제가 구원을 받으려면 어떻게 해야 합니까?” 하고 물었다.","그리고 그들을 밖으로 데리고 나가서 \"두 분 선생님, 제가 어떻게 해야 구원을 얻겠습니까?\" 하고 물었다.","그들을 데리고 나가 이르되 선생들이여 내가 어떻게 하여야 구원을 받으리이까 하거늘","저희를 데리고 나가 가로되 선생들아 내가 어떻게 하여야 구원을 얻으리이까 하거늘","그리고 두 사람을 밖으로 인도해 나와서 \"두 분 선생님, 어떻게 하면 저도 구원을 얻을 수 있겠습니까?\" 하고 물었다.","Then he brought them out and said, “Sirs, what must I do to be saved?”","And brought them out, and said, Sirs, what must I do to be saved?","He then brought them out and asked, \"Sirs, what must I do to be saved?\"","et producens eos foras ait:  “Domini, quid me oportet facere, ut salvus fiam? “.","ויוציאם החוצה ויאמר אדני מה עלי לעשות למען אושע׃"],["51","16","31","그들이 대답하였다. “주 예수님을 믿으시오. 그러면 그대와 그대의 집안이 구원을 받을 것이오.”","\"주 예수를 믿으시오. 그러면 당신과 당신네 집안이 다 구원을 얻을 것입니다.\" 그들은 이렇게 대답하고","이르되 주 예수를 믿으라 그리하면 너와 네 집이 구원을 받으리라 하고","가로되 주 예수를 믿으라 그리하면 너와 네 집이 구원을 얻으리라 하고","두 사람이 대답하였다. \"주 예수를 믿으시오. 그러면 당신과 당신의 온 가족이 구원을 얻을 것입니다.\"","And they said, “Believe in the Lord Jesus and you and your household will be saved.”","And they said, Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shalt be saved, and thy house.","They replied, \"Believe in the Lord Jesus, and you will be saved--you and your household.\"","At illi dixerunt:  “Crede in Domino Iesu et salvus eris tu et domus tua “.","ויאמרו האמן באדון ישוע המשיח ותושע אתה וביתך׃"],["51","16","32","그리고 간수와 그 집의 모든 사람에게 주님의 말씀을 들려주었다.","간수와 그 집안 온 식구들에게 주님의 말씀을 들려주었다.","주의 말씀을 그 사람과 그 집에 있는 모든 사람에게 전하더라","주의 말씀을 그 사람과 그 집에 있는 모든 사람에게 전하더라","이렇게 해서 두 사람은 간수와 그 온 집안 식구들에게 주님의 복음을 전하였다.","So they spoke the word of the Lord to him and to everyone in his house.","And they spake unto him the word of the Lord, and to all that were in his house.","Then they spoke the word of the Lord to him and to all the others in his house.","Et locuti sunt ei verbum Domini cum omnibus, qui erant in domo eius.","ויגידו לו את דבר יהוה ולכל אשר בביתו׃"],["51","16","33","간수는 그날 밤 그 시간에 그들을 데리고 가서 상처를 씻어 주고, 그 자리에서 그와 온 가족이 세례를 받았다.","간수는 한밤중이었는데도 그 두 사람을 데려다가 상처를 씻어주었고 그 자리에서 그와 온 가족이 세례를 받았다.","그 밤 그 시각에 간수가 그들을 데려다가 그 맞은 자리를 씻어 주고 자기와 그 온 가족이 다 세례를 받은 후","밤 그 시에 간수가 저희를 데려다가 그 맞은 자리를 씻기고 자기와 그 권속이 다 세례를 받은 후","간수는 두 사람의 상처를 씻어 주고 치료를 한 후에 온 식구와 더불어 침례를 받았다.","He took them in at that hour of the night and bathed their wounds; then he and all his family were baptized at once.","And he took them the same hour of the night, and washed their stripes; and was baptized, he and all his, straightway.","At that hour of the night the jailer took them and washed their wounds; then immediately he and all his family were baptized.","Et tollens eos in illa hora noctis lavit eos a plagis, et baptizatus est ipse et omnes eius continuo;","ויקחם בלילה בשעה ההיא וירחץ את חבורתיהם וימהר להטבל הוא וכל אשר לו׃"],["51","16","34","이어서 그들을 자기 집 안으로 데려다가 음식을 대접하고, 하느님을 믿게 된 것을 온 집안과 더불어 기뻐하였다.","그리고 바울로와 실라를 자기 집에 데리고 가서 음식을 대접하며 하느님을 믿게 된 것을 온 가족과 함께 기뻐하였다.","그들을 데리고 자기 집에 올라가서 음식을 차려 주고 그와 온 집안이 하나님을 믿으므로 크게 기뻐하니라","저희를 데리고 자기 집에 올라가서 음식을 차려주고 저와 온 집이 하나님을 믿었으므로 크게 기뻐하니라","그리고 두 사람을 자기 집으로 인도하여 음식을 대접하며 온 가족과 함께 신도가 된 것을 기뻐하였다.","He brought them up into his house and provided a meal and with his household rejoiced at having come to faith in God.","And when he had brought them into his house, he set meat before them, and rejoiced, believing in God with all his house.","The jailer brought them into his house and set a meal before them; he was filled with joy because he had come to believe in God--he and his whole family.","cumque perduxisset eos in domum, apposuit mensam et laetatus est cum omni domo sua credens Deo.","ויעלם אל ביתו וישם שלחן לפניהם ויגל עם כל ביתו על היותו מאמין באלהים׃"],["51","16","35","날이 밝자 행정관들은 시종들을 보내어, “그 사람들을 풀어 주어라.” 하고 말하였다.","날이 밝자 치안관들은 부하들을 보내어 두 사람을 놓아주라고 명령하였다.","날이 새매 상관들이 부하를 보내어 이 사람들을 놓으라 하니","날이 새매 상관들이 아전을 보내어 이 사람들을 놓으라 하니","다음날 아침 치안관들은 경비병을 보내어 \"두 사람을 석방하라\"고 통고하였다.","But when it was day, the magistrates sent the lictors with the order, “Release those men.”","And when it was day, the magistrates sent the serjeants, saying, Let those men go.","When it was daylight, the magistrates sent their officers to the jailer with the order: \"Release those men.\"","Et cum dies factus esset, miserunt magistratus lictores dicentes:  “Dimitte homines illos! “.","ובחית הבקר שלחו השרים את השוטרים לאמר שלח את האנשים ההם׃"],["51","16","36","그래서 간수가 바오로에게 그 말을 전하였다. “행정관들이 여러분을 풀어 드리라고 시종들을 보냈습니다. 그러니 이제 나오셔서 평안히 가십시오.”","그래서 간수가 바울로에게 \"치안관들이 선생님들을 놓아주라고 전령을 보내왔습니다. 그러니 이제는 나와서 평안히 가십시오.\" 하고 말하였다.","간수가 그 말대로 바울에게 말하되 상관들이 사람을 보내어 너희를 놓으라 하였으니 이제는 나가서 평안히 가라 하거늘","간수가 이 말대로 바울에게 고하되 상관들이 사람을 보내어 너희를 놓으라 하였으니 이제는 나가서 평안히 가라 하거늘","간수가 바울에게 두 사람이 다 자유의 몸이 되었음을 알렸다.","The jailer reported the[se] words to Paul, “The magistrates have sent orders that you be released. Now, then, come out and go in peace.”","And the keeper of the prison told this saying to Paul, The magistrates have sent to let you go: now therefore depart, and go in peace.","The jailer told Paul, \"The magistrates have ordered that you and Silas be released. Now you can leave. Go in peace.\"","Nuntiavit autem custos carceris verba haec Paulo:  “Miserunt magistratus, ut dimittamini; nunc igitur exeuntes ite in pace “.","ויגד שמר האסורים לפולוס את הדברים האלה לאמר שלחו השרים לפטר אתכם ועתה צאו ולכו בשלום׃"],["51","16","37","그때에 바오로가 그들에게 말하였다. “로마 시민인 우리를 재판도 하지 않은 채 공공연히 매질하고 감옥에 가두었다가 이제 슬그머니 내보내겠다는 말입니까? 안 됩니다. 그들이 직접 와서 우리를 데리고 나가야 합니다.”","그러자 바울로는 \"치안관들이 로마 시민인 우리를 재판도 하지 않은 채 공중 앞에서 매질을 하고 감옥에 처넣었다가 이제 와서 슬그머니 내보내 주겠다니 될 말이오? 안 되오. 그들이 직접 와서 우리를 석방해야 하오.\" 하고 말하였다.","바울이 이르되 로마 사람인 우리를 죄도 정하지 아니하고 공중 앞에서 때리고 옥에 가두었다가 이제는 가만히 내보내고자 하느냐 아니라 그들이 친히 와서 우리를 데리고 나가야 하리라 한대","바울이 이르되 로마 사람인 우리를 죄도 정치 아니하고 공중 앞에서 때리고 옥에 가두었다가 이제는 가만히 우리를 내어 보내고자 하느냐 아니라 저희가 친히 와서 우리를 데리고 나가야 하리라 한대","그러자 바울이 말하였다. \"아, 안 되오. 이대로는 안 됩니다. 그들은 로마 시민인 우리를 재판도 하기 전에 군중 앞에서 채찍으로 때리고 감옥에까지 처넣었소. 그런데 이제 와서 슬그머니 우리를 내보내려 하다니, 이것으로 문제가 끝났다고 생각하시오? 그들이 직접 와서 우리를 내보내라고 하시오.\"","But Paul said to them, “They have beaten us publicly, even though we are Roman citizens and have not been tried, and have thrown us into prison. And now, are they going to release us secretly? By no means. Let them come themselves and lead us out.”","But Paul said unto them, They have beaten us openly uncondemned, being Romans, and have cast us into prison; and now do they thrust us out privily? nay verily; but let them come themselves and fetch us out.","But Paul said to the officers: \"They beat us publicly without a trial, even though we are Roman citizens, and threw us into prison. And now do they want to get rid of us quietly? No! Let them come themselves and escort us out.\"","Paulus autem dixit eis:  “Caesos nos publice, indemnatos, cum homines Romani essemus, miserunt in carcerem; et nunc occulte nos eiciunt? Non ita, sed veniant et ipsi nos educant “.","ויאמר פולוס אליהם הכה הכונו נגד כל העם בלא דין ומשפט ואנחנו אנשים רומיים וישליכו אתנו במשמר ועתה נסתר יגרשונו אל נא כי אם יבאו המה ויוציאונו׃"],["51","16","38","그 시종들이 이 말을 전하자, 행정관들은 바오로와 실라스가 로마 시민이라는 말을 듣고 불안해하며,","그 전령들이 치안관들에게 가서 이 말을 전하자 그들은 바울로와 실라가 로마 시민이라는 말에 겁을 집어먹고","부하들이 이 말을 상관들에게 보고하니 그들이 로마 사람이라 하는 말을 듣고 두려워하여","아전들이 이 말로 상관들에게 고하니 저희가 로마 사람이라 하는 말을 듣고 두려워하여","경비병들의 보고를 들은 치안관들은 바울과 실라가 로마 시민이라는 말에 그만 가슴이 내려앉았다. 자기들의 목숨이 달아나지나 않을까 하여 겁이 덜컥 났던 것이다.","The lictors reported these words to the magistrates, and they became alarmed when they heard that they were Roman citizens.","And the serjeants told these words unto the magistrates: and they feared, when they heard that they were Romans.","The officers reported this to the magistrates, and when they heard that Paul and Silas were Roman citizens, they were alarmed.","Nuntiaverunt autem magistratibus lictores verba haec. Timueruntque audito quod Romani essent;","ויגידו השטרים לשרים את הדברים האלה ויהי כשמעם כי רומיים הם וייראו׃"],["51","16","39","그들에게 가서 사과하고는, 그들을 데리고 나가 그 도시에서 떠나 달라고 요청하였다.","두 사람에게 가서 사과를 하였다. 그리고 밖으로 데리고 나가 그 도시에서 떠나달라고 간청하였다.","와서 권하여 데리고 나가 그 성에서 떠나기를 청하니","와서 권하여 데리고 나가 성에서 떠나기를 청하니","그래서 그들은 곧 감옥으로 달려가 두 사람에게 머리를 숙이며 이 도시를 떠나 달라고 빌었다.","So they came and placated them, and led them out and asked that they leave the city.","And they came and besought them, and brought them out, and desired them to depart out of the city.","They came to appease them and escorted them from the prison, requesting them to leave the city.","et venientes deprecati sunt eos et educentes rogabant, ut egrederentur urbem.","ויבאו ויחלו פניהם ויוציאום וישאלו מהם לצאת מן העיר׃"],["51","16","40","이렇게 그들은 감옥에서 나와, 리디아의 집으로 가서 형제들을 만나 격려해 주고 떠났다.","감옥에서 나온 바울로와 실라는 리디아의 집으로 가서 교우들을 만나 격려해 주고 그 곳을 떠났다.","두 사람이 옥에서 나와 루디아의 집에 들어가서 형제들을 만나 보고 위로하고 가니라","두 사람이 옥에서 나가 루디아의 집에 들어가서 형제들을 만나보고 2)위로하고 가니라권면하고","바울과 실라는 루디아의 집으로 돌아가 신도들에게 한번 더 설교를 한 후에 그곳을 떠났다.","When they had come out of the prison, they went to Lydia’s house where they saw and encouraged the brothers, and then they left.","And they went out of the prison, and entered into the house of Lydia: and when they had seen the brethren, they comforted them, and departed.","After Paul and Silas came out of the prison, they went to Lydia's house, where they met with the brothers and encouraged them. Then they left.","Exeuntes autem de carcere introierunt ad Lydiam et, visis fratribus, consolati sunt eos et profecti sunt.","ויצאו מן המשמר ויבאו אל בית לודיא ויראו את האחים ויזהירום וילכו לדרכם׃"],["51","17","1","바오로 일행은 암피폴리스와 아폴로니아를 거쳐 테살로니카에 이르렀다. 그곳에는 유다인들의 회당이 있었다.","바울로와 실라는 암피볼리스와 아폴로니아를 거쳐 데살로니카에 이르렀다. 거기에는 유다인의 회당이 있었는데","그들이 암비볼리와 아볼로니아로 다녀가 데살로니가에 이르니 거기 유대인의 회당이 있는지라","저희가 암비볼리와 아볼로니아로 다녀가 데살로니가에 이르니 거기 유대인의 회당이 있는지라","바울과 실라는 암비볼리와 아볼로니아를 거쳐 데살로니가로 갔다. 거기에도 유대인의 회당이 있었으므로","When they took the road through Amphipolis and Apollonia, they reached Thessalonica, where there was a synagogue of the Jews.","Now when they had passed through Amphipolis and Apollonia, they came to Thessalonica, where was a synagogue of the Jews:","When they had passed through Amphipolis and Apollonia, they came to Thessalonica, where there was a Jewish synagogue.","Cum autem perambulassent Amphipolim et Apolloniam, venerunt Thessalonicam, ubi erat synagoga Iudaeorum.","ויהי אחרי עברם באמפפוליס ובאפלוינא ויבאו אל תסלוניקי אשר שם בית כנסת היהודים׃"],["51","17","2","바오로는 늘 하던 대로 유다인들을 찾아가 세 안식일에 걸쳐 성경을 가지고 그들과 토론하였다.","바울로는 늘 하던 대로 유다인들의 모임에 가서 세 주간에 걸쳐 안식일마다 성서를 놓고 토론하였다.","바울이 자기의 관례대로 그들에게로 들어가서 세 안식일에 성경을 가지고 강론하며","바울이 자기의 규례대로 저희에게로 들어가서 세 안식일에 성경을 가지고 강론하며","바울은 늘 하던대로 회당에 가서 세 번의 안식일에 걸쳐 성경을 펴놓고 설교를 하였다.","Following his usual custom, Paul joined them, and for three sabbaths he entered into discussions with them from the scriptures,","And Paul, as his manner was, went in unto them, and three sabbath days reasoned with them out of the scriptures,","As his custom was, Paul went into the synagogue, and on three Sabbath days he reasoned with them from the Scriptures,","Secundum consuetudinem autem suam Paulus introivit ad eos et per sabbata tria disserebat eis de Scripturis","ופולוס נכנס אליהם כמשפטו ושלש שבתות דבר עמהם בדברי הכתובים׃"],["51","17","3","그는 메시아께서 고난을 겪으신 다음 죽은 이들 가운데에서 다시 살아나셔야 했음을 설명하고 증명하면서, “내가 여러분에게 선포하고 있는 예수님이 바로 메시아이십니다.” 하고 말하였다.","바울로는 성서를 풀이하면서 그리스도는 반드시 고난을 받고 죽었다가 다시 살아나야 한다는 것을 보여주고 \"내가 여러분에게 전하고 있는 예수가 바로 그 그리스도입니다.\" 하고 말하였다.","뜻을 풀어 그리스도가 해를 받고 죽은 자 가운데서 다시 살아나야 할 것을 증언하고 이르되 내가 너희에게 전하는 이 예수가 곧 그리스도라 하니","뜻을 풀어 그리스도가 해를 받고 죽은 자 가운데서 다시 살아야 할것을 증명하고 이르되 내가 너희에게 전하는 이 예수가 곧 그리스도라 하니","메시야의 고난과 부활에 대한 예언을 설명하고 예수가 메시야이심을 증명하였다.","expounding and demonstrating that the Messiah had to suffer and rise from the dead, and that “This is the Messiah, Jesus, whom I proclaim to you.”","Opening and alleging, that Christ must needs have suffered, and risen again from the dead; and that this Jesus, whom I preach unto you, is Christ.","explaining and proving that the Christ had to suffer and rise from the dead. \"This Jesus I am proclaiming to you is the Christ,\" he said.","adaperiens et comprobans quia Christum oportebat pati et resurgere a mortuis, et:  “Hic est Christus, Iesus, quem ego annuntio vobis “.","פתוח והוכח להם כי צריך היה אשר יענה המשיח ויקום מן המתים וכי זה הוא המשיח ישוע אשר אני מגיד לכם׃"],["51","17","4","그들 가운데 몇 사람이 감복하여 바오로와 실라스를 따르게 되었다. 또한 하느님을 섬기는 그리스인들 가운데에서 많은 사람과 적지 않은 귀부인들도 그렇게 하였다.","그들 가운데서 여러 사람이 이 말에 감화를 받고 바울로와 실라를 따르게 되었다. 그 밖에도 많은 경건한 그리스 사람들과 적지 않은 귀부인들이 그들을 따랐다.","그 중의 어떤 사람 곧 경건한 헬라인의 큰 무리와 적지 않은 귀부인도 권함을 받고 바울과 실라를 따르나","그 중에 어떤 사람 곧 경건한 헬라인의 큰 무리와 적지 않은 귀부인도 권함을 받고 바울과 실라를 좇으나","청중 가운데 여러 사람이 감동을 받고 신도가 되었다. 많은 경건한 헬라 사람과 그 도시의 귀부인들도 신도가 되었다.","Some of them were convinced and joined Paul and Silas; so, too, a great number of Greeks who were worshipers, and not a few of the prominent women.","And some of them believed, and consorted with Paul and Silas; and of the devout Greeks a great multitude, and of the chief women not a few.","Some of the Jews were persuaded and joined Paul and Silas, as did a large number of God-fearing Greeks and not a few prominent women.","Et quidam ex eis crediderunt et adiuncti sunt Paulo et Silae et de colentibus Graecis multitudo magna et mulieres nobiles non paucae.","ויאמינו מקצתם ויספחו על פולוס וסילא וגם יראי אלהים מן היונים לרב וגם נשים חשובות מספר לא מעט׃"],["51","17","5","그러자 유다인들이 시기하여 거리의 불량배들을 데려다가 군중을 선동하게 하여 그 도시를 혼란에 빠뜨렸다. 그러면서 야손의 집으로 몰려가 바오로 일행을 백성 앞으로 끌어내려고 그들을 찾았다.","이것을 시기한 유다인들은 거리의 불량배들을 모아 폭동을 일으켜 도시를 혼란 속에 빠뜨렸다. 그리고 바울로 일행을 찾아 민중 앞에 끌어내려고 야손의 집을 습격하였다.","그러나 유대인들은 시기하여 저자의 어떤 불량한 사람들을 데리고 떼를 지어 성을 소동하게 하여 야손의 집에 침입하여 그들을 백성에게 끌어내려고 찾았으나","그러나 유대인들은 시기하여 저자의 어떤 괴악한 사람들을 데리고 떼를 지어 성을 소동케 하여 야손의 집에 달려들어 저희를 백성에게 끌어 내려고 찾았으나","그러나 이것을 시기한 유대인 지도자들이 거리의 불량배들을 모아 폭동을 일으키게 하였다. 폭도들이 바울과 실라를 끌어내어 시의회에서 처벌받게 하려고 야손의 집을 습격하였다.","But the Jews became jealous and recruited some worthless men loitering in the public square, formed a mob, and set the city in turmoil. They marched on the house of Jason, intending to bring them before the people’s assembly.","But the Jews which believed not, moved with envy, took unto them certain lewd fellows of the baser sort, and gathered a company, and set all the city on an uproar, and assaulted the house of Jason, and sought to bring them out to the people.","But the Jews were jealous; so they rounded up some bad characters from the marketplace, formed a mob and started a riot in the city. They rushed to Jason's house in search of Paul and Silas in order to bring them out to the crowd.","Zelantes autem Iudaei assumentesque de foro viros quosdam malos et turba facta concitaverunt civitatem; et assistentes domui Iasonis quaerebant eos producere in populum.","ויקנאו הסוררים שביהודים ויקחו להם אנשי בליעל מבטלני השוק ויקבצו המון ויהמו את העיר ויסבו על בית יסון ויבקשו להביאם חוצה אל העם׃"],["51","17","6","그러나 그들을 찾아내지 못하자 야손과 몇몇 형제를 시 당국자들에게 끌고 가서 외쳐 댔다. “온 세상에 소란을 일으키던 자들이 여기까지 왔습니다.","그러나 바울로 일행을 찾지 못하게 되자 폭도들은 야손과 교우 몇 사람을 시 치안관들에게 끌고 가서 큰소리로 \"세상을 소란스럽게 하던 자들이 여기까지 들어왔습니다.","발견하지 못하매 야손과 몇 형제들을 끌고 읍장들 앞에 가서 소리 질러 이르되 천하를 어지럽게 하던 이 사람들이 여기도 이르매","발견치 못하매 야손과 및 형제를 끌고 읍장들 앞에 가서 소리질러 가로되 천하를 어지럽게 하던 이 사람들이 여기도 이르매","폭도들은 거기서 두 사람을 찾아내지 못하자 그 대신에 야손과 신도 몇 사람을 끌고 의회로 가서 아우성을 쳤다. \"세상을 온통 뒤집어 놓은 바울과 실라가 이곳에도 왔는데","When they could not find them, they dragged Jason and some of the brothers before the city magistrates, shouting, “These people who have been creating a disturbance all over the world have now come here,","And when they found them not, they drew Jason and certain brethren unto the rulers of the city, crying, These that have turned the world upside down are come hither also;","But when they did not find them, they dragged Jason and some other brothers before the city officials, shouting: \"These men who have caused trouble all over the world have now come here,","Et cum non invenissent eos, trahebant Iasonem et quosdam fratres ad politarchas clamantes:  “Qui orbem concitaverunt, isti et huc venerunt,","וכאשר לא מצאו אותם סחבו את יסון ואנשים מן האחים לפני ראשי העיר ויצעקו לאמר הנה המדיחים את כל ישבי תבל באו גם הלום׃"],["51","17","7","야손이 그자들을 자기 집에 맞아들였습니다. 그자들은 모두 예수라는 또 다른 임금이 있다고 말하면서 황제의 법령들을 어기고 있습니다.”","그런 자들을 야손이 자기 집에 맞아들였습니다. 그자들은 모두 예수라는 또 다른 왕이 있다고 말하면서 카이사르의 법령을 어기고 있습니다.\" 하고 떠들어댔다.","야손이 그들을 맞아 들였도다 이 사람들이 다 가이사의 명을 거역하여 말하되 다른 임금 곧 예수라 하는 이가 있다 하더이다 하니","야손이 들였도다 이 사람들이 다 가이사의 명을 거역하여 말하되 다른 임금 곧 예수라 하는 이가 있다 하더이다 하니","야손이 그놈들을 자기 집에 맞아들였소. 그놈들은 모두 가이사 대신에 예수라는 다른 왕이 있다고 선전하고 다니는 반역자들이오.\"","and Jason has welcomed them. They all act in opposition to the decrees of Caesar and claim instead that there is another king, Jesus.”","Whom Jason hath received: and these all do contrary to the decrees of Caesar, saying that there is another king, one Jesus.","and Jason has welcomed them into his house. They are all defying Caesar's decrees, saying that there is another king, one called Jesus.\"","quos suscepit Iason; et hi omnes contra decreta Caesaris faciunt, regem alium dicentes esse, Iesum “.","ויסון אסף אתם אל ביתו והם כלם עשים נגד דתי הקיסר באמרם כי יש מלך אחר והוא ישוע׃"],["51","17","8","이렇게 그들은 군중과 또 이 말을 듣는 시 당국자들을 자극하였다.","이 말을 듣고 무리들과 시 치안관들은 당황하였다.","무리와 읍장들이 이 말을 듣고 소동하여","무리와 읍장들이 이 말을 듣고 소동하여","이 말을 들은 시민과 치안관들은 이 일을 처리하는 일로 한때 떠들썩하였으나 보석금을 받고 그들을 놓아 주었다.","They stirred up the crowd and the city magistrates who, upon hearing these charges,","And they troubled the people and the rulers of the city, when they heard these things.","When they heard this, the crowd and the city officials were thrown into turmoil.","Concitaverunt autem plebem et politarchas audientes haec;","ויחרידו את העם ואת ראשי העיר אשר שמעו את זאת׃"],["51","17","9","그러나 시 당국자들은 야손과 나머지 사람들에게서 보석금을 받고 풀어 주었다.","그러나 시 치안관들은 야손과 그 밖의 사람들에게서 보석금을 받은 뒤에 그들을 놓아주었다.","야손과 그 나머지 사람들에게 보석금을 받고 놓아 주니라","야손과 그 나머지 사람들에게 보를 받고 놓으니라","(8절에 포함되어 있음)","took a surety payment from Jason and the others before releasing them.","And when they had taken security of Jason, and of the other, they let them go.","Then they made Jason and the others post bond and let them go.","et accepto satis ab Iasone et a ceteris, dimiserunt eos.","ויקחו ערבון מידי יסון ומידי האחרים ואחרי כן פטרום׃"],["51","17","10","형제들은 바로 그 밤에 바오로와 실라스를 베로이아로 떠나보냈다. 그들은 그곳에 이르러 유다인들의 회당으로 갔다.","교우들은 그 날 밤으로 바울로와 실라를 베레아로 보냈다. 베레아에 도착한 두 사람은 유다인의 회당으로 들어갔다.","밤에 형제들이 곧 바울과 실라를 베뢰아로 보내니 그들이 이르러 유대인의 회당에 들어가니라","밤에 형제들이 곧 바울과 실라를 베뢰아로 보내니 저희가 이르러 유대인의 회당에 들어가니라","그날 밤으로 신도들은 서둘러 바울과 실라를 베뢰아로 보냈다. 베뢰아에 닿자 두 사람은 늘 하던 대로 그곳 회당에 가서도 설교를 하였다.","The brothers immediately sent Paul and Silas to Beroea during the night. Upon arrival they went to the synagogue of the Jews.","And the brethren immediately sent away Paul and Silas by night unto Berea: who coming thither went into the synagogue of the Jews.","As soon as it was night, the brothers sent Paul and Silas away to Berea. On arriving there, they went to the Jewish synagogue.","Fratres vero confestim per noctem dimiserunt Paulum et Silam in Beroeam; qui cum advenissent, in synagogam Iudaeorum introierunt.","והאחים מהרו לשלח את פולוס ואת סילא לילה לברואה והם בבאם שמה הלכו לבית כנסת היהודים׃"],["51","17","11","그곳 유다인들은 테살로니카의 유다인들보다 점잖아서 말씀을 아주 기꺼이 받아들이고, 그것이 사실인지 알아보려고 날마다 성경을 연구하였다.","그 곳 유다인들은 데살로니카 유다인들보다 마음이 트인 사람들이어서 말씀을 열심히 받아들이고 바울로의 말이 사실인지 알아보려고 날마다 성서를 연구하였다.","베뢰아에 있는 사람들은 데살로니가에 있는 사람들보다 더 너그러워서 간절한 마음으로 말씀을 받고 이것이 그러한가 하여 날마다 성경을 상고하므로","베뢰아 사람은 데살로니가에 있는 사람보다 더 신사적이어서 간절한 마음으로 말씀을 받고 이것이 그러한가 하여 날마다 성경을 상고하므로","베뢰아 사람들은 데살로니가 사람들보다는 훨씬 마음이 틔어 있어서 기쁜 마음으로 설교를 들었다. 그리고 바울과 실라가 가르치는 말이 진실인지 알고자 날마다 성경을 연구하였다.","These Jews were more fair-minded than those in Thessalonica, for they received the word with all willingness and examined the scriptures daily to determine whether these things were so.","These were more noble than those in Thessalonica, in that they received the word with all readiness of mind, and searched the scriptures daily, whether those things were so.","Now the Bereans were of more noble character than the Thessalonians, for they received the message with great eagerness and examined the Scriptures every day to see if what Paul said was true.","Hi autem erant nobiliores eorum, qui sunt Thessalonicae, qui susceperunt verbum cum omni aviditate, cotidie scrutantes Scripturas, si haec ita se haberent.","ואלה היו נדיבים מאנשי תסלוניקי ויקבלו את הדבר בכל לב וידרשו בכתובים יום יום לדעת אם כן הוא הדבר׃"],["51","17","12","그리하여 그들 가운데에서 많은 이가 믿게 되었다. 지체 높은 그리스 여자들과 남자들 가운데에서도 믿게 된 사람이 적지 않았다.","이리하여 그들 중 많은 사람이 예수를 믿게 되었다. 또 그리스 귀부인들과 남자들 가운데서도 믿는 사람이 적지 않았다.","그 중에 믿는 사람이 많고 또 헬라의 귀부인과 남자가 적지 아니하나","그중에 믿는 사람이 많고 또 헬라의 귀부인과 남자가 적지 아니하나","그리하여 많은 사람이 믿게 되었는데 그 중에는 헬라의 상류계급 귀부인들과 남자들의 수도 적지 않았다.","Many of them became believers, as did not a few of the influential Greek women and men.","Therefore many of them believed; also of honourable women which were Greeks, and of men, not a few.","Many of the Jews believed, as did also a number of prominent Greek women and many Greek men.","Et multi quidem crediderunt ex eis et Graecarum mulierum honestarum et virorum non pauci.","ויאמינו הרבה מהם וגם מן הנשים החשובות היוניות ומן האנשים לא מעט׃"],["51","17","13","테살로니카의 유다인들은 바오로가 베로이아에서도 하느님의 말씀을 선포한다는 것을 알고, 그곳까지 가서 군중을 선동하고 자극하였다.","데살로니카에 살고 있던 유다인들은 바울로가 베레아에서도 하느님의 말씀을 전한다는 말을 듣고 거기까지 가서 무리를 선동하여 소란을 피웠다.","데살로니가에 있는 유대인들은 바울이 하나님의 말씀을 베뢰아에서도 전하는 줄을 알고 거기도 가서 무리를 움직여 소동하게 하거늘","데살로니가에 있는 유대인들이 바울이 하나님 말씀을 베뢰아에서도 전하는 줄을 알고 거기도 가서 무리를 움직여 소동케 하거늘","데살로니가에 있는 유대인들은 바울이 베뢰아에서 전도하고 있다는 말을 듣고 거기까지 몰려와서 소란을 피웠다.","But when the Jews of Thessalonica learned that the word of God had now been proclaimed by Paul in Beroea also, they came there too to cause a commotion and stir up the crowds.","But when the Jews of Thessalonica had knowledge that the word of God was preached of Paul at Berea, they came thither also, and stirred up the people.","When the Jews in Thessalonica learned that Paul was preaching the word of God at Berea, they went there too, agitating the crowds and stirring them up.","Cum autem cognovissent in Thessalonica Iudaei quia et Beroeae annuntiatum est a Paulo verbum Dei, venerunt et illuc commoventes et turbantes multitudinem.","ויהי כאשר שמעו היהודים אשר מתסלוניקי כי מגיד פולוס את דבר אלהים גם בברואה ויבאו ויעררו את העם גם שמה׃"],["51","17","14","그러자 형제들은 곧바로 바오로를 떠나보내어 바닷가까지 가게 하였다. 그러나 실라스와 티모테오는 그곳에 남았다.","그래서 교우들은 급히 바울로를 바닷가로 피신시켰다. 그러나 실라와 디모테오는 거기에 그대로 남아 있었다.","형제들이 곧 바울을 내보내어 바다까지 가게 하되 실라와 디모데는 아직 거기 머물더라","형제들이 곧 바울을 내어 보내어 바다까지 가게 하되 실라와 디모데는 아직 거기 유하더라","신도들은 급히 다시 바울을 해변으로 피신시켰다. 그러나 실라와 디모데는 그대로 그곳에 남아 있었다.","So the brothers at once sent Paul on his way to the seacoast, while Silas and Timothy remained behind.","And then immediately the brethren sent away Paul to go as it were to the sea: but Silas and Timotheus abode there still.","The brothers immediately sent Paul to the coast, but Silas and Timothy stayed at Berea.","Statimque tunc Paulum dimiserunt fratres, ut iret usque ad mare; Silas autem et Timotheus remanserunt ibi.","וימהרו האחים וישלחו את פולוס ללכת עד הים וסילא וטימותיוס נשארו שם׃"],["51","17","15","바오로를 안내하던 이들은 그를 아테네까지 인도하고 나서, 자기에게 되도록 빨리 오라고 실라스와 티모테오에게 전하라는 그의 지시를 받고 돌아왔다.","바울로를 안내하던 사람들은 아테네까지 같이 갔다가 실라와 디모테오도 되도록 빨리 오라는 바울로의 전갈을 받아가지고 베레아로 돌아갔다.","바울을 인도하는 사람들이 그를 데리고 아덴까지 이르러 그에게서 실라와 디모데를 자기에게로 속히 오게 하라는 명령을 받고 떠나니라","바울을 인도하는 사람들이 데리고 아덴까지 이르러 바울에게서 실라와 디모데를 자기에게로 속히 오게 하라는 명을 받고 떠나니라","바울과 동행했던 사람들은 아덴까지 그를 안전하게 바래다 준 뒤 속히 실라와 디모데도 뒤따라 와달라는 바울의 전갈을 가지고 베뢰아로 되돌아갔다.","After Paul’s escorts had taken him to Athens, they came away with instructions for Silas and Timothy to join him as soon as possible.","And they that conducted Paul brought him unto Athens: and receiving a commandment unto Silas and Timotheus for to come to him with all speed, they departed.","The men who escorted Paul brought him to Athens and then left with instructions for Silas and Timothy to join him as soon as possible.","Qui autem deducebant Paulum, perduxerunt usque Athenas; et accepto mandato ad Silam et Timotheum, ut quam celerrime venirent ad illum, profecti sunt.","והמלוים את פולוס הוליכהו עד אתינס ויקבלו מצותו אל סילא וטימותיוס כי בוא יבאו אליו במהרה וילכו׃"],["51","17","16","바오로는 아테네에서 그들을 기다리는 동안, 그 도시가 우상으로 가득 찬 것을 보고 격분하였다.","바울로는 아테네에서 실라와 디모테오를 기다리고 있는 동안에 그 도시가 온통 우상으로 가득 차 있는 것을 보고 격분하였다.","바울이 아덴에서 그들을 기다리다가 그 성에 우상이 가득한 것을 보고 마음에 격분하여","바울이 아덴에서 저희를 기다리다가 온 성에 우상이 가득한 것을 보고 마음에 분하여","바울은 아덴에서 실라와 디모데를 기다리는 동안 시내를 구경하다가 사방에 우상이 즐비한 것을 보고 분노가 치솟아 올랐다.","While Paul was waiting for them in Athens, he grew exasperated at the sight of the city full of idols.","Now while Paul waited for them at Athens, his spirit was stirred in him, when he saw the city wholly given to idolatry.","While Paul was waiting for them in Athens, he was greatly distressed to see that the city was full of idols.","Paulus autem cum Athenis eos exspectaret, irritabatur spiritus eius in ipso videns idololatriae deditam civitatem.","ויהי באתינס ופולוס מהכה להם ותתחמץ רוחו בקרבו בראתו את העיר מלאה אלילים׃"],["51","17","17","그래서 그는 회당에서 유다인들과 하느님을 섬기는 이들과 토론하고, 또 날마다 광장에 나가 그곳에 모인 사람들과 토론하였다.","그래서 바울로는 회당에서 유다인들과 또 하느님을 공경하는 이방인 유다 교도들과 토론을 벌였고 날마다 광장에 나가서 거기에 모인 사람들과도 토론하였다.","회당에서는 유대인과 경건한 사람들과 또 장터에서는 날마다 만나는 사람들과 변론하니","회당에서는 유대인과 경건한 사람들과 또 저자에서는 날마다 만나는 사람들과 변론하니","그래서 그는 회당에 가서 유대인과 경건한 이방인들과 토론을 벌였고 날마다 광장에 나가서 거기 나온 사람들과도 토론을 하였다.","So he debated in the synagogue with the Jews and with the worshipers, and daily in the public square with whoever happened to be there.","Therefore disputed he in the synagogue with the Jews, and with the devout persons, and in the market daily with them that met with him.","So he reasoned in the synagogue with the Jews and the God-fearing Greeks, as well as in the marketplace day by day with those who happened to be there.","Disputabat igitur in synagoga cum Iudaeis et colentibus et in foro per omnes dies ad eos, qui aderant.","על כן בבית הכנסת דבר עם היהודים ועם יראי אלהים ובשוק יום יום עם הנקרים אליו׃"],["51","17","18","에피쿠로스 학파와 스토아 학파의 몇몇 철학자도 바오로와 대담을 나누었는데, 어떤 이들은 “저 떠버리가 도대체 무슨 말을 하려는 것인가?” 하기도 하고, 어떤 이들은 바오로가 예수님과 부활에 관한 복음을 전하는 것을 보고 “이방 신들을 선전하는 사람인 것 같군.” 하고 말하였다.","에피쿠로스 학파와 스토아 학파의 몇몇 철학자들은 바울로와 토론을 해보고는 \"이 떠버리가 도대체 무슨 소리를 하려는 것인가?\" 하기도 하고 또 바울로가 예수와 그의 부활에 관하여 설교하는 것을 보고는 \"다른 나라의 신들을 선전하는 모양이다.\" 하고 말하기도 하였다.","어떤 에피쿠로스와 스토아 철학자들도 바울과 쟁론할새 어떤 사람은 이르되 이 말쟁이가 무슨 말을 하고자 하느냐 하고 어떤 사람은 이르되 이방 신들을 전하는 사람인가보다 하니 이는 바울이 예수와 부활을 전하기 때문이러라","어떤 에비구레오와 스도이고 철학자들도 바울과 쟁론할쌔 혹은 이르되 이 말장이가 무슨 말을 하고자 하느뇨 하고 혹은 이르되 이방 신들을 전하는 사람인가보다 하니 이는 바울이 예수와 또 몸의 부활 전함을 인함이러라","바울은 또 에피큐로스파와 스토아파의 철학자들과도 토론을 하였다. 그러나 바울이 예수와 그분의 부활에 대한 말을 하면 \"이 사람이 꿈을 꾸나 보군\" 하거나 \"다른 나라의 신을 믿으라고 강요할 작정이군\" 하고 말하는 이들이 대부분이었다.","Even some of the Epicurean and Stoic philosophers engaged him in discussion. Some asked, “What is this scavenger trying to say?” Others said, “He sounds like a promoter of foreign deities,” because he was preaching about ‘Jesus’ and ‘Resurrection.’","Then certain philosophers of the Epicureans, and of the Stoicks, encountered him. And some said, What will this babbler say? other some, He seemeth to be a setter forth of strange gods: because he preached unto them Jesus, and the resurrection.","A group of Epicurean and Stoic philosophers began to dispute with him. Some of them asked, \"What is this babbler trying to say?\" Others remarked, \"He seems to be advocating foreign gods.\" They said this because Paul was preaching the good news about Jesus and the resurrection.","Quidam autem ex Epicureis et Stoicis philosophi disserebant cum eo. Et quidam dicebant:  “Quid vult seminiverbius hic dicere? “; alii vero:  “Novorum daemoniorum videtur annuntiator esse “, quia Iesum et resurrectionem evangelizabat.","וגם מקצת הפילוסופים מתלמידי אפיקורוס ומחברת האסטוא התגרו בו ויש אשר אמרו מה יאמר המפטפט הלז ואחרים אמרים כפי הנראה הוא מגיד אלהי נכר יען כי בשר אתם את ישוע ואת התחיה׃"],["51","17","19","그들은 바오로를 아레오파고스로 데리고 가서 물었다. “당신이 말하는 그 새로운 가르침을 우리가 자세히 알 수 있겠소?","그들은 바울로를 아레오파고 법정으로 데리고 가서 이렇게 물었다. \"당신이 가르치는 그 새로운 가르침이 어떤 것인지를 알려줄 수 없겠소?","그를 붙들어 아레오바고로 가며 말하기를 네가 말하는 이 새로운 가르침이 무엇인지 우리가 알 수 있겠느냐","붙들어 가지고 아레오바고로 가며 말하기를 우리가 너의 말하는 이 새 교가 무엇인지 알수 있겠느냐","그들이 바울을 아레오바고 광장으로 데리고 가서 말하였다. \"그 새 교훈에 대해 말해 보시오.","They took him and led him to the Areopagus and said, “May we learn what this new teaching is that you speak of?","And they took him, and brought him unto Areopagus, saying, May we know what this new doctrine, whereof thou speakest, is?","Then they took him and brought him to a meeting of the Areopagus, where they said to him, \"May we know what this new teaching is that you are presenting?","Et apprehensum eum ad Areopagum duxerunt dicentes:  “Possumus scire quae est haec nova, quae a te dicitur, doctrina?","ויאחזוהו ויביאהו אל גבעת המשפט הנקראה בשם אריופגוס ויאמרו הנוכל לדעת מה היא זו התורה החדשה אשר אתה משמיע׃"],["51","17","20","당신은 우리가 듣기에 생소한 것을 전하는데, 우리는 그것이 무엇을 뜻하는지 알고 싶소.”","우리가 듣기에 당신은 생소한 말을 하는데 어디 그 설명을 들어봅시다.\"","네가 어떤 이상한 것을 우리 귀에 들려 주니 그 무슨 뜻인지 알고자 하노라 하니","네가 무슨 이상한 것을 우리 귀에 들려 주니 그 무슨 뜻인지 알고자 하노라 하니","당신의 놀라운 이야기를 어디 한번 우리도 자세히 들어 봅시다.\"","For you bring some strange notions to our ears; we should like to know what these things mean.”","For thou bringest certain strange things to our ears: we would know therefore what these things mean.","You are bringing some strange ideas to our ears, and we want to know what they mean.\"","Mira enim quaedam infers auribus nostris; volumus ergo scire quidnam velint haec esse “.","כי דברים זרים אתה מביא באזנינו והננו חפצים לדעת מה ענינם׃"],["51","17","21","사실 아테네인들과 그곳에 머무르는 외국인들은 모두 무엇인가 새로운 것을 이야기하고 듣는 일로만 세월을 보내는 사람들이었다.","아테네 사람들과 거기에 살고 있던 외국인들은 새 것이라면 무엇이나 듣고 이야기하는 것으로 세월을 보내는 사람들이었다.","모든 아덴 사람과 거기서 나그네 된 외국인들이 가장 새로운 것을 말하고 듣는 것 이외에는 달리 시간을 쓰지 않음이더라","모든 아덴 사람과 거기서 나그네 된 외국인들이 가장 새로 되는 것을 말하고 듣는 이외에 달리는 시간을 쓰지 않음이더라","아덴 사람들이나 그곳에 사는 외국인들은 모두가 늘 새로운 것을 찾아서 듣고 토론하는 것으로 세월을 보내고 있었던 것이다.","Now all the Athenians as well as the foreigners residing there used their time for nothing else but telling or hearing something new.","(For all the Athenians and strangers which were there spent their time in nothing else, but either to tell, or to hear some new thing.)","(All the Athenians and the foreigners who lived there spent their time doing nothing but talking about and listening to the latest ideas.)","Athenienses autem omnes et advenae hospites ad nihil aliud vacabant nisi aut dicere aut audire aliquid novi.","כי האתיניים כלם וגם הנכרים הגרים שם לא חשו לדבר אחר כי אם לספר או לשמע חדשות׃"],["51","17","22","바오로는 아레오파고스 가운데에 서서 말하였다. “아테네 시민 여러분, 내가 보기에 여러분은 모든 면에서 대단한 종교심을 가지고 있습니다.","바울로는 아레오파고 법정에 서서 이렇게 연설하였다. \"아테네 시민 여러분, 내가 보기에 여러분은 여러 모로 강한 신앙심을 가지고 계십니다.","바울이 아레오바고 가운데 서서 말하되 아덴 사람들아 너희를 보니 범사에 종교심이 많도다","바울이 아레오바고 가운데 서서 말하되 아덴 사람들아 너희를 보니 범사에 종교성이 많도다","아레오바고 광장에 서자 바울은 군중들을 향해 이렇게 연설하였다. \"아덴 시민 여러분, 내가 보기에 여러분은 매우 종교심과 신앙심이 많은 사람들입니다.","Then Paul stood up at the Areopagus and said: “You Athenians, I see that in every respect you are very religious.","Then Paul stood in the midst of Mars' hill, and said, Ye men of Athens, I perceive that in all things ye are too superstitious.","Paul then stood up in the meeting of the Areopagus and said: \"Men of Athens! I see that in every way you are very religious.","Stans autem Paulus in medio Areopagi ait:  “Viri Athenienses, per omnia quasi superstitiosiores vos video;","ויעמד פולוס בתוך ועד השפטים ויאמר אנשי אתינס הנני ראה בכל כי יראי אלים אתם מאד׃"],["51","17","23","내가 돌아다니며 여러분의 예배소들을 살펴보다가, ‘알지 못하는 신에게’라고 새겨진 제단도 보았습니다. 여러분이 알지도 못하고 숭배하는 그 대상을 내가 여러분에게 선포하려고 합니다.","내가 아테네 시를 돌아다니며 여러분이 예배하는 곳을 살펴보았더니 '알지 못하는 신에게'라고 새겨진 제단까지 있었습니다. 여러분이 미처 알지 못한 채 예배해 온 그분을 이제 여러분에게 알려드리겠습니다.","내가 두루 다니며 너희가 위하는 것들을 보다가 알지 못하는 신에게라고 새긴 단도 보았으니 그런즉 너희가 알지 못하고 위하는 그것을 내가 너희에게 알게 하리라","내가 두루 다니며 너희의 위하는 것들을 보다가 알지 못하는 신에게라고 새긴 단도 보았으니 그런즉 너희가 알지 못하고 위하는 그것을 내가 너희에게 알게 하리라","나는 시내를 다니며 여러분들의 많은 제단을 보았습니다. 그런데 그중의 하나에 \"알지 못하는 신에게\"라고 쓴 것이 있었습니다. 여러분은 그 신이 어떤 신인지도 모르고 섬기고 있습니다. 그러기에 지금부터 내가 그분에 대한 말씀을 자세히 해드리겠습니다.","For as I walked around looking carefully at your shrines, I even discovered an altar inscribed, ‘To an Unknown God.’ What therefore you unknowingly worship, I proclaim to you.","For as I passed by, and beheld your devotions, I found an altar with this inscription, TO THE UNKNOWN GOD. Whom therefore ye ignorantly worship, him declare I unto you.","For as I walked around and looked carefully at your objects of worship, I even found an altar with this inscription: TO AN UNKNOWN GOD. Now what you worship as something unknown I am going to proclaim to you.","praeteriens enim et videns simulacra vestra inveni et aram, in qua scriptum erat:  “Ignoto deo “. Quod ergo ignorantes colitis, hoc ego annuntio vobis.","כי אני עבר ומתבונן אל עבדות אלהיכם ואמצא מזבח אחד כתוב עליו לאל הנעלם ועתה את אשר עבדתם ואינכם ידעים אתו אני מגיד לכם׃"],["51","17","24","세상과 그 안에 있는 모든 것을 만드신 하느님은 하늘과 땅의 주님으로서, 사람의 손으로 지은 신전에는 살지 않으십니다.","그분은 이 세상과 그 안에 있는 모든 것을 만드신 하느님이십니다. 그분은 하늘과 땅의 주인이시므로 사람이 만든 신전에서는 살지 않으십니다.","우주와 그 가운데 있는 만물을 지으신 하나님께서는 천지의 주재시니 손으로 지은 전에 계시지 아니하시고","우주와 그 가운데 있는 만유를 지으신 신께서는 천지의 주재시니 손으로 지은 전에 계시지 아니하시고","그분은 이 세상과 그 안에 있는 모든 것을 지으신 분입니다. 그분은 하늘과 땅의 주인이시기 때문에 인간의 손으로 만든 신전에는 계시지 않습니다.","The God who made the world and all that is in it, the Lord of heaven and earth, does not dwell in sanctuaries made by human hands,","God that made the world and all things therein, seeing that he is Lord of heaven and earth, dwelleth not in temples made with hands;","\"The God who made the world and everything in it is the Lord of heaven and earth and does not live in temples built by hands.","Deus, qui fecit mundum et omnia, quae in eo sunt, hic, caeli et terrae cum sit Dominus, non in manufactis templis inhabitat","האל אשר עשה את העולם וכל אשר בו לא ישכן בהיכלות מעשה ידים כי הוא אדון השמים והארץ׃"],["51","17","25","또 무엇이 부족하기라도 한 것처럼 사람들의 손으로 섬김을 받지도 않으십니다. 하느님은 오히려 모든 이에게 생명과 숨과 모든 것을 주시는 분이십니다.","또 하느님에게는 사람 손으로 채워드려야 할 만큼 부족한 것이라곤 하나도 없으십니다. 하느님은 오히려 사람들에게 생명과 호흡과 모든 것을 주시는 분이십니다.","또 무엇이 부족한 것처럼 사람의 손으로 섬김을 받으시는 것이 아니니 이는 만민에게 생명과 호흡과 만물을 친히 주시는 이심이라","또 무엇이 부족한 것처럼 사람의 손으로 섬김을 받으시는 것이 아니니 이는 만민에게 생명과 호흡과 만물을 친히 주시는 자이심이라","또한 인간의 손으로는 그분이 원하시는 바를 채워 드릴 수조차 없습니다. 왜냐하면 그분은 필요한 것이 하나도 없으시기 때문입니다. 오히려 그분 자신이 모든 인간에게 생명과 호흡을 주시고 필요한 것을 만족하게 채워 주십니다.","nor is he served by human hands because he needs anything. Rather it is he who gives to everyone life and breath and everything.","Neither is worshipped with men's hands, as though he needed any thing, seeing he giveth to all life, and breath, and all things;","And he is not served by human hands, as if he needed anything, because he himself gives all men life and breath and everything else.","nec manibus humanis colitur indigens aliquo, cum ipse det omnibus vitam et inspirationem et omnia;","גם לא ישרתוהו ידי בני אדם כאלו יצטרך לדבר כי הוא הנתן לכל חיים ונשמה וכל דבר׃"],["51","17","26","그분께서는 또 한 사람에게서 온 인류를 만드시어 온 땅 위에 살게 하시고, 일정한 절기와 거주지의 경계를 정하셨습니다.","하느님께서는 한 조상에게서 모든 인류를 내시어 온 땅 위에서 살게 하시고 또 그들이 살아갈 시대와 영토를 미리 정해 주셨습니다.","인류의 모든 족속을 한 혈통으로 만드사 온 땅에 살게 하시고 그들의 연대를 정하시며 거주의 경계를 한정하셨으니","인류의 모든 족속을 한 혈통으로 만드사 온 땅에 거하게 하시고 저희의 년대를 정하시며 거주의 경계를 한하셨으니","그분이 하나님이십니다. 하나님께서는 이 세상에 있는 모든 인류의 조상인 한 사람 아담을 만드시고 그에게서부터 인류를 온 세계에 퍼져 나가게 하셨습니다. 하나님께서는 어느 나라가 흥하고 어느 나라가 망하며 언제 그렇게 될 것인가를 미리 다 정하시고 그들의 영토도 정하셨습니다.","He made from one the whole human race to dwell on the entire surface of the earth, and he fixed the ordered seasons and the boundaries of their regions,","And hath made of one blood all nations of men for to dwell on all the face of the earth, and hath determined the times before appointed, and the bounds of their habitation;","From one man he made every nation of men, that they should inhabit the whole earth; and he determined the times set for them and the exact places where they should live.","fecitque ex uno omne genus hominum inhabitare super universam faciem terrae, definiens statuta tempora et terminos habitationis eorum,","ויושב כל עממי בני אדם על כל פני האדמה מדם אחד ויצב מועדים קבועים וגבולת מושבם׃"],["51","17","27","이는 사람들이 하느님을 찾게 하려는 것입니다. 더듬거리다가 그분을 찾아낼 수도 있습니다. 사실 그분께서는 우리 각자에게서 멀리 떨어져 계시지 않습니다.","이리하여 사람들이 하느님을 더듬어 찾기만 하면 만날 수 있게 해주셨습니다. 사실 하느님께서는 누구에게나 가까이 계십니다.","이는 사람으로 혹 하나님을 더듬어 찾아 발견하게 하려 하심이로되 그는 우리 각 사람에게서 멀리 계시지 아니하도다","이는 사람으로 1)하나님을 혹 더듬어 찾아 발견케 하려 하심이로되 그는 우리 각 사람에게서 멀리 떠나 계시지 아니하도다 헬, 신","이 모든 일을 행하신 목적은 사람들이 하나님을 더듬어 찾기만 하면 만날 수 있도록 하기 위한 것이었습니다. 사실 하나님께서는 우리들 누구와도 멀리 떨어져 계시지 않습니다.","so that people might seek God, even perhaps grope for him and find him, though indeed he is not far from any one of us.","That they should seek the Lord, if haply they might feel after him, and find him, though he be not far from every one of us:","God did this so that men would seek him and perhaps reach out for him and find him, though he is not far from each one of us.","quaerere Deum, si forte attrectent eum et inveniant, quamvis non longe sit ab unoquoque nostrum.","למען יבקשו את האלהים אולי ימששהו וימצאהו אף כי איננו רחוק מכל אחד ממנו׃"],["51","17","28","여러분의 시인 가운데 몇 사람이 ‘우리도 그분의 자녀다.’ 하고 말하臼뉘資? 우리는 그분 안에서 살고 움직이며 존재합니다.","1)우리는 그분 안에서 숨쉬고 움직이며 살아간다.' 하는 말도 있지 않습니까? 또 여러분의 어떤 시인은 '2)우리도 그의 자녀다.' 하고 말하지 않았습니까?욥기 12:10(시편 104; 다니 5:23 참조).1요한 3:1-2참조.","우리가 그를 힘입어 살며 기동하며 존재하느니라 너희 시인 중 어떤 사람들의 말과 같이 우리가 그의 소생이라 하니","우리가 그를 힘입어 살며 기동하며 있느니라 너희 시인 중에도 어떤 사람들의 말과 같이 우리가 그의 소생이라 하니","우리는 하나님 안에서 숨쉬고 움직이고 살아가고 있습니다. 여러분의 시인 중의 한 사람이 \"우리는 하나님의 자녀들이라\"고 말한 그대로입니다.","For ‘In him we live and move and have our being,’ as even some of your poets have said, ‘For we too are his offspring.’","For in him we live, and move, and have our being; as certain also of your own poets have said, For we are also his offspring.","'For in him we live and move and have our being.' As some of your own poets have said, 'We are his offspring.'","In ipso enim vivimus et movemur et sumus, sicut et quidam vestrum poetarum dixerunt:  “Ipsius enim et genus sumus “.","כי בו אנחנו חיים ומתנועעים וקימים כאשר גם מקצת משורריכם אמרו אף ילידיו אנחנו׃"],["51","17","29","이처럼 우리는 하느님의 자녀이므로, 인간의 예술과 상상으로 빚어 만든 금상이나 은상이나 석상을 신과 같다고 여겨서는 안 됩니다.","하느님의 자녀인 우리는 하느님을, 사람의 기술이나 고안으로 금이나 은이나 돌을 가지고 만들어낸 우상처럼 여겨서는 안 됩니다.","이와 같이 하나님의 소생이 되었은즉 하나님을 금이나 은이나 돌에다 사람의 기술과 고안으로 새긴 것들과 같이 여길 것이 아니니라","이와 같이 신의 소생이 되었은즉 신을 금이나 은이나 돌에다 사람의 기술과 고안으로 새긴 것들과 같이 여길 것이 아니니라","그러니 하나님을 인간들의 손으로 금이나 은이나 또는 돌을 깍아서 만들어 낸 우상 같은 것으로 생각할 수 있겠습니까?","Since therefore we are the offspring of God, we ought not to think that the divinity is like an image fashioned from gold, silver, or stone by human art and imagination.","Forasmuch then as we are the offspring of God, we ought not to think that the Godhead is like unto gold, or silver, or stone, graven by art and man's device.","\"Therefore since we are God's offspring, we should not think that the divine being is like gold or silver or stone--an image made by man's design and skill.","Genus ergo cum simus Dei, non debemus aestimare auro aut argento aut lapidi, sculpturae artis et cogitationis hominis, divinum esse simile.","והנה בהיותנו ילידי האלהים לא נכון לנו לחשב כי האלהות תדמה לזהב או לכסף או לאבן מעשה חרש ומחשבת בני אדם׃"],["51","17","30","하느님께서 무지의 시대에는 그냥 보아 넘겨 주셨지만, 이제는 어디에 있든 모두 회개해야 한다고 사람들에게 명령하십니다.","하느님께서는 사람이 무지했던 때에는 눈을 감아주셨지만 이제는 어디에 있는 사람에게나 다 회개할 것을 명령하십니다.","알지 못하던 시대에는 하나님이 간과하셨거니와 이제는 어디든지 사람에게 다 명하사 회개하라 하셨으니","알지 못하던 시대에는 1)하나님이 허물치 아니하셨거니와 이제는 어디든지 사람을 다 명하사 회개하라 하셨으니 헬, 신","지금까지는 하나님께서 이런 인간의 무지를 참아 주셨습니다. 그러나 지금은 누구든지 다 우상을 버리고 하나님께 돌아설 것을 명령하고 계십니다.","God has overlooked the times of ignorance, but now he demands that all people everywhere repent","And the times of this ignorance God winked at; but now commandeth all men every where to repent:","In the past God overlooked such ignorance, but now he commands all people everywhere to repent.","Et tempora quidem ignorantiae despiciens Deus, nunc annuntiat hominibus, ut omnes ubique paenitentiam agant,","לכן עתה אחרי עבר אלהים על ימות הסכלות מצוה הוא את כל בני האדם בכל אפסי ארץ כי שוב ישובו׃"],["51","17","31","그분께서 당신이 정하신 한 사람을 통하여 세상을 의롭게 심판하실 날을 지정하셨기 때문입니다. 그리고 그분을 죽은 이들 가운데에서 다시 살리시어 그것을 모든 사람에게 증명해 주셨습니다.”","3)과연 하느님께서는 당신이 택하신 분을 시켜 온 세상을 올바르게 심판하실 날을 정하셨고 또 그분을 죽은 자들 가운데서 다시 살리심으로써 모든 사람에게 그 증거를 보이셨습니다.\"시편 9:8, 96:13, 98:9.","이는 정하신 사람으로 하여금 천하를 공의로 심판할 날을 작정하시고 이에 그를 죽은 자 가운데서 다시 살리신 것으로 모든 사람에게 믿을 만한 증거를 주셨음이니라 하니라","이는 정하신 사람으로 하여금 천하를 공의로 심판할 날을 작정하시고 이에 저를 죽은 자 가운데서 다시 살리신 것으로 모든 사람에게 믿을만한 증거를 주셨음이니라 하니라","하나님께서 임명하신 분을 통해서 ㄱ) 공정히 심판하실 날을 정하셨기 때문입니다. 하나님께서는 그분을 죽음으로부터 다시 살리심으로써 이 일을 맡기셨다는 증거를 삼으셨습니다.\" (ㄱ. 시9:8(참조,시96:13,98:9))","because he has established a day on which he will ‘judge the world with justice’ through a man he has appointed, and he has provided confirmation for all by raising him from the dead.”","Because he hath appointed a day, in the which he will judge the world in righteousness by that man whom he hath ordained; whereof he hath given assurance unto all men, in that he hath raised him from the dead.","For he has set a day when he will judge the world with justice by the man he has appointed. He has given proof of this to all men by raising him from the dead.\"","eo quod statuit diem, in qua iudicaturus est orbem in iustitia in viro, quem constituit, fidem praebens omnibus suscitans eum a mortuis “.","יען אשר שת יום לשפט תבל בצדק על ידי איש אשר הפקידו ויתן עדות נאמנה לכלם בהקימו אתו מן המתים׃"],["51","17","32","죽은 이들의 부활에 관하여 듣고서, 어떤 이들은 비웃고 어떤 이들은 “그 점에 관해서는 다음에 다시 듣겠소.” 하고 말하였다.","죽은 자가 다시 살아난다는 말을 듣고 바울로를 비웃는 사람들이 있었는가 하면 훗날 다시 그 이야기를 듣겠다는 사람들도 있었다.","그들이 죽은 자의 부활을 듣고 어떤 사람은 조롱도 하고 어떤 사람은 이 일에 대하여 네 말을 다시 듣겠다 하니","저희가 죽은 자의 부활을 듣고 혹은 기롱도 하고 혹은 이 일에 대하여 네 말을 다시 듣겠다 하니","바울의 말이 부활에까지 이르자 사람들이 비웃기 시작하였다. 그러나 그들 가운데에는 \"우리는 그 일에 대해서 나중에 더 자세한 것을 듣고 싶소\" 하고 말하는 사람들도 있었다.","When they heard about resurrection of the dead, some began to scoff, but others said, “We should like to hear you on this some other time.”","And when they heard of the resurrection of the dead, some mocked: and others said, We will hear thee again of this matter.","When they heard about the resurrection of the dead, some of them sneered, but others said, \"We want to hear you again on this subject.\"","Cum audissent autem resurrectionem mortuorum, quidam quidem irridebant, quidam vero dixerunt:  “Audiemus te de hoc iterum “.","וכאשר שמעו תחית מתים אלה הלעיגו לו ואלה אמרו על זאת נשמעך בעת אחרת׃"],["51","17","33","이렇게 하여 바오로는 그들이 모인 곳에서 나왔다.","바울로가 법정에서 나오자","이에 바울이 그들 가운데서 떠나매","이에 바울이 저희 가운데서 떠나매","바울은 토론을 끝냈다.","And so Paul left them.","So Paul departed from among them.","At that, Paul left the Council.","Sic Paulus exivit de medio eorum.","ובכן יצא פולוס מתוכם׃"],["51","17","34","그때에 몇몇 사람이 바오로 편에 가담하여 믿게 되었다. 그들 가운데에는 아레오파고스 의회 의원인 디오니시오가 있고, 다마리스라는 여자와 그 밖에 다른 사람들도 있었다.","몇몇 사람이 바울로 편이 되어 예수를 믿게 되었다. 그 중에는 아레오파고 법정의 판사인 디오니시오를 비롯하여 다마리스라는 여자와 그 밖에도 몇 사람이 더 있었다.","몇 사람이 그를 가까이하여 믿으니 그 중에는 아레오바고 관리 디오누시오와 다마리라 하는 여자와 또 다른 사람들도 있었더라","몇 사람이 그를 친하여 믿으니 그 중 아레오바고 관원 디오누시오와 다마리라 하는 여자와 또 다른 사람들도 있었더라","몇 사람이 바울을 따라 신도가 되었는데, 그들 가운데는 시의회 의원인 디오누시오와 다마리라는 부인과 그 밖에 다른 사람들도 있었다.","But some did join him, and became believers. Among them were Dionysius, a member of the Court of the Areopagus, a woman named Damaris, and others with them.","Howbeit certain men clave unto him, and believed: among the which was Dionysius the Areopagite, and a woman named Damaris, and others with them.","A few men became followers of Paul and believed. Among them was Dionysius, a member of the Areopagus, also a woman named Damaris, and a number of others.","Quidam vero viri adhaerentes ei crediderunt; in quibus et Dionysius Areopagita et mulier nomine Damaris et alii cum eis.","ומקצתם דבקו בו ויאמינו ובהם דיונוסיוס מן השפטים של אריופגוס ואשה אחת שמה דמריס ועוד אחרים עמהם׃"],["51","18","1","그 뒤에 바오로는 아테네를 떠나 코린토로 갔다.","그 뒤 바울로는 아테네를 떠나 고린토로 왔는데","그 후에 바울이 아덴을 떠나 고린도에 이르러","이 후에 바울이 아덴을 떠나 고린도에 이르러","그후 바울은 아덴을 떠나 고린도로 갔다.","After this he left Athens and went to Corinth.","After these things Paul departed from Athens, and came to Corinth;","After this, Paul left Athens and went to Corinth.","Post haec discedens ab Athe nis venit Corinthum.","אחר כן סר פולוס מאתינס ויבא אל קורנתוס׃"],["51","18","2","거기에서 그는 폰토스 출신의 아퀼라라는 어떤 유다인을 만났다. 아퀼라는 클라우디우스 황제가 모든 유다인은 로마를 떠나라는 칙령을 내렸기 때문에 자기 아내 프리스킬라와 함께 얼마 전에 이탈리아에서 온 사람이었다. 바오로가 그들을 찾아갔는데,","거기에서 그는 본도 출신인 아퀼라라는 유다 사람을 만나게 되었다. 아퀼라는 글라우디오 황제가 모든 유다인은 로마에서 나가라는 칙령을 내렸기 때문에 얼마 전에 자기 아내 브리스킬라를 데리고 이탈리아를 떠나온 사람이었다. 바울로가 그들을 찾아갔는데","아굴라라 하는 본도에서 난 유대인 한 사람을 만나니 글라우디오가 모든 유대인을 명하여 로마에서 떠나라 한 고로 그가 그 아내 브리스길라와 함께 이달리야로부터 새로 온지라 바울이 그들에게 가매","아굴라라 하는 본도에서 난 유대인 하나를 만나니 글라우디오가 모든 유대인을 명하여 로마에서 떠나라 한고로 그가 그 아내 브리스길라와 함께 이달리야로부터 새로 온지라 바울이 그들에게 가매","거기서 본도 출신의 아굴라라는 유대 사람을 알게 되었다. 그는 글라우디오 황제가 로마에 있는 모든 유대인들에게 추방령을 내렸기 때문에 아내 브리스길라와 함께 얼마전에 이달리야에서 쫓겨나 그곳에 와 있던 참이었다. 아굴라도 바울처럼 천막 만드는 일을 하고 있었으므로 바울은 그의 집에 묵으면서 같이 일을 하였다.","There he met a Jew named Aquila, a native of Pontus, who had recently come from Italy with his wife Priscilla because Claudius had ordered all the Jews to leave Rome. He went to visit them","And found a certain Jew named Aquila, born in Pontus, lately come from Italy, with his wife Priscilla; (because that Claudius had commanded all Jews to depart from Rome:) and came unto them.","There he met a Jew named Aquila, a native of Pontus, who had recently come from Italy with his wife Priscilla, because Claudius had ordered all the Jews to leave Rome. Paul went to see them,","Et in veniens quendam Iudaeum nomine Aquilam, Ponticum genere, qui nuper venerat ab Italia, et Priscillam uxorem eius, eo quod praecepisset Claudius discedere omnes Iudaeos a Roma, accessit ad eos","וימצא יהודי נולד בפונטוס ומשו עקילס אשר בא מקרוב מן איטליא הוא ואשתו פריסקלה מפני אשר צוה קלודיוס את כל היהודים לסור מעיר רומי׃"],["51","18","3","마침 생업이 같아 그들과 함께 지내며 일을 하였다. 천막을 만드는 것이 그들의 생업이었다.","마침 직업이 같았기 때문에 그 집에서 함께 살면서 일을 하였다. 천막을 만드는 것이 그들의 직업이었다.","생업이 같으므로 함께 살며 일을 하니 그 생업은 천막을 만드는 것이더라","업이 같으므로 함께 거하여 일을 하니 그 업은 장막을 만드는 것이더라","(2절에 포함되어 있음)","and, because he practiced the same trade, stayed with them and worked, for they were tentmakers by trade.","And because he was of the same craft, he abode with them, and wrought: for by their occupation they were tentmakers.","and because he was a tentmaker as they were, he stayed and worked with them.","et, quia eiusdem erat artis, manebat apud eos et operabatur; erant autem scenofactoriae artis.","ויבא אליהם ויהי בהיתם בני אמנות אחת וישב אתם ויעש מלאכתו ואמנותם עשות יריעות אהלים׃"],["51","18","4","바오로는 안식일마다 회당에서 토론하며 유다인들과 그리스인들을 설득하려고 애썼다.","바울로는 안식일마다 회당에서 유다인과 그리스인들과 함께 토론을 벌이고 그들을 설복시키려고 애썼다.","안식일마다 바울이 회당에서 강론하고 유대인과 헬라인을 권면하니라","안식일마다 바울이 회당에서 강론하고 유대인과 헬라인을 권면하니라","바울은 안식일마다 회당에 가서 유대인뿐만 아니라 이방인들을 설득시키려고 애썼다.","Every sabbath, he entered into discussions in the synagogue, attempting to convince both Jews and Greeks.","And he reasoned in the synagogue every sabbath, and persuaded the Jews and the Greeks.","Every Sabbath he reasoned in the synagogue, trying to persuade Jews and Greeks.","Disputabat autem in synagoga per omne sabbatum suadebatque Iudaeis et Graecis.","וידבר בבית הכנסת בכל שבת ושבת ויוכח את היהודים ואת היונים׃"],["51","18","5","실라스와 티모테오가 마케도니아에서 내려온 뒤로, 바오로는 유다인들에게 예수님께서 메시아시라고 증언하면서 말씀 전파에만 전념하였다.","실라와 디모테오가 마케도니아에서 내려온 후로 바울로는 유다인들에게 예수가 그리스도라는 것을 증언하면서 오로지 전도에만 힘썼다.","실라와 디모데가 마게도냐로부터 내려오매 바울이 하나님의 말씀에 붙잡혀 유대인들에게 예수는 그리스도라 밝히 증언하니","실라와 디모데가 마게도냐로서 내려오매 바울이 하나님의 말씀에 붙잡혀 유대인들에게 예수는 그리스도라 밝히 증거하니","실라와 디모데가 마게도냐에서 온 후로 바울은 유대인들에게 설교하는 일에만 모든 시간을 바치며 예수께서 메시야이심을 증거하였다.","When Silas and Timothy came down from Macedonia, Paul began to occupy himself totally with preaching the word, testifying to the Jews that the Messiah was Jesus.","And when Silas and Timotheus were come from Macedonia, Paul was pressed in the spirit, and testified to the Jews that Jesus was Christ.","When Silas and Timothy came from Macedonia, Paul devoted himself exclusively to preaching, testifying to the Jews that Jesus was the Christ.","Cum venissent autem de Macedonia Silas et Timotheus, instabat verbo Paulus testificans Iudaeis esse Christum Iesum.","וכבוא סילא וטימותיוס ממקדוניא היה פולוס נגש ברוח להעיד אל היהודים כי ישוע הוא המשיח׃"],["51","18","6","그러나 그들이 반대하며 모독하는 말을 퍼붓자 바오로는 옷의 먼지를 털고 나서, “여러분의 멸망은 여러분의 책임입니다. 나에게는 잘못이 없습니다. 이제부터 나는 다른 민족들에게로 갑니다.” 하고 그들에게 말하였다.","그러나 유다인들이 대들며 욕설을 퍼붓자 그는 옷의 먼지를 털면서 \"잘못의 책임은 당신들이 지시오. 나에게는 잘못이 없소. 이제 나는 이방인들에게로 갑니다.\" 하고는","그들이 대적하여 비방하거늘 바울이 옷을 털면서 이르되 너희 피가 너희 머리로 돌아갈 것이요 나는 깨끗하니라 이 후에는 이방인에게로 가리라 하고","저희가 대적하여 훼방하거늘 바울이 옷을 떨어 가로되 너희 피가 너희 머리로 돌아갈 것이요 나는 깨끗하니라 이 후에는 이방인에게로 가리라 하고","그러나 유대인들은 그러한 바울에게 대들고 욕을 퍼부었고 예수를 모독하기까지 하였다. 바울은 도저히 참을 수 없게 되자 옷의 먼지를 떨어 버리고 말하였다. \"당신들이 잘못한 책임은 당신들이 지시오. 이제부터 나는 이방인들에게 전도하겠소.\"","When they opposed him and reviled him, he shook out his garments and said to them, “Your blood be on your heads! I am clear of responsibility. From now on I will go to the Gentiles.”","And when they opposed themselves, and blasphemed, he shook his raiment, and said unto them, Your blood be upon your own heads; I am clean; from henceforth I will go unto the Gentiles.","But when the Jews opposed Paul and became abusive, he shook out his clothes in protest and said to them, \"Your blood be on your own heads! I am clear of my responsibility. From now on I will go to the Gentiles.\"","Contradicentibus autem eis et blasphemantibus, excutiens vestimenta dixit ad eos:  “Sanguis vester super caput vestrum! Mundus ego. Ex hoc nunc ad gentes vadam “.","ויהי כהמרותם וכגדפם וינער את בגדיו ויאמר אליהם דמכם בראשיכם ואנכי נקי מעתה אלכה לי אל הגוים׃"],["51","18","7","그리고 그 자리를 떠나 티티우스 유스투스라는 사람의 집으로 갔는데, 그는 하느님을 섬기는 이였다. 그 집은 바로 회당 옆에 있었다.","그 자리를 떠나 디디오 유스도라는 사람의 집으로 갔다. 이 사람은 하느님을 공경하는 이방인으로서 바로 회당 옆에 살고 있었다.","거기서 옮겨 하나님을 경외하는 디도 유스도라 하는 사람의 집에 들어가니 그 집은 회당 옆이라","거기서 옮겨 하나님을 공경하는 디도 유스도라 하는 사람의 집에 들어가니 그 집이 회당 옆이라","그 일이 있은 후에 바울은 디도 유스도라는 사람의 집에 가서 지냈다. 유스도는 이방인이면서도 하나님을 공경하는 사람이었다. 그의 집은 바로 회당 옆에 있었다.","So he left there and went to a house belonging to a man named Titus Justus, a worshiper of God; his house was next to a synagogue.","And he departed thence, and entered into a certain man's house, named Justus, one that worshipped God, whose house joined hard to the synagogue.","Then Paul left the synagogue and went next door to the house of Titius Justus, a worshiper of God.","Et migrans inde intravit in domum cuiusdam nomine Titi Iusti, colentis Deum, cuius domus erat coniuncta synagogae.","וילך משם ויבא אל בית איש ושמו יוסטוס איש ירא אלהים וביתו סמוך לבית הכנסת׃"],["51","18","8","회당장 크리스포스는 온 집안과 함께 주님을 믿게 되었다. 코린토 사람들 가운데에서 바오로의 설교를 들은 다른 많은 사람도 믿고 세례를 받았다.","회당장 그리스보는 온 집안 식구와 함께 주님을 믿게 되었고 그 밖에도 많은 고린토 사람들이 바울로의 설교를 듣고 예수를 믿어 세례를 받았다.","또 회당장 그리스보가 온 집안과 더불어 주를 믿으며 수많은 고린도 사람도 듣고 믿어 세례를 받더라","또 회당장 그리스보가 온 집으로 더불어 주를 믿으며 수다한 고린도 사람도 듣고 믿어 세례를 받더라","회당 책임자 그리스보가 그의 온 식구들과 함께 주님을 믿고 침례를 받았다. 많은 고린도 사람들도 예수를 믿고 침례를 받았다.","Crispus, the synagogue official, came to believe in the Lord along with his entire household, and many of the Corinthians who heard believed and were baptized.","And Crispus, the chief ruler of the synagogue, believed on the Lord with all his house; and many of the Corinthians hearing believed, and were baptized.","Crispus, the synagogue ruler, and his entire household believed in the Lord; and many of the Corinthians who heard him believed and were baptized.","Crispus autem archisynagogus credidit Domino cum omni domo sua, et multi Corinthiorum audientes credebant et baptizabantur.","וקריספוס ראש הכנסת האמין באדון הוא וכל ביתו וגם קורנתים רבים בשמעם האמינו ויטבלו׃"],["51","18","9","어느 날 밤 주님께서는 환시 속에서 바오로에게 이르셨다. “두려워하지 마라. 잠자코 있지 말고 계속 말하여라.","어느 날 밤 주께서 신비로운 영상으로 바울로에게 나타나 \"겁내지 마라. 잠자코 있지 말고 전도를 계속하여라.","밤에 주께서 환상 가운데 바울에게 말씀하시되 두려워하지 말며 침묵하지 말고 말하라","밤에 주께서 환상 가운데 바울에게 말씀하시되 두려워하지 말며 잠잠하지 말고 말하라","어느 날 밤 주께서 환상으로 바울에게 말씀하셨다. \"겁내지 말라. 계속하여라. 중단해서는 안 된다.","One night in a vision the Lord said to Paul, “Do not be afraid. Go on speaking, and do not be silent,","Then spake the Lord to Paul in the night by a vision, Be not afraid, but speak, and hold not thy peace:","One night the Lord spoke to Paul in a vision: \"Do not be afraid; keep on speaking, do not be silent.","Dixit autem Dominus nocte per visionem Paulo:  “Noli timere, sed loquere et ne taceas,","ודבר האדון היה אל פולוס במחזה בלילה לאמר אל תירא כי אם דבר ואל תחשה׃"],["51","18","10","내가 너와 함께 있다. 아무도 너에게 손을 대어 해치지 못할 것이다. 이 도시에는 내 백성이 많기 때문이다.”","내가 너와 함께 있을 터이니 너에게 손을 대어 해칠 사람은 하나도 없을 것이다. 이 도시에는 내 백성이 많다.\" 하고 말씀하셨다.","내가 너와 함께 있으매 어떤 사람도 너를 대적하여 해롭게 할 자가 없을 것이니 이는 이 성중에 내 백성이 많음이라 하시더라","내가 너와 함께 있으매 아무 사람도 너를 대적하여 해롭게 할 자가 없을 것이니 이는 이 성중에 내 백성이 많음이라 하시더라","내가 너와 함께 있으니 아무도 너를 해치지 못할 것이다. 이 도시에는 내 백성 될 사람이 많이 있다.\"","for I am with you. No one will attack and harm you, for I have many people in this city.”","For I am with thee, and no man shall set on thee to hurt thee: for I have much people in this city.","For I am with you, and no one is going to attack and harm you, because I have many people in this city.\"","quia ego sum tecum, et nemo apponetur tibi, ut noceat te, quoniam populus est mihi multus in hac civitate “.","כי עמך אנכי ואיש אל יגע בך להרע לך כי גוי גדול לי בעיר הזאת׃"],["51","18","11","그리하여 바오로는 일 년 육 개월 동안 그곳에 자리를 잡고 사람들에게 하느님의 말씀을 가르쳤다.","바울로는 일 년 육 개월 동안 거기에 머물면서 사람들에게 하느님의 말씀을 가르쳤다.","일 년 육 개월을 머물며 그들 가운데서 하나님의 말씀을 가르치니라","일년 육개월을 유하며 그들 가운데서 하나님의 말씀을 가르치니라","그래서 바울은 1년 6개월 동안 거기 머물면서 하나님의 말씀을 가르쳤다.","He settled there for a year and a half and taught the word of God among them.","And he continued there a year and six months, teaching the word of God among them.","So Paul stayed for a year and a half, teaching them the word of God.","Sedit autem annum et sex menses docens apud eos verbum Dei.","וישב שם שנה וששה חדשים וילמד בהם את דבר האלהים׃"],["51","18","12","그러나 갈리오가 아카이아 지방 총독으로 있을 때, 유다인들이 합심하여 들고일어나 바오로를 재판정으로 끌고 가서,","갈리오가 아카이아 지방 총독으로 있을 때 유다인들이 작당을 하여 바울로를 붙잡아 법정으로 끌고 가서","갈리오가 아가야 총독 되었을 때에 유대인이 일제히 일어나 바울을 대적하여 법정으로 데리고 가서","갈리오가 아가야 총독 되었을 때에 유대인이 일제히 일어나 바울을 대적하여 재판 자리로 데리고 와서","갈리오가 아기야 지방 총독이 되자 유대인들은 작당을 하여 바울을 붙잡아 총독에게 끌고 가서","But when Gallio was proconsul of Achaia, the Jews rose up together against Paul and brought him to the tribunal,","And when Gallio was the deputy of Achaia, the Jews made insurrection with one accord against Paul, and brought him to the judgment seat,","While Gallio was proconsul of Achaia, the Jews made a united attack on Paul and brought him into court.","Gallione autem proconsule Achaiae, insurrexerunt uno animo Iudaei in Paulum et adduxerunt eum ad tribunal","ויהי בהיות גליון שר מדינת אכיא ויקומו היהודים כלם וחדו על פולוס ויביאהו אל כסא המשפט׃"],["51","18","13","“이자는 법에 어긋나는 방식으로 하느님을 섬기라고 사람들을 부추기고 있습니다.” 하고 말하였다.","\"이 사람은 하느님을 예배하라고 사람들을 충동하며 법을 어기고 있습니다.\" 하고 고발하였다.","말하되 이 사람이 율법을 어기면서 하나님을 경외하라고 사람들을 권한다 하거늘","말하되 이 사람이 율법을 어기어 하나님을 공경하라고 사람들을 권한다 하거늘","\"이 사람은 로마법을 위반해 가면서 하나님을 예배하라고 충동질하고 있습니다\" 하고 고소하였다.","saying, “This man is inducing people to worship God contrary to the law.”","Saying, This fellow persuadeth men to worship God contrary to the law.","\"This man,\" they charged, \"is persuading the people to worship God in ways contrary to the law.\"","dicentes:  “Contra legem hic persuadet hominibus colere Deum “.","ויאמרו האיש הזה מפתה את בני האדם לעבד את אלהים בלא כתורה׃"],["51","18","14","바오로가 입을 열려고 하는데 갈리오가 유다인들에게 말하였다. “유다인 여러분, 무슨 범죄나 악행이라면 여러분의 고발을 당연히 들어 주겠소.","바울로가 답변하려 하자 갈리오는 유다인들에게 \"유다인 여러분, 만일 이 사건이 무슨 범법이나 악한 범행에 관련된 것이라면 당신들의 고발을 들어주겠소.","바울이 입을 열고자 할 때에 갈리오가 유대인들에게 이르되 너희 유대인들아 만일 이것이 무슨 부정한 일이나 불량한 행동이었으면 내가 너희 말을 들어 주는 것이 옳거니와","바울이 입을 열고자 할 때에 갈리오가 유대인들에게 이르되 너희 유대인들아 만일 무슨 부정한 일이나 괴악한 행동이었으면 내가 너희 말을 들어주는 것이 가하거니와","바울이 해명하려고 하는데 갈리오가 고소한 사람들을 향해 말하였다. \"보시오. 당신네 유대인들, 만일 이것이 범죄 사건이라면 내가 당신네들의 고소를 들어 줄 의무가 있소.","When Paul was about to reply, Gallio spoke to the Jews, “If it were a matter of some crime or malicious fraud, I should with reason hear the complaint of you Jews;","And when Paul was now about to open his mouth, Gallio said unto the Jews, If it were a matter of wrong or wicked lewdness, O ye Jews, reason would that I should bear with you:","Just as Paul was about to speak, Gallio said to the Jews, \"If you Jews were making a complaint about some misdemeanor or serious crime, it would be reasonable for me to listen to you.","Incipiente autem Paulo aperire os, dixit Gallio ad Iudaeos:  “Si quidem esset iniquum aliquid aut facinus pessimum, o Iudaei, merito vos sustinerem;","ויהי אך בקש פולוס לפתח את פיו וגליון אמר אל היהודים לאמר אם היה דבר פשע או מעשה נבלה כי עתה נשאתי ושמעתי אתכם היהודים כמשפט׃"],["51","18","15","그러나 말이라든지 명칭이라든지 여러분의 율법과 관련된 시비라면, 스스로 알아서 처리하시오. 나는 그런 일에 재판관이 되고 싶지 않소.”","그러나 이것은 말과 명칭과 당신들의 율법에 관련된 것이니 만큼 당신들이 알아서 처리하시오. 나는 이런 사건을 처리하는 재판관 노릇을 하고 싶지 않소.\" 하고 말하였다.","만일 문제가 언어와 명칭과 너희 법에 관한 것이면 너희가 스스로 처리하라 나는 이러한 일에 재판장 되기를 원하지 아니하노라 하고","만일 문제가 언어와 명칭과 너희 법에 관한 것이면 너희가 스스로 처리하라 나는 이러한 일에 재판장 되기를 원치 아니하노라 하고","하지만 이것은 단지 말의 해석이나 인물을 비평하는 일이나 당신네들의 유대 율법에 관한 것이 아니오? 그런 거라면 당신네들끼리 해결해야 되지 않겠소? 나는 그런 일에 흥미도 없고 또 관여하고 싶지도 않소\"","but since it is a question of arguments over doctrine and titles and your own law, see to it yourselves. I do not wish to be a judge of such matters.”","But if it be a question of words and names, and of your law, look ye to it; for I will be no judge of such matters.","But since it involves questions about words and names and your own law--settle the matter yourselves. I will not be a judge of such things.\"","si vero quaestiones sunt de verbo et nominibus et lege vestra, vos ipsi videritis; iudex ego horum nolo esse “.","אבל אם היא שאלה על מלין ושמות והדת שלכם ראו אתם ואני אין רצוני להיות שפט על דברים כאלה׃"],["51","18","16","그러고 나서 그들을 재판정에서 몰아내었다.","그리고 나서 그들을 법정에서 몰아내자","그들을 법정에서 쫓아내니","저희를 재판 자리에서 쫓아내니","하고 소리치며 그들을 법정에서 쫓아내 버렸다.","And he drove them away from the tribunal.","And he drave them from the judgment seat.","So he had them ejected from the court.","Et minavit eos a tribunali.","ויגרש אתם מלפני כסא המשפט׃"],["51","18","17","그러자 모두 회당장 소스테네스를 붙잡아 재판정 앞에서 매질하였다. 그러나 갈리오는 그 일에 아무런 관심도 두지 않았다.","그들은 일제히 회당장 소스테네를 붙들어다가 법정 앞에서 매질을 하였다. 그러나 갈리오는 그 일에 도무지 참견하지 않았다.","모든 사람이 회당장 소스데네를 잡아 법정 앞에서 때리되 갈리오가 이 일을 상관하지 아니하니라","모든 사람이 회당장 소스데네를 잡아 재판 자리 앞에서 때리되 갈리오가 이 일을 상관치 아니하니라","그러자 폭도들은 회당 책임자 소스데네를 법정 앞에 붙들어다 놓고 마구 때렸다. 그러나 갈리오는 그 일에 조금도 상관하지 않았다.","They all seized Sosthenes, the synagogue official, and beat him in full view of the tribunal. But none of this was of concern to Gallio.","Then all the Greeks took Sosthenes, the chief ruler of the synagogue, and beat him before the judgment seat. And Gallio cared for none of those things.","Then they all turned on Sosthenes the synagogue ruler and beat him in front of the court. But Gallio showed no concern whatever.","Apprehendentes autem omnes Sosthenen, principem synagogae, percutiebant ante tribunal; et nihil horum Gallioni curae erat.","ויאחזו כל היונים את סוסתנים ראש הכנסת ויכוהו לפני כסא המשפט וגליון לא שת לבו גם לזאת׃"],["51","18","18","바오로는 한동안 그곳에 더 머물렀다가, 형제들과 작별하고 프리스킬라와 아퀼라와 함께 배를 타고 시리아로 갔다. 바오로는 서원한 일이 있었으므로, 떠나기 전에 켕크레애에서 머리를 깎았다.","바울로는 고린토에서 여러 날 더 머물러 있다가 교우들과 작별하고 브리스킬라와 아퀼라와 함께 배를 타고 시리아로 떠났다. 그런데 바울로는 하느님께 서약한 일 때문에 떠나기에 앞서 겐크레아에서 머리를 깎았다.","바울은 더 여러 날 머물다가 형제들과 작별하고 배 타고 수리아로 떠나갈새 브리스길라와 아굴라도 함께 하더라 바울이 일찍이 서원이 있었으므로 겐그레아에서 머리를 깎았더라","바울은 더 여러 날 유하다가 형제들을 작별하고 배 타고 수리아로 떠나갈쌔 브리스길라와 아굴라도 함께 하더라 바울이 일찍 서원이 있으므로 겐그레아에서 머리를 깎았더라","바울은 그후 얼마동안 더 고린도에 머물러 있다가 그리스도인들과 작별하고 브리스길라와 아굴라를 데리고 배편으로 수리아를 향해 떠났다. 바울은 전에 하나님께 서원했던 일 때문에 겐그레아에서 그 머리를 깍았다.","Paul remained for quite some time, and after saying farewell to the brothers he sailed for Syria, together with Priscilla and Aquila. At Cenchreae he had his hair cut because he had taken a vow.","And Paul after this tarried there yet a good while, and then took his leave of the brethren, and sailed thence into Syria, and with him Priscilla and Aquila; having shorn his head in Cenchrea: for he had a vow.","Paul stayed on in Corinth for some time. Then he left the brothers and sailed for Syria, accompanied by Priscilla and Aquila. Before he sailed, he had his hair cut off at Cenchrea because of a vow he had taken.","Paulus vero, cum adhuc sustinuisset dies multos, fratribus valefaciens navigabat Syriam, et cum eo Priscilla et Aquila, qui sibi totonderat in Cenchreis caput; habebat enim votum.","ופולוס ישב שם עוד ימים רבים ויפטר מן האחים וירד באניה ללכת אל סוריא ואתו פריסקלה ועקילס ויגלח את ראשו בקנכרי כי נדר עליו׃"],["51","18","19","그들은 에페소에 도착하였다. 바오로는 그 두 사람을 그곳에 따로 남겨 두고 혼자 회당으로 가서 유다인들과 토론하였다.","일행과 함께 에페소에 이른 바울로는 두 사람과 헤어져 혼자 회당에 들어가 유다인들과 이야기를 나누었다.","에베소에 와서 그들을 거기 머물게 하고 자기는 회당에 들어가서 유대인들과 변론하니","에베소에 와서 저희를 거기 머물러 두고 자기는 회당에 들어가서 유대인들과 변론하니","에베소에 도착한 바울은 일행을 배에 남겨 둔 채 회당에 가서 유대인들과 토론을 벌였다.","When they reached Ephesus, he left them there, while he entered the synagogue and held discussions with the Jews.","And he came to Ephesus, and left them there: but he himself entered into the synagogue, and reasoned with the Jews.","They arrived at Ephesus, where Paul left Priscilla and Aquila. He himself went into the synagogue and reasoned with the Jews.","Deveneruntque Ephesum, et illos ibi reliquit; ipse vero ingressus synagogam disputabat cum Iudaeis.","ויבאו אל אפסוס ויעזב אתם שם והוא הלך לבית הכנסת וידבר עם היהודים׃"],["51","18","20","그들은 바오로에게 좀 더 오래 머물기를 청하였지만 그는 승낙하지 않았다.","그들이 바울로에게 좀더 오래 머물러 있어달라고 청하였으나 바울로는 거절하고","여러 사람이 더 오래 있기를 청하되 허락하지 아니하고","여러 사람이 더 오래 있기를 청하되 허락지 아니하고","그들이 바울에게 며칠만 더 있어 달라고 청하였다. 그러나 바울은 시간을 더 지체할 수 없다고 거절하면서","Although they asked him to stay for a longer time, he did not consent,","When they desired him to tarry longer time with them, he consented not;","When they asked him to spend more time with them, he declined.","Rogantibus autem eis, ut ampliore tempore maneret, non consensit,","ויבקשו ממנו להאריך ימי שבתו אתם ולא אבה׃"],["51","18","21","그러나 “하느님께서 원하시면 여러분에게 다시 오겠습니다.” 하고 작별 인사를 한 뒤, 배를 타고 에페소를 떠났다.","\"하느님의 뜻이라면 다시 찾아오겠소.\" 하고 작별 인사를 남긴 뒤 배를 타고 에페소를 떠났다.","작별하여 이르되 만일 하나님의 뜻이면 너희에게 돌아오리라 하고 배를 타고 에베소를 떠나","작별하여 가로되 만일 하나님의 뜻이면 너희에게 돌아오리라 하고 배를 타고 에베소를 떠나","\"나는 무슨 일이 있어도 명절 전에는 예루살렘에 닿아야 합니다\" 라고 하였다. 그리고 만일 하나님께서 허락하신다면 후에 다시 에베소로 돌아오겠다고 약속한 뒤 떠났다.","but as he said farewell he promised, “I shall come back to you again, God willing.” Then he set sail from Ephesus.","But bade them farewell, saying, I must by all means keep this feast that cometh in Jerusalem: but I will return again unto you, if God will. And he sailed from Ephesus.","But as he left, he promised, \"I will come back if it is God's will.\" Then he set sail from Ephesus.","sed valefaciens et dicens:  “Iterum revertar ad vos Deo volente “, navigavit ab Epheso;","כי אם נפטר מהם באמרו מחיב אני לחג את החג הבא בירושלים ואחרי כן אשובה אליכם אם ירצה יהוה וילך לו באניה מן אפסוס׃"],["51","18","22","바오로는 카이사리아에 내려 예루살렘으로 올라가 교회에 인사한 다음, 안티오키아로 내려갔다.","바울로는 가이사리아에 내려 예루살렘으로 올라가서 교회에 인사를 한 다음, 안티오키아로 내려갔다.","가이사랴에 상륙하여 올라가 교회의 안부를 물은 후에 안디옥으로 내려가서","가이사랴에서 상륙하여 올라가 교회의 안부를 물은 후에 안디옥으로 내려가서","그 다음에 들른 항구는 가이사랴였다. 거기서 바울은 예루살렘에 있는 교회를 방문하여 인사한 후에 다시 배를 타고 안디옥으로 갔다.","Upon landing at Caesarea, he went up and greeted the church and then went down to Antioch.","And when he had landed at Caesarea, and gone up, and saluted the church, he went down to Antioch.","When he landed at Caesarea, he went up and greeted the church and then went down to Antioch.","et descendens Caesaream ascendit et salutavit ecclesiam et descendit Antiochiam.","ויבא אל קסרין ויעל וישאל לשלום הקהלה וירד אל אנטיוכיא׃"],["51","18","23","바오로는 그곳에서 얼마 동안 지낸 뒤 다시 길을 떠나, 갈라티아 지방과 프리기아를 차례로 거쳐 가면서 모든 제자들의 힘을 북돋아 주었다.","바울로는 거기에서 얼마 동안 지낸 뒤 다시 길을 떠나 갈라디아 지방과 프리기아 지방을 차례로 돌아다니며 모든 신도들을 격려하였다.","얼마 있다가 떠나 갈라디아와 브루기아 땅을 차례로 다니며 모든 제자를 굳건하게 하니라","얼마 있다가 떠나 갈라디아와 브루기아 땅을 차례로 다니며 모든 제자를 굳게 하니라","안디옥에서 얼마 동안 지낸 다음 갈라디아와 브루기아 지방에 있는 모든 신도들을 격려하고 주님 안에서 굳은 믿음을 지켜 가도록 도와주었다.","After staying there some time, he left and traveled in orderly sequence through the Galatian country and Phrygia, bringing strength to all the disciples.","And after he had spent some time there, he departed, and went over all the country of Galatia and Phrygia in order, strengthening all the disciples.","After spending some time in Antioch, Paul set out from there and traveled from place to place throughout the region of Galatia and Phrygia, strengthening all the disciples.","Et facto ibi aliquanto tempore, profectus est perambulans ex ordine Galaticam regionem et Phrygiam, confirmans omnes discipulos.","וישב שם ימים אחדים וילך למסעיו ויעבר בארץ גלטיא ופרוגיא ויחזק את כל התלמידים׃"],["51","18","24","한편 아폴로라는 어떤 유다인이 에페소에 도착하였는데, 그는 알렉산드리아 출신으로 달변가이며 성경에 정통한 사람이었다.","한편 에페소에는 아폴로라는 유다인이 와 있었는데 그는 알렉산드리아 출신으로 구변이 좋고 성서에 정통한 사람이었다.","알렉산드리아에서 난 아볼로라 하는 유대인이 에베소에 이르니 이 사람은 언변이 좋고 성경에 능통한 자라","알렉산드리아에서 난 아볼로라 하는 유대인이 에베소에 이르니 이 사람은 학문이 많고 성경에 능한 자라","그 무렵 훌륭한 성경교사며 설교자로서도 뛰어난 아볼로라는 유대 사람이 애굽의 알렉산드리아에서 에베소를 찾았다.","A Jew named Apollos, a native of Alexandria, an eloquent speaker, arrived in Ephesus. He was an authority on the scriptures.","And a certain Jew named Apollos, born at Alexandria, an eloquent man, and mighty in the scriptures, came to Ephesus.","Meanwhile a Jew named Apollos, a native of Alexandria, came to Ephesus. He was a learned man, with a thorough knowledge of the Scriptures.","Iudaeus autem quidam Apollo nomine, Alexandrinus natione, vir eloquens, devenit Ephesum, potens in Scripturis.","ואיש יהודי בא אל אפסוס ועיר מולדתו אלכסנדריא ושמו אפולוס איש דברים ותקיף בכתובים׃"],["51","18","25","이미 주님의 길을 배워 알고 있던 그는 예수님에 관한 일들을 열정을 가지고 이야기하며 정확히 가르쳤다. 그러나 요한의 세례만 알고 있었다.","그는 요한의 세례밖에 알지 못했으나 이미 주님의 가르침을 배워 잘 알고 있을 뿐 아니라 열성을 다하여 전도하며, 예수에 관한 일들을 정확하게 가르치고 있었다.","그가 일찍이 주의 도를 배워 열심으로 예수에 관한 것을 자세히 말하며 가르치나 요한의 세례만 알 따름이라","그가 일찍 주의 도를 배워 열심으로 예수에 관한 것을 자세히 말하며 가르치나 요한의 세례만 알 따름이라","그는 예수의 가르침을 배워서 열성을 다해 회당에서 설교하였다. 그러나 그가 아는 것은 고작 애굽에 있을 때 어떤 사람에게서 들은 침례 요한에 대한 이야기와 요한이 예수에 대해 어떻게 말했는가 하는 것이 전부였다. 하지만 담대한 그의 설교를 들어 본 브리스길라와 아굴라는 아볼로를 찾아가서 요한이 온 후에 예수께 일어난 일들과 그것이 무엇을 의미하는지를 더 자세하게 설명해 주었다.","He had been instructed in the Way of the Lord and, with ardent spirit, spoke and taught accurately about Jesus, although he knew only the baptism of John.","This man was instructed in the way of the Lord; and being fervent in the spirit, he spake and taught diligently the things of the Lord, knowing only the baptism of John.","He had been instructed in the way of the Lord, and he spoke with great fervor and taught about Jesus accurately, though he knew only the baptism of John.","Hic erat catechizatus viam Domini; et fervens spiritu loquebatur et docebat diligenter ea, quae sunt de Iesu, sciens tantum baptisma Ioannis.","הוא היה מלמד דרך האדון והוא מדבר כחם רוחו ומלמד היטב על אדות ישוע ולא ידע כי אם טבילת יוחנן לבדה׃"],["51","18","26","그가 회당에서 담대히 설교하기 시작하였는데, 프리스킬라와 아퀼라가 그의 말을 듣고 데리고 가서 그에게 하느님의 길을 더 정확히 설명해 주었다.","그가 회당에서 담대하게 전도하는 것을 들은 브리스킬라와 아퀼라는 그를 집으로 데리고 가서 하느님의 가르침을 더 자세히 설명해 주었다.","그가 회당에서 담대히 말하기 시작하거늘 브리스길라와 아굴라가 듣고 데려다가 하나님의 도를 더 정확하게 풀어 이르더라","그가 회당에서 담대히 말하기를 시작하거늘 브리스길라와 아굴라가 듣고 데려다가 하나님의 도를 더 자세히 풀어 이르더라","(25절에 포함되어 있음)","He began to speak boldly in the synagogue; but when Priscilla and Aquila heard him, they took him aside and explained to him the Way (of God) more accurately.","And he began to speak boldly in the synagogue: whom when Aquila and Priscilla had heard, they took him unto them, and expounded unto him the way of God more perfectly.","He began to speak boldly in the synagogue. When Priscilla and Aquila heard him, they invited him to their home and explained to him the way of God more adequately.","Hic ergo coepit fiducialiter agere in synagoga; quem cum audissent Priscilla et Aquila, assumpserunt eum et diligentius exposuerunt ei viam Dei.","והוא החל לקרא בבית הכנסת בבטחון לבב וישמעו אתו עקילס ופריסקלה ויקחהו אליהם ויוסיפו להגיד לו את דרך האלהים באר היטב׃"],["51","18","27","그 뒤에 아폴로가 아카이아로 건너가고 싶어 하자, 형제들이 그를 격려하며, 그곳의 제자들에게 그를 영접해 달라는 편지를 써 보냈다. 아폴로는 그곳에 이르러, 하느님의 은총으로 이미 신자가 된 이들에게 큰 도움을 주었다.","에페소의 교우들은 아폴로가 아카이아로 건너가고 싶어하는 것을 알고 그를 격려하며 아카이아의 신도들에게 그를 환영해 달라는 편지를 써 보냈다. 아폴로는 아카이아에 도착하여 이미 하느님의 은총으로 신도가 된 사람들에게 큰 도움을 주었다.","아볼로가 아가야로 건너가고자 함으로 형제들이 그를 격려하며 제자들에게 편지를 써 영접하라 하였더니 그가 가매 은혜로 말미암아 믿은 자들에게 많은 유익을 주니","아볼로가 아가야로 건너가고자 하니 형제들이 저를 장려하며 제자들에게 편지하여 영접하라 하였더니 저가 가매 은혜로 말미암아 믿은 자들에게 많은 유익을 주니","얼마 후 아볼로가 아가야로 가고 싶어하자 신도들은 그를 격려해 주었다. 그리고 그곳 믿음의 형제들에게 아볼로를 소개하고 환영해 달라는 편지를 써보냈다. 아가야에 도착한 아볼로는 하나님을 위해 열심히 일하며 교회에 큰 힘을 북돋아 주었다.","And when he wanted to cross to Achaia, the brothers encouraged him and wrote to the disciples there to welcome him. After his arrival he gave great assistance to those who had come to believe through grace.","And when he was disposed to pass into Achaia, the brethren wrote, exhorting the disciples to receive him: who, when he was come, helped them much which had believed through grace:","When Apollos wanted to go to Achaia, the brothers encouraged him and wrote to the disciples there to welcome him. On arriving, he was a great help to those who by grace had believed.","Cum autem vellet transire in Achaiam, exhortati fratres scripserunt discipulis, ut susciperent eum; qui cum venisset, contulit multum his, qui crediderant per gratiam;","ויחפץ ללכת לאכיא ויכתבו האחים אל התלמידים ויעררו אתם לקבלו ויבא שמה ויעזר הרבה את המאמינים על ידי החסד׃"],["51","18","28","그가 성경을 바탕으로 예수님께서 메시아이심을 논증하면서, 공공연히 그리고 확고히 유다인들을 논박하였기 때문이다.","그가 성서를 근거로 하여 예수가 그리스도임을 떳떳하게 증명하여 유다인들을 여지없이 논박했기 때문이다.","이는 성경으로써 예수는 그리스도라고 증언하여 공중 앞에서 힘있게 유대인의 말을 이김이러라","이는 성경으로써 예수는 그리스도라고 증거하여 공중 앞에서 유력하게 유대인의 말을 이김일러라","그는 공개 토론에서도 유대인들을 훌륭하게 논박하고 성경의 말씀을 인용하여 예수께서 참으로 메시야이시라는 것을 증명하였다.","He vigorously refuted the Jews in public, establishing from the scriptures that the Messiah is Jesus.","For he mightily convinced the Jews, and that publickly, shewing by the scriptures that Jesus was Christ.","For he vigorously refuted the Jews in public debate, proving from the Scriptures that Jesus was the Christ.","vehementer enim Iudaeos revincebat publice, ostendens per Scripturas esse Christum Iesum.","כי בחזקה התוכח עם היהודים לפני כל העם ויראם מן המקראות כי ישוע הוא המשיח׃"],["51","19","1","아폴로가 코린토에 있는 동안, 바오로는 여러 내륙 지방을 거쳐 에페소로 내려갔다. 그곳에서 제자 몇 사람을 만나,","아폴로가 고린토에 머물러 있는 동안 바울로는 북부 지방을 거쳐 에페소에 이르렀다. 거기에서 몇몇 신도들을 만나","아볼로가 고린도에 있을 때에 바울이 윗지방으로 다녀 에베소에 와서 어떤 제자들을 만나","아볼로가 고린도에 있을 때에 바울이 윗 지방으로 다녀 에베소에 와서 어떤 제자들을 만나","아볼로가 고린도에 있는 동안 바울은 아시아 지방을 거쳐서 에베소에 닿았다. 거기서 몇 사람의 제자를 만나자 바울은","While Apollos was in Corinth, Paul traveled through the interior of the country and came (down) to Ephesus where he found some disciples.","And it came to pass, that, while Apollos was at Corinth, Paul having passed through the upper coasts came to Ephesus: and finding certain disciples,","While Apollos was at Corinth, Paul took the road through the interior and arrived at Ephesus. There he found some disciples","Factum est autem, cum Apollo esset Corinthi, ut Paulus, peragratis superioribus partibus, veniret Ephesum et inveniret quosdam discipulos;","ויהי בהיות אפולוס בקורנתוס ויעבר פולוס במדינות העליונת וירד אל אפסוס וימצא שם תלמידים׃"],["51","19","2","“여러분이 믿게 되었을 때에 성령을 받았습니까?” 하고 묻자, 그들이 “받지 않았습니다. 성령이 있다는 말조차 듣지 못하였습니다.” 하고 대답하였다.","\"당신들이 신도가 되었을 때 성령을 받았습니까?\" 하고 물어보았다. 그랬더니 그들은 \"우리는 성령이라는 것이 있다는 말조차 들어보지 못하였습니다.\" 하고 대답하였다.","이르되 너희가 믿을 때에 성령을 받았느냐 이르되 아니라 우리는 성령이 계심도 듣지 못하였노라","가로되 너희가 믿을 때에 성령을 받았느냐 가로되 아니라 우리는 성령이 있음도 듣지 못하였노라","\"여러분은 믿을 때에 성령을 받았습니까?\" 하고 물었다. 그들이 대답하였다. \"아니오. 무슨 말씀인지 모르겠군요. 성령이 무엇입니까?\"","He said to them, “Did you receive the holy Spirit when you became believers?” They answered him, “We have never even heard that there is a holy Spirit.”","He said unto them, Have ye received the Holy Ghost since ye believed? And they said unto him, We have not so much as heard whether there be any Holy Ghost.","and asked them, \"Did you receive the Holy Spirit when you believed?\" They answered, \"No, we have not even heard that there is a Holy Spirit.\"","dixitque ad eos:  “Si Spiritum Sanctum accepistis credentes? “. At illi ad eum:  “Sed neque, si Spiritus Sanctus est, audivimus “.","ויאמר אליהם הקבלתם את רוח הקדש אחרי אשר האמנתם ויאמרו אליו אף לא שמענו כי ישנו רוח הקדש׃"],["51","19","3","바오로가 다시 “그러면 어떤 세례를 받았습니까?” 하니, 그들이 대답하였다. “요한의 세례입니다.”","바울로가 \"그러면 당신들은 어떤 세례를 받았습니까?\" 하고 다시 묻자 그들은 \"요한의 세례를 받았습니다.\" 하고 대답하였다.","바울이 이르되 그러면 너희가 무슨 세례를 받았느냐 대답하되 요한의 세례니라","바울이 가로되 그러면 너희가 무슨 세례를 받았느냐 대답하되 요한의 세례로라","\"그렇다면 여러분은 침례를 받을 때 어떤 신앙고백을 하였습니까?\" 바울이 다시 묻자 \"침례 요한이 가르친 것을 고백하였습니다\" 하고 대답하였다.","He said, “How were you baptized?” They replied, “With the baptism of John.”","And he said unto them, Unto what then were ye baptized? And they said, Unto John's baptism.","So Paul asked, \"Then what baptism did you receive?\" \"John's baptism,\" they replied.","Ille vero ait:  “In quo ergo baptizati estis? “. Qui dixerunt:  “In Ioannis baptismate “.","ויאמר אליהם על מה אפוא הטבלתם ויאמרו על טבילת יוחנן׃"],["51","19","4","바오로가 말하였다. “요한은 회개의 세례를 주면서, 자기 뒤에 오시는 분 곧 예수님을 믿으라고 백성에게 일렀습니다.”","이 때 바울로는 다음과 같이 일러주었다. \"요한은 사람들에게 죄를 회개한 표시로 세례를 베풀었습니다. 그러나 요한은 자기 뒤에 오실 분 곧 예수를 믿으라고 사람들에게 가르쳤던 것입니다.\"","바울이 이르되 요한이 회개의 세례를 베풀며 백성에게 말하되 내 뒤에 오시는 이를 믿으라 하였으니 이는 곧 예수라 하거늘","바울이 가로되 요한이 회개의 세례를 베풀며 백성에게 말하되 내 뒤에 오시는 이를 믿으라 하였으니 이는 곧 예수라 하거늘","그러자 바울은 요한의 침례는 죄를 떠나서 하나님께로 돌아오는 결의를 나타내는 것이므로 그의 침례를 받은 사람은 요한이 말한대로 나중에 오신 예수를 믿는 게 당연한 일이라고 말하였다.","Paul then said, “John baptized with a baptism of repentance, telling the people to believe in the one who was to come after him, that is, in Jesus.”","Then said Paul, John verily baptized with the baptism of repentance, saying unto the people, that they should believe on him which should come after him, that is, on Christ Jesus.","Paul said, \"John's baptism was a baptism of repentance. He told the people to believe in the one coming after him, that is, in Jesus.\"","Dixit autem Paulus:  “Ioannes baptizavit baptisma paenitentiae, populo dicens in eum, qui venturus esset post ipsum ut crederent, hoc est in Iesum “.","ויאמר פולוס יוחנן הטביל בטבילת התשובה ואמר אל העם כי האמן יאמינו באשר יבוא אחריו והוא המשיח ישוע׃"],["51","19","5","그들은 이 말을 듣고 주 예수님의 이름으로 세례를 받았다.","그들은 이 말을 듣고 주 예수의 이름으로 세례를 받았다.","그들이 듣고 주 예수의 이름으로 세례를 받으니","저희가 듣고 주 예수의 이름으로 세례를 받으니","그들은 이 말을 듣고 곧 주 예수의 이름으로 침례를 받았다.","When they heard this, they were baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus.","When they heard this, they were baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus.","On hearing this, they were baptized into the name of the Lord Jesus.","His auditis, baptizati sunt in nomine Domini Iesu;","ויהי כשמעם זאת ויבאו להטבל בשם ישוע האדון׃"],["51","19","6","그리고 바오로가 그들에게 안수하자 성령께서 그들에게 내리시어, 그들이 신령한 언어로 말하고 예언을 하였다.","바울로가 그들에게 손을 얹자 성령께서 그들에게 내리셨다. 그러자 그들은 이상한 언어로 말을 하고 예언을 하기 시작하였다.","바울이 그들에게 안수하매 성령이 그들에게 임하시므로 방언도 하고 예언도 하니","바울이 그들에게 안수하매 성령이 그들에게 임하시므로 방언도 하고 예언도 하니","바울이 그들의 머리에 손을 얹자 성령이 그들에게 임하셔서 그들은 방언과 예언을 하기 시작하였다.","And when Paul laid [his] hands on them, the holy Spirit came upon them, and they spoke in tongues and prophesied.","And when Paul had laid his hands upon them, the Holy Ghost came on them; and they spake with tongues, and prophesied.","When Paul placed his hands on them, the Holy Spirit came on them, and they spoke in tongues and prophesied.","et cum imposuisset illis manus Paulus, venit Spiritus Sanctus super eos, et loquebantur linguis et prophetabant.","ויסמך פולוס את ידיו עליהם ויבא עליהם רוח הקדש וימללו בלשנות ויתנבאו׃"],["51","19","7","그들은 모두 열두 사람쯤 되었다.","이렇게 성령을 받은 사람들은 모두 열두 사람쯤 되었다.","모두 열두 사람쯤 되니라","모두 열 두 1)사람쯤 되니라 헬, 남자","그 자리에 참가한 사람은 모두 열두 사람쯤 되었다.","Altogether there were about twelve men.","And all the men were about twelve.","There were about twelve men in all.","Erant autem omnes viri fere duodecim.","ויהיו כלם כשנים עשר איש׃"],["51","19","8","바오로는 석 달 동안 회당에 드나들며 하느님 나라에 관하여 토론하고 설득하면서 담대히 설교하였다.","바울로는 석 달 동안 회당을 드나들며 대담하게 증언하고 하느님 나라에 관하여 토론도 하고 알아듣도록 설명도 해주었다.","바울이 회당에 들어가 석 달 동안 담대히 하나님 나라에 관하여 강론하며 권면하되","바울이 회당에 들어가 석 달 동안을 담대히 하나님 나라에 대하여 강론하며 권면하되","바울은 석 달 동안 안식일마다 회당에 가서 담대하게 설교하며 그가 무엇을 믿고 있으며 왜 많은 사람에게 예수를 믿으라고 설득하는가를 알려 주었다.","He entered the synagogue, and for three months debated boldly with persuasive arguments about the kingdom of God.","And he went into the synagogue, and spake boldly for the space of three months, disputing and persuading the things concerning the kingdom of God.","Paul entered the synagogue and spoke boldly there for three months, arguing persuasively about the kingdom of God.","Introgressus autem synagogam cum fiducia loquebatur per tres menses disputans et suadens de regno Dei.","ויבא אל בית הכנסת ויקרא שם בבטחון לבב וידבר עמם כשלשה חדשים ויט את לבם אל דברי מלכות האלהים׃"],["51","19","9","그러나 몇몇 사람이 회중 앞에서 주님의 길을 헐뜯으며 고집스럽게 믿지 않으려 하자, 바오로는 그들을 떠나 제자들을 따로 데리고 날마다 티란노스 학원에서 토론을 벌였다.","그러나 어떤 사람들은 오히려 마음이 더 굳어져서 믿으려 하지 않고 바울로가 전하는 그리스도교를 회중 앞에서 비난하였다. 그래서 바울로는 그들과 손을 끊고 신도들을 데리고 나가 디란노 학원에서 날마다 토론을 벌였다.","어떤 사람들은 마음이 굳어 순종하지 않고 무리 앞에서 이 도를 비방하거늘 바울이 그들을 떠나 제자들을 따로 세우고 두란노 서원에서 날마다 강론하니라","어떤 사람들은 마음이 굳어 순종치 않고 무리 앞에서 이 도를 비방하거늘 바울이 그들을 떠나 제자들을 따로 세우고 두란노 서원에서 날마다 강론하여","그러나 어떤 사람들은 바울의 말을 거부하고 공공연하게 그리스도를 거역하는 말을 떠들어댔다. 그래서 바울은 그들에게 다시는 설교하지 않으리라 마음먹고 회당을 떠났다. 그리고 신도들을 데리고 두란노의 강당에서 별도의 집회를 열고 날마다 거기서 설교를 하였다.","But when some in their obstinacy and disbelief disparaged the Way before the assembly, he withdrew and took his disciples with him and began to hold daily discussions in the lecture hall of Tyrannus.","But when divers were hardened, and believed not, but spake evil of that way before the multitude, he departed from them, and separated the disciples, disputing daily in the school of one Tyrannus.","But some of them became obstinate; they refused to believe and publicly maligned the Way. So Paul left them. He took the disciples with him and had discussions daily in the lecture hall of Tyrannus.","Cum autem quidam indurarentur et non crederent maledicentes viam coram multitudine, discedens ab eis segregavit discipulos, cotidie disputans in schola Tyranni.","אך מקצתם הקשו את לבבם ולא האמינו וידברו סרה על הדרך הזה לפני הקהל ויסר מהם ויבדל מתוכם את התלמידים וידבר אתם יום יום בבית המדרש של טורנוס׃"],["51","19","10","이 일이 두 해 동안 계속되어, 아시아에 사는 사람들은 유다인 그리스인 할 것 없이 모두 주님의 말씀을 듣게 되었다.","이렇게 두 해를 계속하는 동안에 아시아에 사는 사람들은 유다인이나 이방인이나 할 것 없이 모두 주님의 말씀을 듣게 되었다.","두 해 동안 이같이 하니 아시아에 사는 자는 유대인이나 헬라인이나 다 주의 말씀을 듣더라","이같이 두 해 동안을 하매 아시아에 사는 자는 유대인이나 헬라인이나 다 주의 말씀을 듣더라","그렇게 2년이 지나자 아시아 지방에 사는 사람들은 유대인이나 이방인이나 할 것 없이 다 주님의 복음을 듣게 되었다.","This continued for two years with the result that all the inhabitants of the province of Asia heard the word of the Lord, Jews and Greeks alike.","And this continued by the space of two years; so that all they which dwelt in Asia heard the word of the Lord Jesus, both Jews and Greeks.","This went on for two years, so that all the Jews and Greeks who lived in the province of Asia heard the word of the Lord.","Hoc autem factum est per biennium, ita ut omnes, qui habitabant in Asia, audirent verbum Domini, Iudaei atque Graeci.","וכן היתה כשנתים ימים עד כי שמעו כל ישבי אסיא גם יהודים גם יונים את דבר ישוע האדון׃"],["51","19","11","하느님께서는 바오로를 통하여 비범한 기적들을 일으키셨다.","하느님께서는 바울로를 시켜 놀라운 기적들을 행하셨는데","하나님이 바울의 손으로 놀라운 능력을 행하게 하시니","하나님이 바울의 손으로 희한한 능을 행하게 하시니","하나님께서는 바울에게 놀라운 이적을 행하는 능력을 주셨다.","So extraordinary were the mighty deeds God accomplished at the hands of Paul","And God wrought special miracles by the hands of Paul:","God did extraordinary miracles through Paul,","Virtutesque non quaslibet Deus faciebat per manus Pauli,","וגבורות גדלות עשה האלהים על ידי פולוס׃"],["51","19","12","그의 살갗에 닿았던 수건이나 앞치마를 병자들에게 대기만 해도, 그들에게서 질병이 사라지고 악령들이 물러갔다.","바울로의 몸에 닿았던 수건이나 앞치마를 병자에게 대기만 해도 병이 낫고 악령들이 쫓겨 나갔다.","심지어 사람들이 바울의 몸에서 손수건이나 앞치마를 가져다가 병든 사람에게 얹으면 그 병이 떠나고 악귀도 나가더라","심지어 사람들이 바울의 몸에서 손수건이나 앞치마를 가져다가 병든 사람에게 얹으면 그 병이 떠나고 2)악귀도 나가더라 헬, 악령","그래서 그의 손수건이나 옷가지만 병자에게 갖다 대도 병이 낫고 어떠한 귀신이라도 떠나갔다.","that when face cloths or aprons that touched his skin were applied to the sick, their diseases left them and the evil spirits came out of them.","So that from his body were brought unto the sick handkerchiefs or aprons, and the diseases departed from them, and the evil spirits went out of them.","so that even handkerchiefs and aprons that had touched him were taken to the sick, and their illnesses were cured and the evil spirits left them.","ita ut etiam super languidos deferrentur a corpore eius sudaria vel semicinctia, et recederent ab eis languores, et spiritus nequam egrederentur.","עד כי גם הניחו סודרים וחגרת מעל עור בשרו על החולים ויסורו מהם תחלאיהם וגם הרוחות הרעות יצאו׃"],["51","19","13","그러자 구마자로 돌아다니는 몇몇 유다인까지도 “바오로가 선포하는 예수님의 이름으로 너희에게 명령한다.” 하면서, 악령 들린 사람들에게 주 예수님의 이름을 이용해 보려고 시도하였다.","그런데 마귀를 쫓아낸다고 떠돌아다니는 몇몇 유다인들까지도 마귀 들린 사람들을 향해서 \"바울로가 전하는 예수의 이름으로 명령한다.\" 하면서 주 예수의 이름을 불러 마귀를 쫓아내려고 해보았다.","이에 돌아다니며 마술하는 어떤 유대인들이 시험삼아 악귀 들린 자들에게 주 예수의 이름을 불러 말하되 내가 바울이 전파하는 예수를 의지하여 너희에게 명하노라 하더라","이에 돌아다니며 마술하는 어떤 유대인들이 3)시험적으로 2)악귀 들린 자들에게 대하여 주 예수의 이름을 불러 말하되 내가 바울의 전파하는 예수를 빙자하여 너희를 명하노라 하더라 혹 망령되이헬, 악령","그때에 악마를 쫓아내는 일을 하며 돌아다니던 유대인 마술쟁이 일행이 있었다. 그들은 주 예수의 이름을 사용해서 귀신을 쫓아내 보자는 계획을 세우고는 \"바울이 전하는 예수의 이름으로 내가 네게 명령한다. 나가거라\" 하는 주문을 정하였다.","Then some itinerant Jewish exorcists tried to invoke the name of the Lord Jesus over those with evil spirits, saying, “I adjure you by the Jesus whom Paul preaches.”","Then certain of the vagabond Jews, exorcists, took upon them to call over them which had evil spirits the name of the LORD Jesus, saying, We adjure you by Jesus whom Paul preacheth.","Some Jews who went around driving out evil spirits tried to invoke the name of the Lord Jesus over those who were demon-possessed. They would say, \"In the name of Jesus, whom Paul preaches, I command you to come out.\"","Tentaverunt autem quidam et de circumeuntibus Iudaeis exorcistis invocare super eos, qui habebant spiritus malos, nomen Domini Iesu dicentes:  “Adiuro vos per Iesum, quem Paulus praedicat “.","ואנשים מן היהודים הסבבים ומלחשים הואילו להזכיר את שם ישוע האדון על אחוזי הרוחות הרעות לאמר משביע אני אתכם בישוע אשר פולוס קרא אותו׃"],["51","19","14","그런데 스케우아스라는 유다인 대사제의 일곱 아들이 그렇게 하자,","스큐아라는 유다인 대사제의 아들 일곱 형제도 이런 일을 하고 있었다.","유대의 한 제사장 스게와의 일곱 아들도 이 일을 행하더니","유대의 한 제사장 스게와의 일곱 아들도 이 일을 행하더니","이런 짓을 한 사람들은 유대의 제사장인 스게와의 일곱 아들들이었다.","When the seven sons of Sceva, a Jewish high priest, tried to do this,","And there were seven sons of one Sceva, a Jew, and chief of the priests, which did so.","Seven sons of Sceva, a Jewish chief priest, were doing this.","Erant autem cuiusdam Scevae Iudaei principis sacerdotum septem filii, qui hoc faciebant.","והעשים ככה היו שבעת בני סקוה אחד מגדולי כהני היהודים׃"],["51","19","15","악령이 그들에게 “나는 예수도 알고 바오로도 아는데 너희는 누구냐?” 하였다.","그 때 마귀 들린 사람이 \"나는 예수도 알고 바울로도 잘 아는데 도대체 너희들은 누구냐?\" 하면서","악귀가 대답하여 이르되 내가 예수도 알고 바울도 알거니와 너희는 누구냐 하며","악귀가 대답하여 가로되 예수도 내가 알고 바울도 내가 알거니와 너희는 누구냐 하며","그런데 그들이 실제로 귀신들린 사람에게 실험을 하자 \"나는 예수도 알고 바울도 안다. 그런데 너는 도대체 누구냐?\" 하고 귀신이 오히려 반발하였다.","the evil spirit said to them in reply, “Jesus I recognize, Paul I know, but who are you?”","And the evil spirit answered and said, Jesus I know, and Paul I know; but who are ye?","One day the evil spirit answered them, \"Jesus I know, and I know about Paul, but who are you?\"","Respondens autem spiritus nequam dixit eis:  “Iesum novi et Paulum scio; vos autem qui estis? “.","ויען הרוח ויאמר את ישוע אני מכיר ואת פולוס אני ידע ומי אתם׃"],["51","19","16","그때에 악령 들린 사람이 그들에게 달려들어 그들을 모조리 억누르고 짓누르는 바람에, 그들은 옷이 벗겨지고 상처를 입어 그 집에서 달아났다.","덤벼들어 그들을 모조리 때려눕혔다. 그들은 상처투성이가 되어 알몸으로 그 집에서 도망쳤다.","악귀 들린 사람이 그들에게 뛰어올라 눌러 이기니 그들이 상하여 벗은 몸으로 그 집에서 도망하는지라","악귀 들린 사람이 그 두 사람에게 뛰어올라 억제하여 이기니 저희가 상하여 벗은 몸으로 그 집에서 도망하는지라","그뿐아니라 귀신 들린 사람이 그들 가운데 두 사람에게 덤벼들어 난폭하게 구는 바람에 그들은 상처투성이가 되어 간신히 도망쳐 나왔다.","The person with the evil spirit then sprang at them and subdued them all. He so overpowered them that they fled naked and wounded from that house.","And the man in whom the evil spirit was leaped on them, and overcame them, and prevailed against them, so that they fled out of that house naked and wounded.","Then the man who had the evil spirit jumped on them and overpowered them all. He gave them such a beating that they ran out of the house naked and bleeding.","Et insiliens homo in eos, in quo erat spiritus malus, dominatus amborum invaluit contra eos, ita ut nudi et vulnerati effugerent de domo illa.","ויקפץ עליהם בעל הרוח הרעה ויגבר עליהם ויכבשם עד כי נסו מן הבית ההוא עירמים ופצועים׃"],["51","19","17","이 일이 에페소에 사는 모든 유다인과 그리스인에게 알려지니, 그들은 모두 두려움에 휩싸였다. 그리고 사람들은 주 예수님의 이름을 찬송하였다.","이 소문이 에페소에 사는 모든 유다인과 이방인들에게 퍼지자 그들은 모두 두려워하며 주 예수의 이름을 찬양하였다.","에베소에 사는 유대인과 헬라인들이 다 이 일을 알고 두려워하며 주 예수의 이름을 높이고","에베소에 거하는 유대인과 헬라인들이 다 이 일을 알고 두려워하며 주 예수의 이름을 높이고","이 소문은 순식간에 에베소에 있는 유대인과 헬라 사람에게 퍼져 온 시내는 두려움 속에 주 예수의 이름을 높이 찬양하였다.","When this became known to all the Jews and Greeks who lived in Ephesus, fear fell upon them all, and the name of the Lord Jesus was held in great esteem.","And this was known to all the Jews and Greeks also dwelling at Ephesus; and fear fell on them all, and the name of the Lord Jesus was magnified.","When this became known to the Jews and Greeks living in Ephesus, they were all seized with fear, and the name of the Lord Jesus was held in high honor.","Hoc autem notum factum est omnibus Iudaeis atque Graecis, qui habitabant Ephesi, et cecidit timor super omnes illos, et magnificabatur nomen Domini Iesu.","ויודע הדבר לכל היהודים והיונים ישבי אפסוס ויפל פחד על כלם ויגדל שם האדון ישוע׃"],["51","19","18","그러자 신자가 된 많은 사람들이 나서서 자기들이 해 온 행실을 숨김없이 고백하였다.","그리고 많은 신도들이 와서 자기들이 한 일을 숨김없이 자백하였다.","믿은 사람들이 많이 와서 자복하여 행한 일을 알리며","믿은 사람들이 많이 와서 자복하여 행한 일을 고하며","그리고 마술을 써오던 많은 사람들은 자기들이 지금까지 행한 일들을 고백하며 주문 외는 책이나 부적들을 가지고 나와서 산더미처럼 쌓아 놓고 사람들이 보는 앞에서 불살라 버렸다. 그 책값을 계산해 보았더니 은화 5만개에 해당하였다.","Many of those who had become believers came forward and openly acknowledged their former practices.","And many that believed came, and confessed, and shewed their deeds.","Many of those who believed now came and openly confessed their evil deeds.","Multique credentium veniebant confitentes et annuntiantes actus suos.","ורבים מן המאמינים באו ויתודו ויודיעו את אשר עשו׃"],["51","19","19","또 마술을 부리던 자들 가운데 많은 이가 자기 책들을 모아 모든 사람 앞에서 불살라 버렸다. 그 책들을 값으로 따져 보니 은돈 오만 냥어치나 되었다.","또 많은 마술쟁이들은 마술책을 모두 가지고 나와 모든 사람들 앞에서 불살라 버렸다. 그 책은 값으로 치면 은화로 오만 냥어치나 되었다.","또 마술을 행하던 많은 사람이 그 책을 모아 가지고 와서 모든 사람 앞에서 불사르니 그 책 값을 계산한즉 은 오만이나 되더라","또 마술을 행하던 많은 사람이 그 책을 모아 가지고 와서 모든 사람 앞에서 불사르니 그 책 값을 계산한즉 은 오만이나 되더라","(18절에 포함되어 있음)","Moreover, a large number of those who had practiced magic collected their books and burned them in public. They calculated their value and found it to be fifty thousand silver pieces.","Many of them also which used curious arts brought their books together, and burned them before all men: and they counted the price of them, and found it fifty thousand pieces of silver.","A number who had practiced sorcery brought their scrolls together and burned them publicly. When they calculated the value of the scrolls, the total came to fifty thousand drachmas.","Multi autem ex his, qui fuerant curiosa sectati, conferentes libros combusserunt coram omnibus; et computaverunt pretia illorum et invenerunt argenti quinquaginta milia.","ורבים אשר עשקו במעשי כשפים הביאו את ספריהם וישרפום לעיני כל ויחשבו את ערכם וימצאהו חמשת רבבות דינרים׃"],["51","19","20","그리하여 주님의 말씀은 더욱 힘차게 자라고 힘을 떨쳤다.","이리하여 주의 말씀은 줄기차게 퍼져 나가고 점점 더 세력을 떨쳤다.","이와 같이 주의 말씀이 힘이 있어 흥왕하여 세력을 얻으니라","이와 같이 주의 말씀이 힘이 있어 흥왕하여 세력을 얻으니라","이는 바로 하나님의 말씀에 의해서 얼마나 큰일이 온 지방에 일어났는 가를 단적으로 말해주는 것이다.","Thus did the word of the Lord continue to spread with influence and power.","So mightily grew the word of God and prevailed.","In this way the word of the Lord spread widely and grew in power.","Ita fortiter verbum Domini crescebat et convalescebat.","ודבר יהוה גבר מאד וילך הלך וחזק׃"],["51","19","21","이런 일들이 끝난 뒤, 바오로는 마케도니아와 아카이아를 거쳐 예루살렘에 가기로 작정하고, “거기에 갔다가 로마에도 가 보아야 하겠습니다.” 하고 말하였다.","이런 일이 있은 뒤에 바울로는 마케도니아와 아카이아 지방을 거쳐 예루살렘에 돌아가기로 작정하였다. 그리고 \"내가 거기에 갔다가 로마에도 가봐야겠다.\" 하고 혼잣말을 하였다.","이 일이 있은 후에 바울이 마게도냐와 아가야를 거쳐 예루살렘에 가기로 작정하여 이르되 내가 거기 갔다가 후에 로마도 보아야 하리라 하고","이 일이 다 된 후 바울이 마게도냐와 아가야로 다녀서 예루살렘에 가기를 경영하여 가로되 내가 거기 갔다가 후에 로마도 보아야 하리라 하고","그후 바울은 예루살렘으로 돌아가기 전에 우선 마게도냐와 아가야를 거쳐서 가리라고 마음 먹고는 \"그곳에 들렀다가 로마로 가야겠다\"고 중얼거렸다.","When this was concluded, Paul made up his mind to travel through Macedonia and Achaia, and then to go on to Jerusalem, saying, “After I have been there, I must visit Rome also.”","After these things were ended, Paul purposed in the spirit, when he had passed through Macedonia and Achaia, to go to Jerusalem, saying, After I have been there, I must also see Rome.","After all this had happened, Paul decided to go to Jerusalem, passing through Macedonia and Achaia. \"After I have been there,\" he said, \"I must visit Rome also.\"","His autem expletis, proposuit Paulus in Spiritu, transita Macedonia et Achaia, ire Hierosolymam, dicens:  “Postquam fuero ibi, oportet me et Romam videre “.","ויהי ככלות הדברים האלה יעץ פולוס ברוחו לעבר בתוך מקדוניא ואכיא וללכת ירושלים ויאמר אחרי היותי שמה ראה אראה גם את רומי׃"],["51","19","22","그래서 그는 자기의 협력자들 가운데에서 티모테오와 에라스토스 두 사람을 마케도니아로 보내고, 자기는 얼마 동안 아시아에 더 머물렀다.","그래서 그는 자기 협조자 중에서 디모테오와 에라스도 두 사람을 마케도니아로 앞서 보내고 자기는 얼마 동안 아시아에 더 눌러 있었다.","자기를 돕는 사람 중에서 디모데와 에라스도 두 사람을 마게도냐로 보내고 자기는 아시아에 얼마 동안 더 있으니라","자기를 돕는 사람 중에서 디모데와 에라스도 두 사람을 마게도냐로 보내고 자기는 아시아에 얼마간 더 있으니라","바울은 먼저 그를 늘 도와주는 디모데와 에라스도를 마게도냐로 먼저 보낸 뒤 자신은 얼마동안 더 아시아에 머물러 있었다.","Then he sent to Macedonia two of his assistants, Timothy and Erastus, while he himself stayed for a while in the province of Asia.","So he sent into Macedonia two of them that ministered unto him, Timotheus and Erastus; but he himself stayed in Asia for a season.","He sent two of his helpers, Timothy and Erastus, to Macedonia, while he stayed in the province of Asia a little longer.","Mittens autem in Macedoniam duos ex ministrantibus sibi, Timotheum et Erastum, ipse remansit ad tempus in Asia.","וישלח שנים מן המשרתים אתו את טימותיוס ואת ארסטוס אל מקדוניא והוא התמהמה עוד ימים באסיא׃"],["51","19","23","그 무렵 주님의 길 때문에 적지 않은 소동이 일어났다.","이 무렵에 에페소에서는 그리스도교 때문에 적지 않은 소란이 일어났다.","그 때쯤 되어 이 도로 말미암아 적지 않은 소동이 있었으니","그 때쯤 되어 이 도로 인하여 적지 않은 소동이 있었으니","바로 그무렵 에베소에서는 그리스도인들 때문에 큰 소동이 일어났다.","About that time a serious disturbance broke out concerning the Way.","And the same time there arose no small stir about that way.","About that time there arose a great disturbance about the Way.","Facta est autem in illo tempore turbatio non minima de via.","ותהי בעת ההיא מהומה לא קטנה על אדות דרך יהוה׃"],["51","19","24","데메트리오스라는 은장이가 있었는데, 그는 은으로 아르테미스 신당 모형을 만드는 사람으로서 장인들에게 적지 않은 돈벌이를 시켜 주고 있었다.","데메드리오라는 은장이가 은으로 여신 아르데미스의 신당 모형들을 만들어 직공들에게 큰 돈벌이를 시켜주고 있었는데","즉 데메드리오라 하는 어떤 은장색이 은으로 아데미의 신상 모형을 만들어 직공들에게 적지 않은 벌이를 하게 하더니","즉 데메드리오라 하는 어떤 은장색이 아데미의 은감실을 만들어 직공들로 적지 않은 벌이를 하게 하더니","그 소동은 데메드리오라는 은세공업자가 일으킨 것이었다. 그는 많은 직공을 두고 에베소의 여신 아데미 신전 모형을 만들어 큰 장사를 벌여 온 인물이었다.","There was a silversmith named Demetrius who made miniature silver shrines of Artemis and provided no little work for the craftsmen.","For a certain man named Demetrius, a silversmith, which made silver shrines for Diana, brought no small gain unto the craftsmen;","A silversmith named Demetrius, who made silver shrines of Artemis, brought in no little business for the craftsmen.","Demetrius enim quidam nomine, argentarius, faciens aedes argenteas Dianae praestabat artificibus non modicum quaestum;","כי צורף כסף אחד דמטריוס שמו עשה היכלות כסף של ארטמיס המציא לחרשים משכרת לא מעט׃"],["51","19","25","데메트리오스가 그 장인들과 또 같은 일에 종사하는 다른 사람들을 모아 놓고 말하였다. “여러분, 여러분도 알다시피 우리는 이 직업으로 부유하게 되었습니다.","하루는 자기 직공들과 동업자들을 한자리에 불러놓고 이런 말을 하였다. \"여러분, 여러분도 알다시피 우리는 이 사업으로 잘 살아왔습니다.","그가 그 직공들과 그러한 영업하는 자들을 모아 이르되 여러분도 알거니와 우리의 풍족한 생활이 이 생업에 있는데","그가 그 직공들과 이러한 영업하는 자들을 모아 이르되 여러분도 알거니와 우리의 유족한 생활이 이 업에 있는데","그가 자기 직공과 동업자들을 한자리에 불러 모아놓고 말하였다. \"여러분, 우리는 이 사업으로 먹고 삽니다.","He called a meeting of these and other workers in related crafts and said, “Men, you know well that our prosperity derives from this work.","Whom he called together with the workmen of like occupation, and said, Sirs, ye know that by this craft we have our wealth.","He called them together, along with the workmen in related trades, and said: \"Men, you know we receive a good income from this business.","quos congregans et eos, qui eiusmodi erant opifices, dixit:  “Viri, scitis quia de hoc artificio acquisitio est nobis;","ויקהל אתם ואת שאר העסקים במלאכה ההיא ויאמר אנשים אתם ידעים כי מן המלאכה הזאת עשינו כבוד׃"],["51","19","26","그런데 여러분이 보고 듣는 대로, 저 바오로라는 자가 사람의 손으로 만든 것은 신이 아니라고 하면서, 에페소만이 아니라 거의 온 아시아 지방에 걸쳐 수많은 사람을 설득하고 유인하였습니다.","그런데 그 바울로라는 자가 사람의 손으로 만든 것은 신이 아니라고 하면서 이 에페소에서뿐만 아니라 거의 아시아 전역에서 많은 사람들을 설득하여 마음을 돌려놓았다는 사실을 여러분은 보고 들었을 것입니다.","이 바울이 에베소뿐 아니라 거의 전 아시아를 통하여 수많은 사람을 권유하여 말하되 사람의 손으로 만든 것들은 신이 아니라 하니 이는 그대들도 보고 들은 것이라","이 바울이 에베소 뿐아니라 거의 아시아 전부를 통하여 허다한 사람을 권유하여 말하되 사람의 손으로 만든 것들은 신이 아니라 하니 이는 그대들도 보고 들은 것이라","그런데 여러분이 이미 듣고 본 바와 같이 저 바울이라는 작자가 손으로 만든 것은 신이 아니라고 많은 사람들에게 떠벌리고 다니는 통에 우리의 장사는 이제 말이 아닙니다. 여기 에베소뿐만 아니라 아시아 전체가 이런 실정입니다.","As you can now see and hear, not only in Ephesus but throughout most of the province of Asia this Paul has persuaded and misled a great number of people by saying that gods made by hands are not gods at all.","Moreover ye see and hear, that not alone at Ephesus, but almost throughout all Asia, this Paul hath persuaded and turned away much people, saying that they be no gods, which are made with hands:","And you see and hear how this fellow Paul has convinced and led astray large numbers of people here in Ephesus and in practically the whole province of Asia. He says that man-made gods are no gods at all.","et videtis et auditis quia non solum Ephesi, sed paene totius Asiae Paulus hic suadens avertit multam turbam dicens quoniam non sunt dii, qui manibus fiunt.","ואתם ראים ושמעים אשר לא באפסוס לבדה כי גם כמעט באסיא כלה זה פולוס פתה והדיח המון עם רב לאמר לא אלהים אלה הנעשים בידים׃"],["51","19","27","그래서 우리의 사업이 나쁜 평판을 받을 뿐만 아니라 위대한 여신 아르테미스의 신전도 무시를 당하고, 마침내 온 아시아와 온 세상이 숭배하는 이 여신께서 위엄마저 상실하실 위험에 놓였습니다.”","이대로 가다가는 우리의 사업이 타격을 입게 될 뿐만 아니라 위대한 여신 아르데미스 신당이 괄시를 받게 되고 마침내는 온 아시아와 온 세계가 숭상하는 이 여신의 위신이 땅에 떨어지고 말 터이니 참으로 위험합니다.\"","우리의 이 영업이 천하여질 위험이 있을 뿐 아니라 큰 여신 아데미의 신전도 무시 당하게 되고 온 아시아와 천하가 위하는 그의 위엄도 떨어질까 하노라 하더라","우리의 이 영업만 천하여질 위험이 있을 뿐아니라 큰 여신 아데미의 전각도 경홀이 여김이 되고 온 아시아와 천하가 위하는 그의 위엄도 떨어질까 하노라 하더라","물론 나는 이런 형편에서 우리 사업에 대한 전망이나 수입이 줄어든다는 것만을 말하려는 건 아닙니다. 이대로 가다가는 위대한 여신 아데미 신전이 그 영향력을 잃게 되고, 이 아시아 지방은 말할 것도 없고 세계 모든 사람들이 장엄한 여신 아데미를 잊어버리게 될 것입니다.\"","The danger grows, not only that our business will be discredited, but also that the temple of the great goddess Artemis will be of no account, and that she whom the whole province of Asia and all the world worship will be stripped of her magnificence.”","So that not only this our craft is in danger to be set at nought; but also that the temple of the great goddess Diana should be despised, and her magnificence should be destroyed, whom all Asia and the world worshippeth.","There is danger not only that our trade will lose its good name, but also that the temple of the great goddess Artemis will be discredited, and the goddess herself, who is worshiped throughout the province of Asia and the world, will be robbed of her divine majesty.\"","Non solum autem haec periclitatur nobis pars in redargutionem venire, sed et magnae deae Dianae templum in nihilum reputari, et destrui incipiet maiestas eius, quam tota Asia et orbis colit “.","ועתה עוד מעט ולא לבד חלקנו זה יהיה לבוז כי אם גם היכל ארטמיס המלכת הגדולה יחשב לאין ותכלה תפארתה אשר כל אסיא וכל ישבי תבל מכבדים אותה׃"],["51","19","28","그들은 이 말을 듣고 격분하여, “에페소인들의 아르테미스는 위대하시다!” 하고 외쳤다.","이 말을 들은 사람들이 격분하여 \"에페소의 여신 아르데미스 만세!\" 하고 아우성쳤고, 그 소리와 함께","그들이 이 말을 듣고 분노가 가득하여 외쳐 이르되 크다 에베소 사람의 아데미여 하니","저희가 이 말을 듣고 분이 가득하여 외쳐 가로되 크다 에베소 사람의 아데미여 하니","이 연설을 들은 사람들은 화가 머리끝까지 치밀어 \"에베소의 여신 아데미는 위대하다\" 하고 소리 지르기 시작하였다.","When they heard this, they were filled with fury and began to shout, “Great is Artemis of the Ephesians!”","And when they heard these sayings, they were full of wrath, and cried out, saying, Great is Diana of the Ephesians.","When they heard this, they were furious and began shouting: \"Great is Artemis of the Ephesians!\"","His auditis, repleti sunt ira et clamabant dicentes:  “Magna Diana Ephesiorum! “;","ויהי כשמעם את דבריו וימלאו חמה ויצעקו לאמר גדולה ארטמיס של האפסיים׃"],["51","19","29","그래서 온 도시가 혼란에 빠졌다. 사람들은 바오로의 동행인 마케도니아 사람 가이오스와 아리스타르코스를 붙들어, 일제히 극장으로 몰려갔다.","온 도시가 소란해졌다. 사람들은 바울로의 동행인 마케도니아 사람 가이오와 아리스타르고를 붙들어가지고 떼를 지어 극장으로 몰려갔다.","온 시내가 요란하여 바울과 같이 다니는 마게도냐 사람 가이오와 아리스다고를 붙들어 일제히 연극장으로 달려 들어가는지라","온 성이 요란하여 바울과 같이 다니는 마게도냐 사람 가이오와 아리스다고를 잡아가지고 일제히 연극장으로 달려들어 가는지라","시가에는 대혼란이 일어났다. 사람들은 바울과 함께 다니던 가이오와 아리스다고를 재판에 붙이려고 강제로 끌고 원형극장으로 몰려갔다.","The city was filled with confusion, and the people rushed with one accord into the theater, seizing Gaius and Aristarchus, the Macedonians, Paul’s traveling companions.","And the whole city was filled with confusion: and having caught Gaius and Aristarchus, men of Macedonia, Paul's companions in travel, they rushed with one accord into the theatre.","Soon the whole city was in an uproar. The people seized Gaius Aristarchus, Paul's traveling companions from Macedonia, and rushed as one man into the theater.","et impleta est civitas confusione, et impetum fecerunt uno animo in theatrum, rapto Gaio et Aristarcho Macedonibus, comitibus Pauli.","ותמלא כל העיר מבוכה ויסערו כלם יחדו אל התאטרון ויחטפו אתם את גיוס ואת ארסטרכוס אנשים מקדונים וחברי פולוס במסעיו׃"],["51","19","30","바오로가 군중 속으로 들어가려고 하였으나 제자들이 그를 말렸다.","그 때 바울로가 그 군중 속으로 뛰어들려고 하였으나 신도들이 그를 말렸다.","바울이 백성 가운데로 들어가고자 하나 제자들이 말리고","바울이 백성 가운데로 들어가고자 하나 제자들이 말리고","바울이 이것을 보고 안으로 들어가려고 하였으나 제자들이 들어가지 못하게 말렸다.","Paul wanted to go before the crowd, but the disciples would not let him,","And when Paul would have entered in unto the people, the disciples suffered him not.","Paul wanted to appear before the crowd, but the disciples would not let him.","Paulo autem volente intrare in populum, non permiserunt discipuli;","ויאל פולוס לבוא אל תוך העם ולא הניחו לו התלמידים׃"],["51","19","31","바오로와 친하게 지내던 몇몇 아시아 지방 장관들도 바오로에게 사람들을 보내어 극장 안으로 들어가지 말라고 권고하였다.","바울로와 가까이 지내던 몇몇 아시아 지방장관들도 전갈을 보내어 바울로더러 극장에 들어가지 말라고 간청하였다.","또 아시아 관리 중에 바울의 친구된 어떤 이들이 그에게 통지하여 연극장에 들어가지 말라 권하더라","또 아시아 관원 중에 바울의 친구된 어떤이들이 그에게 통지하여 연극장에 들어가지 말라 권하더라","바울의 친구인 그 지방의 로마 관리들도 바울에게 사람을 보내 안에 들어가면 위험을 당할테니 제발 들어가지 말라고 하였다.","and even some of the Asiarchs who were friends of his sent word to him advising him not to venture into the theater.","And certain of the chief of Asia, which were his friends, sent unto him, desiring him that he would not adventure himself into the theatre.","Even some of the officials of the province, friends of Paul, sent him a message begging him not to venture into the theater.","quidam autem de Asiarchis, qui erant amici eius, miserunt ad eum rogantes, ne se daret in theatrum.","וגם מקצת ראשי אסיא אשר היו אהביו שלחו אליו ויזהירו אתו אשר לא ימלאהו לבו לבוא אל התאטרון׃"],["51","19","32","한편 이 사람들은 이렇게 외치고 저 사람들은 저렇게 외치는 바람에 집회는 매우 혼란스러웠는데, 대부분의 사람은 무엇 때문에 모여들었는지 알지도 못하였다.","극장에 모인 사람들이 저마다 이러니 저러니 하고 떠드는 바람에 장내는 온통 뒤범벅이 되어 대부분의 사람들은 무엇 때문에 모여들었는지조차 알지 못하였다.","사람들이 외쳐 어떤 이는 이런 말을, 어떤 이는 저런 말을 하니 모인 무리가 분란하여 태반이나 어찌하여 모였는지 알지 못하더라","사람들이 외쳐 혹은 이 말을, 혹은 저 말을 하니 모인 무리가 분란하여 태반이나 어찌하여 모였는지 알지 못하더라","극장 안은 군중들이 저마다 이 사람은 이렇게 떠들고 저 사람은 저렇게 떠들어댔기 때문에 수라장이 되고 말았다. 사실 대부분의 사람들은 자기가 왜 이 자리에 와 있는지 조차도 알지 못하였다.","Meanwhile, some were shouting one thing, others something else; the assembly was in chaos, and most of the people had no idea why they had come together.","Some therefore cried one thing, and some another: for the assembly was confused: and the more part knew not wherefore they were come together.","The assembly was in confusion: Some were shouting one thing, some another. Most of the people did not even know why they were there.","Alii autem aliud clamabant; erat enim ecclesia confusa, et plures nesciebant qua ex causa convenissent.","ויצעקו שם אלה בכה ואלה בכה כי מבוכה גדולה היתה בקהל ורבם לא ידעו על מה זה נאספו׃"],["51","19","33","그때에 유다인들이 알렉산드로스를 앞으로 밀어내자, 군중 가운데에서 몇 사람이 그에게 상황을 이야기해 주었다. 그래서 알렉산드로스가 조용히 하라고 손짓하고 군중에게 설명하려고 하였다.","그 때 유다인들이 알렉산더라는 사람을 앞으로 밀어내자 군중 가운데서 몇 사람이 그를 끌어내 세웠다. 그래서 알렉산더가 군중들에게 조용히 해달라고 손짓을 하며 자기를 변명하려고 하였다.","유대인들이 무리 가운데서 알렉산더를 권하여 앞으로 밀어내니 알렉산더가 손짓하며 백성에게 변명하려 하나","유대인들이 무리 가운데서 알렉산더를 권하여 앞으로 밀어내니 알렉산더가 손짓하며 백성에게 발명하려 하나","알렉산더가 유대인들에게 떠밀려 군중 앞에 섰다. 그는 조용히 해줄 것을 부탁하고 말을 시작하려고 하였다.","Some of the crowd prompted Alexander, as the Jews pushed him forward, and Alexander signaled with his hand that he wished to explain something to the gathering.","And they drew Alexander out of the multitude, the Jews putting him forward. And Alexander beckoned with the hand, and would have made his defence unto the people.","The Jews pushed Alexander to the front, and some of the crowd shouted instructions to him. He motioned for silence in order to make a defense before the people.","De turba autem instruxerunt Alexandrum, propellentibus eum Iudaeis; Alexander ergo, manu silentio postulato, volebat rationem reddere populo.","וימשכו מתוך ההמון את אלכסנדר והיהודים דחו אתו עד צאתו וינף אלכסנדר את ידו ויבקש להצטדק לפני העם׃"],["51","19","34","그러나 군중은 그가 유다인이라는 것을 알고, 모두 한목소리로 거의 두 시간 동안이나 “에페소인들의 아르테미스는 위대하시다!” 하고 외쳐 댔다.","그러나 군중들은 그가 유다인인 것을 알고는 큰소리로 일제히 \"에페소의 여신 아르데미스 만세!\" 하고 두 시간 동안이나 외쳤다.","그들은 그가 유대인인 줄 알고 다 한 소리로 외쳐 이르되 크다 에베소 사람의 아데미여 하기를 두 시간이나 하더니","저희는 그가 유대인인줄 알고 다 한 소리로 외쳐 가로되 크다 에베소 사람의 아데미여 하기를 두시 동안이나 하더니","그러나 그가 유대인이라는 것을 안 군중은 다시 소리 지르며 \"에베소의 여신 아데미는 위대하다! 에베소의 여신 아데미는 위대하다!\" 하고 두 시간 가깝게 떠들어댔다.","But when they recognized that he was a Jew, they all shouted in unison, for about two hours, “Great is Artemis of the Ephesians!”","But when they knew that he was a Jew, all with one voice about the space of two hours cried out, Great is Diana of the Ephesians.","But when they realized he was a Jew, they all shouted in unison for about two hours: \"Great is Artemis of the Ephesians!\"","Quem ut cognoverunt Iudaeum esse, vox facta est una omnium quasi per horas duas clamantium:  “Magna Diana Ephesiorum “.","והמה כהכירם כי הוא יהודי נשאו כלם קול ויצעקו כשתי שעות לאמר גדולה ארטמיס של האפסיים׃"],["51","19","35","마침내 서기관이 군중을 진정시키고 나서 말하였다. “에페소 시민 여러분, 에페소인들의 도시가 위대한 아르테미스와 하늘에서 내려온 그 신상을 지키는 곳임을 모르는 사람이 어디 있습니까?","드디어 에페소 시장이 군중을 진정시키고 나서 이렇게 말하였다. \"에페소 시민 여러분, 이 에페소 시가 위대한 여신 아르데미스의 신당과 제우스 신의 아들을 숭배하는 도시라는 것을 모르는 사람은 하나도 없습니다.","서기장이 무리를 진정시키고 이르되 에베소 사람들아 에베소 시가 큰 아데미와 제우스에게서 내려온 우상의 신전지기가 된 줄을 누가 알지 못하겠느냐","서기장이 무리를 안돈시키고 이르되 에베소 사람들아 에베소 성이 큰 아데미와 및 4)쓰스에게서 내려온 우상의 전각지기가 된줄을 누가 알지 못하겠느냐 혹 하늘로서","결국 에베소 시장이 군중을 겨우 진정시킨 뒤 말하였다. \"에베소 시민 여러분, 에베소가 위대한 여신 아데미와 하늘에서 내려온 신상을 숭배하는 도시라는 것은 누구나 다 아는 일입니다.","Finally the town clerk restrained the crowd and said, “You Ephesians, what person is there who does not know that the city of the Ephesians is the guardian of the temple of the great Artemis and of her image that fell from the sky?","And when the townclerk had appeased the people, he said, Ye men of Ephesus, what man is there that knoweth not how that the city of the Ephesians is a worshipper of the great goddess Diana, and of the image which fell down from Jupiter?","The city clerk quieted the crowd and said: \"Men of Ephesus, doesn't all the world know that the city of Ephesus is the guardian of the temple of the great Artemis and of her image, which fell from heaven?","Et cum sedasset scriba turbam, dixit:  “Viri Ephesii, quis enim est hominum, qui nesciat Ephesiorum civitatem cultricem esse magnae Dianae et simulacri a Iove delapsi?","ויהס סופר העיר את העם ויאמר אנשי אפסוס מי הוא האיש אשר לא ידע כי העיר אפסוס סכנת היא להיכל של ארטמיס המלכת הגדולה ולצלמה היורד מן השמים׃"],["51","19","36","이것은 부인할 수 없는 사실이므로, 여러분은 진정하고 절대로 경솔한 행동을 해서는 안 됩니다.","이것은 아무도 부인할 수 없는 일이니 여러분은 진정하고 절대로 경솔한 행동을 하지 마십시오.","이 일이 그렇지 않다 할 수 없으니 너희가 가만히 있어서 무엇이든지 경솔히 아니하여야 하리라","이 일이 그렇지 않다 할수 없으니 너희가 가만히 있어서 무엇이든지 경솔히 아니하여야 하리라","이것은 아무도 부인할 수 없는 사실입니다. 그러니 여러분은 진정하고 경솔한 행동을 해서는 안됩니다.","Since these things are undeniable, you must calm yourselves and not do anything rash.","Seeing then that these things cannot be spoken against, ye ought to be quiet, and to do nothing rashly.","Therefore, since these facts are undeniable, you ought to be quiet and not do anything rash.","Cum ergo his contradici non possit, oportet vos sedatos esse et nihil temere agere.","ויען אשר אין לכחש בדברים האלה ראוי לכם להיות שקטים ולא לעשות דבר נמהר׃"],["51","19","37","그런데 여러분은 신전 강도도 아니고 우리 여신을 모독하지도 않은 이 사람들을 끌고 왔습니다.","여러분이 끌고 온 이 사람들은 우리 신당의 물건을 훔친 일도 없고 우리 여신을 모독한 일도 없습니다.","신전의 물건을 도둑질하지도 아니하였고 우리 여신을 비방하지도 아니한 이 사람들을 너희가 붙잡아 왔으니","전각의 물건을 도적질하지도 아니하였고 우리 여신을 훼방하지도 아니한 이 사람들을 너희가 잡아 왔으니","여러분들이 여기에 데리고 온 이 두 사람은 여신의 신전에서 무엇을 훔쳐 내치도 않았고 또 여신을 모독한 일도 없습니다.","The men you brought here are not temple robbers, nor have they insulted our goddess.","For ye have brought hither these men, which are neither robbers of churches, nor yet blasphemers of your goddess.","You have brought these men here, though they have neither robbed temples nor blasphemed our goddess.","Adduxistis enim homines istos neque sacrilegos neque blasphemantes deam nostram.","כי הבאתם את האנשים האלה אשר אינם גזלי מקדש גם אינם מגדפי מלכתכם׃"],["51","19","38","데메트리오스와 그의 동료 장인들은 누구를 걸어 송사할 일이 있으면, 법정이 열려 있고 지방 총독들도 있으니 당사자들끼리 고소하십시오.","데메드리오와 그의 직공들이 누구를 걸어서 고소할 일이 있다면 법정이 열리는 날도 있고 지방장관들도 있으니 당사자들이 직접 법에 호소하시오.","만일 데메드리오와 그와 함께 있는 직공들이 누구에게 고발할 것이 있으면 재판 날도 있고 총독들도 있으니 피차 고소할 것이요","만일 데메드리오와 및 그와 함께 있는 직공들이 누구에게 송사할 것이 있거든 재판 날도 있고 총독들도 있으니 피차 고소할 것이요","만일 데메드리오와 직공들이 이 두 사람을 고소할 생각이 있으면 법정이 열려 있으니까 재판관들을 찾아가십시오. 그러면 즉시 처리해 줄 것입니다. 법적인 절차를 밟아서 진행해 주시기 바랍니다.","If Demetrius and his fellow craftsmen have a complaint against anyone, courts are in session, and there are proconsuls. Let them bring charges against one another.","Wherefore if Demetrius, and the craftsmen which are with him, have a matter against any man, the law is open, and there are deputies: let them implead one another.","If, then, Demetrius and his fellow craftsmen have a grievance against anybody, the courts are open and there are proconsuls. They can press charges.","Quod si Demetrius et, qui cum eo sunt, artifices habent adversus aliquem causam, conventus forenses aguntur, et proconsules sunt: accusent invicem.","לכן אם לדמטריוס ולחרשים אשר אתו דבר ריב עם איש הנה לנו ימי בית דין ושרי המדינה ויביאו אליהם את ריבם׃"],["51","19","39","그리고 다른 요구 사항이 있으면 정식 집회에서 해결하십시오.","만일 여러분이 이보다 더한 문제가 있거든 합법적인 집회에서 해결짓도록 하시오.","만일 그 외에 무엇을 원하면 정식으로 민회에서 결정할지라","만일 그 외에 무엇을 원하거든 정식으로 민회에서 결단할찌라","만일 그 밖에 또 다른 불평이 있으면 정기 시의회에 내놓으면 됩니다.","If you have anything further to investigate, let the matter be settled in the lawful assembly,","But if ye enquire any thing concerning other matters, it shall be determined in a lawful assembly.","If there is anything further you want to bring up, it must be settled in a legal assembly.","Si quid autem ulterius quaeritis, in legitima ecclesia poterit absolvi.","ואם תבקשו דבר אחר שפוט ישפט בקהל כפי החק׃"],["51","19","40","사실 우리는 오늘의 일 때문에 소요죄로 고소를 당할 위험이 있습니다. 그런데 소요의 사유가 없으니 우리는 이 난동을 해명하지 못할 것입니다.” 그는 이렇게 말하고 나서 집회를 해산시켰다.","우리는 오늘의 사건 때문에 소요죄로 몰릴 위험이 있습니다. 오늘 여러분이 피운 소동은 불법이니 만일 그것이 문제가 된다면 해명할 길이 없을 것입니다.\"","오늘 아무 까닭도 없는 이 일에 우리가 소요 사건으로 책망 받을 위험이 있고 우리는 이 불법 집회에 관하여 보고할 자료가 없다 하고","오늘 아무 까닭도 없는 이 일에 우리가 소요의 사건으로 책망 받을 위험이 있고 우리가 이 불법 집회에 관하여 보고할 재료가 없다 하고","오늘의 이 소동은 정당한 이유가 한 가지도 성립되지 않기 때문에 만일 로마 정부로부터 문책이라도 당한다면 대답하기가 곤란합니다.\"","for, as it is, we are in danger of being charged with rioting because of today’s conduct. There is no cause for it. We shall [not] be able to give a reason for this demonstration.” With these words he dismissed the assembly.","For we are in danger to be called in question for this day's uproar, there being no cause whereby we may give an account of this concourse.","As it is, we are in danger of being charged with rioting because of today's events. In that case we would not be able to account for this commotion, since there is no reason for it.\"","Nam et periclitamur argui seditionis hodiernae, cum nullus obnoxius sit, de quo non possimus reddere rationem concursus istius “. Et cum haec dixisset, dimisit ecclesiam.","כי הלא בסכנה אנחנו להתחיב במרד בעבור היום הזה ודבר אין לנו לתת דין וחשבון על הרגשה הזאת׃"],["51","19","41",null,"이렇게 말하고 그는 군중을 해산시켰다.","이에 그 모임을 흩어지게 하니라","이에 그 모임을 흩어지게 하니라","그러고 나서 시장이 군중을 해산시키자 그들은 다 흩어졌다.",null,"And when he had thus spoken, he dismissed the assembly.","After he had said this, he dismissed the assembly.",null,"ויהי כאשר כלה לדבר כדברים האלה וישלח את הקהל׃"],["51","20","1","그 소동이 가라앉은 뒤에 바오로는 제자들을 불러오게 하여 그들을 격려한 다음, 작별 인사를 하고 마케도니아로 가려고 길을 떠났다.","그 소동이 가라앉은 뒤에 바울로는 신도들을 불러 격려한 다음, 작별 인사를 하고 그 곳을 떠나 마케도니아로 갔다.","소요가 그치매 바울은 제자들을 불러 권한 후에 작별하고 떠나 마게도냐로 가니라","소요가 그치매 바울이 제자들을 불러 권한 후에 작별하고 떠나 마게도냐로 가니라","소란이 어느 정도 진정되자 바울은 신도들을 불러 마지막 설교를 하고 마게도냐로 떠났다.","When the disturbance was over, Paul had the disciples summoned and, after encouraging them, he bade them farewell and set out on his journey to Macedonia.","And after the uproar was ceased, Paul called unto him the disciples, and embraced them, and departed for to go into Macedonia.","When the uproar had ended, Paul sent for the disciples and, after encouraging them, said good-by and set out for Macedonia.","Postquam autem cessavit tumultus, accersitis Paulus discipulis et exhortatus eos, valedixit et profectus est, ut iret in Macedoniam.","ואחרי אשר שקטה המהומה קרא פולוס לתלמידים ויברכם ויצא ללכת אל מקדוניא׃"],["51","20","2","바오로는 그곳 지방들을 거쳐 가는 동안에 신자들을 여러 가지 말로 격려하면서 그리스까지 갔다.","바울로는 지나는 길에 그 지방의 교우들을 만나 여러 가지로 격려하고 그리스로 갔다.","그 지방으로 다녀가며 여러 말로 제자들에게 권하고 헬라에 이르러","그 지경으로 다녀가며 여러 말로 제자들에게 권하고 헬라에 이르러","가는 도중에도 지나가는 여러 도시에 들러서 설교를 하였다. 그리고 헬라에 도착하여","As he traveled throughout those regions, he provided many words of encouragement for them. Then he arrived in Greece,","And when he had gone over those parts, and had given them much exhortation, he came into Greece,","He traveled through that area, speaking many words of encouragement to the people, and finally arrived in Greece,","Cum autem perambulasset partes illas et exhortatus eos fuisset multo sermone, venit ad Graeciam;","ויעבר במדינות ההן ויזהר אתם בדברים רבים ויבא אל ארץ יון׃"],["51","20","3","거기에서 석 달을 지낸 뒤에 배를 타고 시리아로 가려고 하였지만, 유다인들이 그를 해칠 음모를 꾸몄으므로 마케도니아를 거쳐 돌아가기로 결정하였다.","거기에서 석 달을 지낸 뒤에 배를 타고 시리아로 건너가려고 하였으나 자기를 해치려는 유다인들의 음모를 알아채고 다시 마케도니아를 거쳐 본국으로 돌아가기로 작정하였다.","거기 석 달 동안 있다가 배 타고 수리아로 가고자 할 그 때에 유대인들이 자기를 해하려고 공모하므로 마게도냐를 거쳐 돌아가기로 작정하니","거기 석 달을 있다가 배 타고 수리아로 가고자 할 그 때에 유대인들이 자기를 해하려고 공모하므로 마게도냐로 다녀 돌아가기를 작정하니","석 달을 거기서 지낸 뒤 배를 타고 수리아로 건너가려고 준비하였다. 그러나 유대인들이 그의 목숨을 노리고 있는 기미를 알아차리고 북쪽 마게도냐로 먼저 가기로 결정하였다.","where he stayed for three months. But when a plot was made against him by the Jews as he was about to set sail for Syria, he decided to return by way of Macedonia.","And there abode three months. And when the Jews laid wait for him, as he was about to sail into Syria, he purposed to return through Macedonia.","where he stayed three months. Because the Jews made a plot against him just as he was about to sail for Syria, he decided to go back through Macedonia.","cumque fecisset menses tres, factae sunt illi insidiae a Iudaeis navigaturo in Syriam, habuitque consilium, ut reverteretur per Macedoniam.","וישב שם שלשה חדשים ויהי באמרו ללכת אל סוריא ויארבו לו היהודים ויגמר בלבו לשוב דרך מקדוניא׃"],["51","20","4","베로이아 사람 피로스의 아들 소파테르, 테살로니카 사람 아리스타르코스와 세쿤두스, 데르베 사람 가이오스, 티모테오, 아시아 사람 티키코스와 트로피모스가 바오로와 동행하였다.","그와 동행한 사람은 베레아 사람 비로의 아들 소바드로와 데살로니카 사람 아리스다르코와 세군도, 데르베 사람 가이오와 디모테오, 아시아 사람 디키고와 드로피모 등이었다.","아시아까지 함께 가는 자는 베뢰아 사람 부로의 아들 소바더와 데살로니가 사람 아리스다고와 세군도와 더베 사람 가이오와 및 디모데와 아시아 사람 두기고와 드로비모라","1)아시아까지 함께 가는 자는 베뢰아 사람 부로의 아들 소바더와 데살로니가 사람 아리스다고와 세군도와 더베 사람 가이오와 및 디모데와 아시아 사람 두기고와 드로비모라 어떤 사본에는, 「아시아까지」가 없음","바울과 같이 아시아까지 동행한 사람은 베뢰아 출신 부로의 아들 소바더, 데살로니가에서 온 아리스다고와 세군도, 더베 사람 가이오, 디모데였다. 두기고와 드로비모는 자기들의 고향인 아시아로 돌아가는 길이었다.","Sopater, the son of Pyrrhus, from Beroea, accompanied him, as did Aristarchus and Secundus from Thessalonica, Gaius from Derbe, Timothy, and Tychicus and Trophimus from Asia","And there accompanied him into Asia Sopater of Berea; and of the Thessalonians, Aristarchus and Secundus; and Gaius of Derbe, and Timotheus; and of Asia, Tychicus and Trophimus.","He was accompanied by Sopater son of Pyrrhus from Berea, Aristarchus and Secundus from Thessalonica, Gaius from Derbe, Timothy also, and Tychicus and Trophimus from the province of Asia.","Comitabatur autem eum Sopater Pyrrhi Beroeensis, Thessalonicensium vero Aristarchus et Secundus et Gaius Derbeus et Timotheus, Asiani vero Tychicus et Trophimus.","וילכו אתו עד לאסיא סופטרוס הברואי ומן התסלוניקים ארסטרכוס וסקונדוס וגיוס הדרבי וטימותיוס ומן אסיא טוכיקוס וטרופימוס׃"],["51","20","5","이들은 트로아스에 먼저 가서 우리를 기다렸고,","그들은 트로아스에 먼저 가서 우리 일행을 기다리고 있었고","그들은 먼저 가서 드로아에서 우리를 기다리더라","그들은 먼저 가서 드로아에서 우리를 기다리더라","그들은 드로아에 먼저 가서 우리를 기다리고 있었고,","who went on ahead and waited for us at Troas.","These going before tarried for us at Troas.","These men went on ahead and waited for us at Troas.","Hi cum praecessissent, sustinebant nos Troade;","ואלה הלכו לפנינו ויוחילו לנו בטרואס׃"],["51","20","6","우리는 무교절이 지난 뒤에 필리피에서 배를 타고 닷새 만에 트로아스에 있는 그들과 합류하여, 그곳에서 이레 동안 지냈다.","우리는 무교절이 지난 뒤에 필립비를 떠나 배를 타고 닷새 후에 트로아스에 이르러 그들을 만나 거기에서 이레 동안 같이 지냈다.","우리는 무교절 후에 빌립보에서 배로 떠나 닷새 만에 드로아에 있는 그들에게 가서 이레를 머무니라","우리는 무교절 후에 빌립보에서 배로 떠나 닷새만에 드로아에 있는 그들에게 가서 이레를 머무니라","우리는 무교절 기간이 끝나는 즉시로 헬라의 북쪽에 있는 빌립보에서 배를 타고 닷새 후에 드로아로 갔다. 그리고 거기서 우리는 한 주일을 지냈다.","We sailed from Philippi after the feast of Unleavened Bread, and rejoined them five days later in Troas, where we spent a week.","And we sailed away from Philippi after the days of unleavened bread, and came unto them to Troas in five days; where we abode seven days.","But we sailed from Philippi after the Feast of Unleavened Bread, and five days later joined the others at Troas, where we stayed seven days.","nos vero navigavimus post dies Azymorum a Philippis et venimus ad eos Troadem in diebus quinque, ubi demorati sumus diebus septem.","ואנחנו יצאנו מן פילפי אחרי ימי חג המצות ומקץ חמשה ימים באנו באניה אליהם אל טרואס ונשב שם שבעת ימים׃"],["51","20","7","주간 첫날에 우리는 빵을 떼어 나누려고 모였다. 바오로가 신자들에게 이야기하였는데, 이튿날 떠나기로 되어 있었기 때문에 자정까지 이야기를 계속하였다.","안식일 다음 날, 우리는 주의 만찬을 나누려고 한자리에 모였다. 바울로는 그 이튿날 떠나기로 되어 모인 사람들과 밤이 깊도록 오래 이야기를 나누었다.","그 주간의 첫날에 우리가 떡을 떼려 하여 모였더니 바울이 이튿날 떠나고자 하여 그들에게 강론할새 말을 밤중까지 계속하매","안식 후 첫날에 우리가 떡을 떼려 하여 모였더니 바울이 이튿날 떠나고자 하여 저희에게 강론할쌔 말을 밤중까지 계속하매","주일에 우리는 성만찬을 나누려고 한자리에 모였다. 우리는 그 다음날 떠날 예정이었으므로 바울은 밤중까지 설교를 계속하였다.","On the first day of the week when we gathered to break bread, Paul spoke to them because he was going to leave on the next day, and he kept on speaking until midnight.","And upon the first day of the week, when the disciples came together to break bread, Paul preached unto them, ready to depart on the morrow; and continued his speech until midnight.","On the first day of the week we came together to break bread. Paul spoke to the people and, because he intended to leave the next day, kept on talking until midnight.","In una autem sabbatorum, cum convenissemus ad frangendum panem, Paulus disputabat eis, profecturus in crastinum, protraxitque sermonem usque in mediam noctem.","ויהי באחד בשבת כאשר נאספו התלמידים לבצע הלחם וידבר אתם פולוס כי אמר ללכת משם למחרת היום ויארך הדבר עד חצות הלילה׃"],["51","20","8","우리가 모여 있던 위층 방에는 등불이 많이 켜져 있었다.","우리가 모여 있던 위층 방에는 등불이 많이 켜져 있었다.","우리가 모인 윗다락에 등불을 많이 켰는데","우리의 모인 윗다락에 등불을 많이 켰는데","우리가 모인 3층방에는 등불을 많이 켜두었다.","There were many lamps in the upstairs room where we were gathered,","And there were many lights in the upper chamber, where they were gathered together.","There were many lamps in the upstairs room where we were meeting.","Erant autem lampades copiosae in cenaculo, ubi eramus congregati;","ונרות רבים היו בעליה אשר נאספנו שם׃"],["51","20","9","그런데 에우티코스라는 젊은이가 창문에 걸터앉아 있다가, 바오로가 길게 이야기하는 동안 깊은 잠에 빠졌다. 그렇게 잠에 취하여 그만 삼층에서 밑으로 떨어지고 말았다. 사람들이 일으켜 보니 이미 죽어 있었다.","그 때 유디코라는 청년이 창문에 걸터앉아 있었는데 바울로의 이야기가 너무 오래 계속되자 졸음을 이기지 못하여 마침내 깊이 잠이 들었다가 그만 삼층에서 땅으로 떨어졌다. 사람들이 일으켜보니 그는 이미 죽어 있었다.","유두고라 하는 청년이 창에 걸터 앉아 있다가 깊이 졸더니 바울이 강론하기를 더 오래 하매 졸음을 이기지 못하여 삼 층에서 떨어지거늘 일으켜보니 죽었는지라","유두고라 하는 청년이 창에 걸터 앉았다가 깊이 졸더니 바울이 강론하기를 더 오래 하매 졸음을 이기지 못하여 삼 층 누에서 떨어지거늘 일으켜보니 죽었는지라","그런데 바울의 설교가 오래 계속되자 창문에 걸터 앉아 있던 유두고라는 청년이 깊이 잠이 들어 그만 3층에서 떨어졌다. 사람들이 달려가 일으켰으나 그는 이미 죽어있었다.","and a young man named Eutychus who was sitting on the window sill was sinking into a deep sleep as Paul talked on and on. Once overcome by sleep, he fell down from the third story and when he was picked up, he was dead.","And there sat in a window a certain young man named Eutychus, being fallen into a deep sleep: and as Paul was long preaching, he sunk down with sleep, and fell down from the third loft, and was taken up dead.","Seated in a window was a young man named Eutychus, who was sinking into a deep sleep as Paul talked on and on. When he was sound asleep, he fell to the ground from the third story and was picked up dead.","sedens autem quidam adulescens nomine Eutychus super fenestram, cum mergeretur somno gravi, disputante diutius Paulo, eductus somno cecidit de tertio cenaculo deorsum et sublatus est mortuus.","ובחור אחד שמו אבטוכוס ישב בחלון וירדם בהאריך פולוס את אמרתו ותגבר עליו שנתו ויפל מהמדור השלישי למטה וישאהו מת׃"],["51","20","10","바오로가 내려가 에우티코스에게 엎드려 그를 끌어안고, “걱정하지들 마십시오. 살았습니다.” 하고 말하였다.","바울로가 내려가서 그 청년을 부둥켜 안고 사람들에게 \"걱정하지 마시오. 아직 살아 있소.\" 하고 말하였다.","바울이 내려가서 그 위에 엎드려 그 몸을 안고 말하되 떠들지 말라 생명이 그에게 있다 하고","바울이 내려가서 그 위에 엎드려 그 몸을 안고 말하되 떠들지 말라 생명이 저에게 있다 하고","바울이 내려가서 그 청년을 팔에 안고 \"걱정하지 마시오. 이 사람은 살아 있소\" 하고 말하였다. 과연 그는 살아났다. 사람들은 두려움 반 기쁨 반으로 어쩔 줄을 몰랐다. 그 청년이 살아나 사람들은 적지않이 위로를 받았다. 그들은 모두 다시 3층 방으로 올라가서 주님의 만찬을 나누며 바울의 긴 설교를 들었다. 일행은 새벽이 되어 길을 떠났다.","Paul went down, threw himself upon him, and said as he embraced him, “Don’t be alarmed; there is life in him.”","And Paul went down, and fell on him, and embracing him said, Trouble not yourselves; for his life is in him.","Paul went down, threw himself on the young man and put his arms around him. \"Don't be alarmed,\" he said. \"He's alive!\"","Cum descendisset autem Paulus, incubuit super eum et complexus dixit:  “Nolite turbari, anima enim ipsius in eo est! “.","וירד פולוס ויגהר עליו ויחבקהו ויאמר אל תבהלו כי נשמתו בו׃"],["51","20","11","바오로는 다시 올라가 빵을 떼어 나누고 또 식사를 한 다음, 날이 샐 때까지 오래 이야기를 하고 나서 떠났다.","바울로는 다시 위층으로 올라가 빵을 떼어 나누어 먹으면서 날이 밝도록 오래 이야기하다가 떠나갔다.","올라가 떡을 떼어 먹고 오랫동안 곧 날이 새기까지 이야기하고 떠나니라","올라가 떡을 떼어 먹고 오래 동안 곧 날이 새기까지 이야기하고 떠나니라","(10절에 포함되어 있음)","Then he returned upstairs, broke the bread, and ate; after a long conversation that lasted until daybreak, he departed.","When he therefore was come up again, and had broken bread, and eaten, and talked a long while, even till break of day, so he departed.","Then he went upstairs again and broke bread and ate. After talking until daylight, he left.","Ascendens autem frangensque panem et gustans satisque allocutus usque in lucem, sic profectus est.","ואחר עלה ויבצע הלחם ויטעם וירב לשיח אתם עד אור הבקר ויצא ללכת לדרכו׃"],["51","20","12","그리고 사람들은 살아난 청년을 데리고 가면서 크게 위로를 받았다.","한편 사람들은 살아난 청년을 집으로 데리고 가며 한없는 위로를 받았다.","사람들이 살아난 청년을 데리고 가서 적지 않게 위로를 받았더라","사람들이 살아난 아이를 데리고 와서 위로를 적지 않게 받았더라","(10절에 포함되어 있음)","And they took the boy away alive and were immeasurably comforted.","And they brought the young man alive, and were not a little comforted.","The people took the young man home alive and were greatly comforted.","Adduxerunt autem puerum viventem et consolati sunt non minime.","והם הביאו את הנער חי וינחמו עד מאד׃"],["51","20","13","우리는 먼저 배를 타고 아쏘스로 떠났다. 거기에서 바오로를 배에 태울 참이었다. 바오로가 거기까지 육로로 가겠다고 하면서 그렇게 정한 것이다.","우리는 배를 타고 아쏘로 먼저 떠났다. 바울로는 육로로 거기까지 가기로 했기 때문에 우리는 거기에서 바울로를 태울 참이었다.","우리는 앞서 배를 타고 앗소에서 바울을 태우려고 그리로 가니 이는 바울이 걸어서 가고자 하여 그렇게 정하여 준 것이라","우리는 앞서 배를 타고 앗소에서 바울을 태우려고 그리로 행선하니 이는 자기가 2)도보로 가고자 하여 이렇게 정하여 준 것이라 혹 육로로","바울은 우리에게 먼저 배편으로 가라고 이른 후에 자신은 육로로 앗소로 갔다.","We went ahead to the ship and set sail for Assos where we were to take Paul on board, as he had arranged, since he was going overland.","And we went before to ship, and sailed unto Assos, there intending to take in Paul: for so had he appointed, minding himself to go afoot.","We went on ahead to the ship and sailed for Assos, where we were going to take Paul aboard. He had made this arrangement because he was going there on foot.","Nos autem praecedentes navi enavigavimus in Asson, inde suscepturi Paulum; sic enim disposuerat volens ipse per terram iter facere.","ואנחנו קדמנו לרדת באניה ונעבר אסוסה למען נקח שם אתנו את פולוס כי כן צוה והוא חשב בלבו ללכת שמה ברגליו׃"],["51","20","14","우리는 아쏘스에서 바오로를 만나 그를 배에 태우고 미틸레네로 갔다.","우리는 아쏘에서 바울로를 만나 그를 배에 태우고 미딜레네로 갔다.","바울이 앗소에서 우리를 만나니 우리가 배에 태우고 미둘레네로 가서","바울이 앗소에서 우리를 만나니 우리가 배에 올리고 미둘레네에 가서","앗소에서 그와 합류한 우리는 이번에는 배를 타고 미둘레네로 갔다.","When he met us in Assos, we took him aboard and went on to Mitylene.","And when he met with us at Assos, we took him in, and came to Mitylene.","When he met us at Assos, we took him aboard and went on to Mitylene.","Cum autem convenisset nos in Asson, assumpto eo, venimus Mitylenen",null],["51","20","15","그리고 이튿날 그곳을 떠나 키오스 섬 앞바다에 이르렀고, 다음 날 사모스 섬에 들렀다가 그다음 날에는 밀레토스에 다다랐다.","그리고 이튿날 거기를 떠나 키오스 섬 앞바다에 이르렀고 다음날 사모스 섬에 들렀다가 그 다음날에는 밀레도스에 도착하였다.","거기서 떠나 이튿날 기오 앞에 오고 그 이튿날 사모에 들르고 또 그 다음 날 밀레도에 이르니라","거기서 떠나 이튿날 기오 앞에 오고 그 이튿날 사모에 들리고 또 그 다음날 밀레도에 이르니라","이튿날에는 기오를 지나 그 다음날에 사모에 들렀다. 그리고 하루 뒤 우리는 밀레도에 도착하였다.","We sailed away from there on the next day and reached a point off Chios, and a day later we reached Samos, and on the following day we arrived at Miletus.","And we sailed thence, and came the next day over against Chios; and the next day we arrived at Samos, and tarried at Trogyllium; and the next day we came to Miletus.","The next day we set sail from there and arrived off Kios. The day after that we crossed over to Samos, and on the following day arrived at Miletus.","et inde navigantes sequenti die pervenimus contra Chium et alia applicuimus Samum et sequenti venimus Miletum.",null],["51","20","16","바오로가 아시아에서 시간을 허비하지 않으려고 에페소를 그냥 지나치기로 결정하였던 것이다. 사실 그는 되도록 오순절에는 예루살렘에 있으려고 서둘렀다.","바울로가 아시아에서 시간을 허비하지 않으려고 에페소에는 들르지 않기로 하였던 것이다. 그는 할 수만 있으면 오순절을 예루살렘에서 지내려고 서두르고 있었다.","바울이 아시아에서 지체하지 않기 위하여 에베소를 지나 배 타고 가기로 작정하였으니 이는 될 수 있는 대로 오순절 안에 예루살렘에 이르려고 급히 감이러라","바울이 아시아에서 지체치 않기 위하여 에베소를 지나 행선하기로 작정하였으니 이는 될수 있는대로 오순절 안에 예루살렘에 이르려고 급히 감이러라","바울은 가능한 한 오순절까지는 예루살렘에 도착하려고 서두르고 있었으므로 에베소에는 들르지 않을 예정이었다.","Paul had decided to sail past Ephesus in order not to lose time in the province of Asia, for he was hurrying to be in Jerusalem, if at all possible, for the day of Pentecost.","For Paul had determined to sail by Ephesus, because he would not spend the time in Asia: for he hasted, if it were possible for him, to be at Jerusalem the day of Pentecost.","Paul had decided to sail past Ephesus to avoid spending time in the province of Asia, for he was in a hurry to reach Jerusalem, if possible, by the day of Pentecost.","Proposuerat enim Paulus transnavigare Ephesum, ne qua mora illi fieret in Asia; festinabat enim, si possibile sibi esset, ut diem Pentecosten faceret Hierosolymis.",null],["51","20","17","바오로는 밀레토스에서 에페소로 사람을 보내어 그 교회의 원로들을 불러오게 하였다.","밀레도스에서 바울로는 에페소에 사람을 보내어 그 교회 원로들을 불렀다.","바울이 밀레도에서 사람을 에베소로 보내어 교회 장로들을 청하니","바울이 밀레도에서 사람을 에베소로 보내어 교회 장로들을 청하니","그래서 우리가 밀레도에 닿자 바울은 에베소 교회 장로들에게 자기를 만나러 배로 오라는 전갈을 보냈다.","From Miletus he had the presbyters of the church at Ephesus summoned.","And from Miletus he sent to Ephesus, and called the elders of the church.","From Miletus, Paul sent to Ephesus for the elders of the church.","A Mileto autem mittens Ephesum convocavit presbyteros ecclesiae.",null],["51","20","18","그들이 자기에게 오자 바오로가 말하였다. “여러분은 내가 아시아에 발을 들여놓은 첫날부터 여러분과 함께 그 모든 시간을 어떻게 지냈는지 잘 알고 있습니다.","원로들이 오자 바울로는 이렇게 말하였다. \"여러분은 내가 아시아에 발을 들여놓은 첫날부터 지금까지 여러분과 함께 어떻게 지내왔는지를 잘 알고 있습니다.","오매 그들에게 말하되 아시아에 들어온 첫날부터 지금까지 내가 항상 여러분 가운데서 어떻게 행하였는지를 여러분도 아는 바니","오매 저희에게 말하되 아시아에 들어온 첫날부터 지금까지 내가 항상 너희 가운데서 어떻게 행한 것을 너희도 아는바니","장로들이 도착하자 바울은 다음과 같이 연설하였다. \"여러분은 내가 아시아에 발을 들여놓은 그날부터 오늘까지 여러분과 함께 어떻게 지내 왔는지를 알고 있습니다.","When they came to him, he addressed them, “You know how I lived among you the whole time from the day I first came to the province of Asia.","And when they were come to him, he said unto them, Ye know, from the first day that I came into Asia, after what manner I have been with you at all seasons,","When they arrived, he said to them: \"You know how I lived the whole time I was with you, from the first day I came into the province of Asia.","Qui cum venissent ad eum, dixit eis:  “Vos scitis a prima die, qua ingressus sum in Asiam, qualiter vobiscum per omne tempus fuerim,",null],["51","20","19","나는 유다인들의 음모로 여러 시련을 겪고 눈물을 흘리며 아주 겸손히 주님을 섬겼습니다.","나는 유다인들의 음모로 여러 차례 시련을 겪으면서도 눈물을 머금고 온갖 굴욕을 참아가며 주님을 섬겨왔습니다.","곧 모든 겸손과 눈물이며 유대인의 간계로 말미암아 당한 시험을 참고 주를 섬긴 것과","곧 모든 겸손과 눈물이며 유대인의 간계를 인하여 당한 시험을 참고 주를 섬긴 것과","나는 겸손하게, 눈물을 삼키면서 주님의 사업을 위해 일해 왔습니다. 유대인들이 나를 해치려고 음모를 꾸민 일이 한두 번이 아니었고 나는 그때마다 극심한 위험을 겪어야 하였습니다.","I served the Lord with all humility and with the tears and trials that came to me because of the plots of the Jews,","Serving the LORD with all humility of mind, and with many tears, and temptations, which befell me by the lying in wait of the Jews:","I served the Lord with great humility and with tears, although I was severely tested by the plots of the Jews.","serviens Domino cum omni humilitate et lacrimis et tentationibus, quae mihi acciderunt in insidiis Iudaeorum;",null],["51","20","20","그리고 유익한 것이면 무엇 하나 빼놓지 않고 회중 앞에서 또 개인 집에서 여러분에게 알려 주고 가르쳤습니다.","그리고 여러분에게 유익한 것이라면 하나도 빼놓지 않고 공중 앞에서나 여러분의 가정에서 전하며 가르쳤습니다.","유익한 것은 무엇이든지 공중 앞에서나 각 집에서나 거리낌이 없이 여러분에게 전하여 가르치고","유익한 것은 무엇이든지 공중 앞에서나 각 집에서나 꺼림이 없이 너희에게 전하여 가르치고","그러나 나는 대중 앞에서나 여러분의 가정에서나 여러분들에게 전리를 말하는 일을 조금도 꺼리지 않았습니다.","and I did not at all shrink from telling you what was for your benefit, or from teaching you in public or in your homes.","And how I kept back nothing that was profitable unto you, but have shewed you, and have taught you publickly, and from house to house,","You know that I have not hesitated to preach anything that would be helpful to you but have taught you publicly and from house to house.","quomodo nihil subtraxerim utilium, quominus annuntiarem vobis et docerem vos publice et per domos,",null],["51","20","21","나는 유다인들과 그리스인들에게, 회개하여 하느님께 돌아오고 우리 주 예수님을 믿어야 한다고 증언하였습니다.","그리고 유다인에게나 이방인에게나 똑같이 회개하고 하느님께 돌아와 우리 주 예수를 믿어야 한다고 애써 권면하였던 것입니다.","유대인과 헬라인들에게 하나님께 대한 회개와 우리 주 예수 그리스도께 대한 믿음을 증언한 것이라","유대인과 헬라인들에게 하나님께 대한 회개와 우리 주 예수 그리스도께 대한 믿음을 증거한 것이라","나는 유대인에게나 이방인에게나 똑같이 죄에서 떠나 우리 주님 예수 그리스도를 믿고 하나님께로 돌아와야 한다는 한 가지 사실만을 강조하였습니다.","I earnestly bore witness for both Jews and Greeks to repentance before God and to faith in our Lord Jesus.","Testifying both to the Jews, and also to the Greeks, repentance toward God, and faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ.","I have declared to both Jews and Greeks that they must turn to God in repentance and have faith in our Lord Jesus.","testificans Iudaeis atque Graecis in Deum paenitentiam et fidem in Dominum nostrum Iesum.",null],["51","20","22","그런데 이제 나는 성령께 사로잡혀 예루살렘으로 가고 있습니다. 거기에서 나에게 무슨 일이 닥칠지 나는 모릅니다.","이제 나는 성령의 지시를 따라 예루살렘으로 올라가는 길인데 거기에 가면 나에게 무슨 일이 닥칠지 모릅니다.","보라 이제 나는 성령에 매여 예루살렘으로 가는데 거기서 무슨 일을 당할는지 알지 못하노라","보라 이제 나는 심령에 매임을 받아 예루살렘으로 가는데 저기서 무슨 일을 만날는지 알지 못하노라","이제 나는 거역할 수 없는 성령의 강한 힘에 이끌려 예루살렘으로 갑니다. 거기서 무슨 일이 나를 기다리고 있는지는 잘 모릅니다.","But now, compelled by the Spirit, I am going to Jerusalem. What will happen to me there I do not know,","And now, behold, I go bound in the spirit unto Jerusalem, not knowing the things that shall befall me there:","\"And now, compelled by the Spirit, I am going to Jerusalem, not knowing what will happen to me there.","Et nunc ecce alligatus ego Spiritu vado in Ierusalem, quae in ea eventura sint mihi ignorans,",null],["51","20","23","다만 투옥과 환난이 나를 기다리고 있다는 것은 성령께서 내가 가는 고을에서마다 일러 주셨습니다.","다만 내가 아는 것은 내가 어느 도시에 들어가든지 투옥과 고통이 나를 기다리고 있다는 것을 성령께서 나에게 일러주신다는 사실입니다.","오직 성령이 각 성에서 내게 증언하여 결박과 환난이 나를 기다린다 하시나","오직 성령이 각 성에서 내게 증거하여 결박과 환난이 나를 기다린다 하시나","다만 한 가지 내가 아는 것은 내가 가는 도시마다 투옥과 고난이 기다리고 있다는 것을 성령께서 알려 주신다는 사실입니다.","except that in one city after another the holy Spirit has been warning me that imprisonment and hardships await me.","Save that the Holy Ghost witnesseth in every city, saying that bonds and afflictions abide me.","I only know that in every city the Holy Spirit warns me that prison and hardships are facing me.","nisi quod Spiritus Sanctus per omnes civitates protestatur mihi dicens quoniam vincula et tribulationes me manent.",null],["51","20","24","그러나 내가 달릴 길을 다 달려 주 예수님께 받은 직무 곧 하느님 은총의 복음을 증언하는 일을 다 마칠 수만 있다면, 내 목숨이야 조금도 아깝지 않습니다.","그러나 내 사명을 완수하고 하느님의 은총의 복음을 전하라고 주 예수께서 나에게 맡겨주신 임무를 다할 수만 있다면 나는 조금도 목숨을 아끼지 않겠습니다.","내가 달려갈 길과 주 예수께 받은 사명 곧 하나님의 은혜의 복음을 증언하는 일을 마치려 함에는 나의 생명조차 조금도 귀한 것으로 여기지 아니하노라","나의 달려갈 길과 주 예수께 받은 사명 곧 하나님의 은혜의 복음 증거하는 일을 마치려 함에는 나의 생명을 조금도 귀한 것으로 여기지 아니하노라","그러나 주 예수께서 내게 맡기신 이 일, 하나님의 전능하신 자비와 사랑의 복음을 다른 사람에게 전하는 이 일을 다 할 수만 있다면 나는 목숨이 조금도 아깝지 않습니다.","Yet I consider life of no importance to me, if only I may finish my course and the ministry that I received from the Lord Jesus, to bear witness to the gospel of God’s grace.","But none of these things move me, neither count I my life dear unto myself, so that I might finish my course with joy, and the ministry, which I have received of the Lord Jesus, to testify the gospel of the grace of God.","However, I consider my life worth nothing to me, if only I may finish the race and complete the task the Lord Jesus has given me--the task of testifying to the gospel of God's grace.","Sed nihili facio animam meam pretiosam mihi, dummodo consummem cursum meum et ministerium, quod accepi a Domino Iesu, testificari evangelium gratiae Dei.",null],["51","20","25","이제, 내가 두루 돌아다니며 하느님의 나라를 선포한 여러분 가운데에서 아무도 다시는 내 얼굴을 볼 수 없으리라는 것을 나는 압니다.","나는 이제 분명히 압니다. 여러분은 모두 내 얼굴을 다시는 보지 못하게 될 것입니다. 내가 여러분과 함께 지내는 동안 하느님 나라를 줄곧 선포하였으니","보라 내가 여러분 중에 왕래하며 하나님의 나라를 전파하였으나 이제는 여러분이 다 내 얼굴을 다시 보지 못할 줄 아노라","보라 내가 너희 중에 왕래하며 하나님 나라를 전파하였으나 지금은 너희가 다 내 얼굴을 다시 보지 못할줄 아노라","나는 여러분들을 찾아 다니면서 하나님 나라를 가르쳐 왔습니다. 그러나 이제 여러분이 다시는 내 얼굴을 보지 못하게 될 것입니다.","“But now I know that none of you to whom I preached the kingdom during my travels will ever see my face again.","And now, behold, I know that ye all, among whom I have gone preaching the kingdom of God, shall see my face no more.","\"Now I know that none of you among whom I have gone about preaching the kingdom will ever see me again.","Et nunc ecce ego scio quia amplius non videbitis faciem meam vos omnes, per quos transivi praedicans regnum;",null],["51","20","26","그래서 여러분 가운데 그 누구의 멸망에 대해서도 나에게는 잘못이 없다는 것을, 나는 오늘 여러분에게 엄숙히 선언합니다.","앞으로 여러분 가운데 누가 멸망하게 되더라도 나에게는 아무런 책임이 없다는 것을 이 자리에서 분명히 말해 두는 바입니다.","그러므로 오늘 여러분에게 증언하거니와 모든 사람의 피에 대하여 내가 깨끗하니","그러므로 오늘 너희에게 증거하노니 모든 사람의 피에 대하여 내가 깨끗하니","그러므로 나는 이 자리에서 분명히 말해 둡니다. 앞으로 여러분 가운데 누가 어떤 심판을 받게 되든 그것은 내 책임이 아닙니다.","And so I solemnly declare to you this day that I am not responsible for the blood of any of you,","Wherefore I take you to record this day, that I am pure from the blood of all men.","Therefore, I declare to you today that I am innocent of the blood of all men.","quapropter contestor vos hodierna die, quia mundus sum a sanguine omnium;",null],["51","20","27","내가 하느님의 모든 뜻을 무엇 하나 빼놓지 않고 여러분에게 알려 주었기 때문입니다.","나는 하느님의 모든 계획을 남김없이 여러분에게 전해 주었습니다.","이는 내가 꺼리지 않고 하나님의 뜻을 다 여러분에게 전하였음이라","이는 내가 꺼리지 않고 하나님의 뜻을 다 너희에게 전하였음이라","나는 하나님의 모든 말씀을 여러분에게 남김없이 선포하였기 때문입니다.","for I did not shrink from proclaiming to you the entire plan of God.","For I have not shunned to declare unto you all the counsel of God.","For I have not hesitated to proclaim to you the whole will of God.","non enim subterfugi, quominus annuntiarem omne consilium Dei vobis.",null],["51","20","28","여러분 자신과 모든 양 떼를 잘 보살피십시오. 성령께서 여러분을 양 떼의 감독으로 세우시어, 하느님의 교회 곧 하느님께서 당신 아드님의 피로 얻으신 교회를 돌보게 하셨습니다.","여러분은 늘 자신을 살피며 성령께서 맡겨주신 양떼들을 잘 돌보시오. 성령께서는 여러분을 감독으로 세우셔서 하느님께서 당신 아드님의 피로 값을 치르고 얻으신 당신의 교회를 보살피게 하셨습니다.","여러분은 자기를 위하여 또는 온 양 떼를 위하여 삼가라 성령이 그들 가운데 여러분을 감독자로 삼고 하나님이 자기 피로 사신 교회를 보살피게 하셨느니라","너희는 자기를 위하여 또는 온 양떼를 위하여 삼가라 성령이 저들 가운데 너희로 감독자를 삼고 3)하나님이 자기 피로 사신 교회를 치게 하셨느니라 어떤 사본에, 주께서","이제 여러분은 정신을 바짝 차리고 성령께서 맡겨 주신 양 떼를 잘 돌보십시오. 성령께서는 여러분을 감독으로 세우셔서 하나님께서 자기 피로 값을 치르고 사신 그 교회를 자라게 하셨습니다.","Keep watch over yourselves and over the whole flock of which the holy Spirit has appointed you overseers, in which you tend the church of God that he acquired with his own blood.","Take heed therefore unto yourselves, and to all the flock, over the which the Holy Ghost hath made you overseers, to feed the church of God, which he hath purchased with his own blood.","Keep watch over yourselves and all the flock of which the Holy Spirit has made you overseers. Be shepherds of the church of God, which he bought with his own blood.","Attendite vobis et universo gregi, in quo vos Spiritus Sanctus posuit episcopos, pascere ecclesiam Dei, quam acquisivit sanguine suo.",null],["51","20","29","내가 떠난 뒤에 사나운 이리들이 여러분 가운데로 들어가 양 떼를 해칠 것임을 나는 압니다.","내가 떠나가면 사나운 이리떼가 여러분 가운데 들어와 양떼를 마구 헤칠 것이며","내가 떠난 후에 사나운 이리가 여러분에게 들어와서 그 양 떼를 아끼지 아니하며","내가 떠난 후에 흉악한 이리가 너희에게 들어와서 그 양떼를 아끼지 아니하며","내가 떠난 후에 사나운 이리 떼와 같은 거짓 교사들이 나타나서 양 떼들을 마구 해칠 것이며","I know that after my departure savage wolves will come among you, and they will not spare the flock.","For I know this, that after my departing shall grievous wolves enter in among you, not sparing the flock.","I know that after I leave, savage wolves will come in among you and will not spare the flock.","Ego scio quoniam intrabunt post discessionem meam lupi graves in vos non parcentes gregi;",null],["51","20","30","바로 여러분 가운데에서도 진리를 왜곡하는 말을 하며 자기를 따르라고 제자들을 꾀어내는 사람들이 생겨날 것입니다.","여러분 가운데서도 진리를 그르치는 말을 하며 신도들을 이탈시켜 자기를 따르라고 할 사람들이 생겨날 것은 분명합니다.","또한 여러분 중에서도 제자들을 끌어 자기를 따르게 하려고 어그러진 말을 하는 사람들이 일어날 줄을 내가 아노라","또한 너희 중에서도 제자들을 끌어 자기를 좇게 하려고 어그러진 말을 하는 사람들이 일어날 줄을 내가 아노니","여러분 중에서도 진리를 왜곡시키는 자들이 나타나 자기를 따르라고 할 것입니다.","And from your own group, men will come forward perverting the truth to draw the disciples away after them.","Also of your own selves shall men arise, speaking perverse things, to draw away disciples after them.","Even from your own number men will arise and distort the truth in order to draw away disciples after them.","et ex vobis ipsis exsurgent viri loquentes perversa, ut abstrahant discipulos post se.",null],["51","20","31","그러니 내가 삼 년 동안 밤낮 쉬지 않고 여러분 한 사람 한 사람을 눈물로 타이른 것을 명심하며 늘 깨어 있으십시오.","그러므로 여러분은 언제나 깨어 있으시오. 그리고 내가 삼 년 동안이나 밤낮으로 눈물을 흘리며 각 사람에게 쉬지 않고 훈계하던 것을 잊지 마시오.","그러므로 여러분이 일깨어 내가 삼 년이나 밤낮 쉬지 않고 눈물로 각 사람을 훈계하던 것을 기억하라","그러므로 너희가 일깨어 내가 삼년이나 밤낮 쉬지 않고 눈물로 각 사람을 훈계하던 것을 기억하라","잘 살피십시오. 내가 여러분과 함께 보낸 그 3년을 잊지 마십시오. 밤낮으로 여러분을 보살피고 여러분을 위해 흘린 내 많은 눈물을 기억하십시오.","So be vigilant and remember that for three years, night and day, I unceasingly admonished each of you with tears.","Therefore watch, and remember, that by the space of three years I ceased not to warn every one night and day with tears.","So be on your guard! Remember that for three years I never stopped warning each of you night and day with tears.","Propter quod vigilate, memoria retinentes quoniam per triennium nocte et die non cessavi cum lacrimis monens unumquemque vestrum.",null],["51","20","32","이제 나는 하느님과 그분 은총의 말씀에 여러분을 맡깁니다. 그 말씀은 여러분을 굳건히 세울 수 있고, 또 거룩하게 된 모든 이와 함께 상속 재산을 차지하도록 여러분에게 그것을 나누어 줄 수 있습니다.","나는 이제 하느님과 그의 은총의 말씀에 여러분을 맡깁니다. 그 말씀은 여러분을 완전한 사람으로 키울 수 있으며 모든 성도들과 함께 유산을 차지하게 할 수 있습니다.","지금 내가 여러분을 주와 및 그 은혜의 말씀에 부탁하노니 그 말씀이 여러분을 능히 든든히 세우사 거룩하게 하심을 입은 모든 자 가운데 기업이 있게 하시리라","지금 내가 너희를 주와 및 그 은혜의 말씀께 부탁하노니 그 말씀이 너희를 능히 든든히 세우사 거룩케 하심을 입은 모든 자 가운데 기업이 있게 하시리라","이제 나는 하나님과 그분의 돌보심과 은총의 말씀에 여러분을 맡깁니다. 그 말씀이 여러분의 신앙을 바로 세우고 하나님을 위해서 성별된 사람들이 상속받는 그 모든 몫을 여러분에게도 줄 것입니다.","And now I commend you to God and to that gracious word of his that can build you up and give you the inheritance among all who are consecrated.","And now, brethren, I commend you to God, and to the word of his grace, which is able to build you up, and to give you an inheritance among all them which are sanctified.","\"Now I commit you to God and to the word of his grace, which can build you up and give you an inheritance among all those who are sanctified.","Et nunc commendo vos Deo et verbo gratiae ipsius, qui potens est aedificare et dare hereditatem in sanctificatis omnibus.",null],["51","20","33","나는 누구의 은이나 금이나 옷을 탐낸 일이 없습니다.","나는 누구의 은이나 금이나 옷을 탐낸 일이 없습니다.","내가 아무의 은이나 금이나 의복을 탐하지 아니하였고","내가 아무의 은이나 금이나 의복을 탐하지 아니하였고","나는 지금까지 돈을 탐한 일도, 훌륭한 의복을 탐한 일도 없습니다.","I have never wanted anyone’s silver or gold or clothing.","I have coveted no man's silver, or gold, or apparel.","I have not coveted anyone's silver or gold or clothing.","Argentum aut aurum aut vestem nullius concupivi;",null],["51","20","34","나와 내 일행에게 필요한 것을 이 두 손으로 장만하였다는 사실을 여러분 자신이 잘 알고 있습니다.","여러분도 알다시피 나와 내 일행에게 필요한 것은 모두 나의 이 두 손으로 일해서 장만하였습니다.","여러분이 아는 바와 같이 이 손으로 나와 내 동행들이 쓰는 것을 충당하여","너희 아는 바에 이 손으로 나와 내 동행들의 쓰는 것을 당하여","여러분이 아시는대로 나는 내 이 두 손으로 일해서 생활에 필요한 것을 마련했고 심지어 나와 함께 지낸 사람들에게 필요한 것까지도 공급해 왔습니다.","You know well that these very hands have served my needs and my companions.","Yea, ye yourselves know, that these hands have ministered unto my necessities, and to them that were with me.","You yourselves know that these hands of mine have supplied my own needs and the needs of my companions.","ipsi scitis quoniam ad ea, quae mihi opus erant et his, qui mecum sunt, ministraverunt manus istae.",null],["51","20","35","나는 모든 면에서 여러분에게 본을 보였습니다. 그렇게 애써 일하며 약한 이들을 거두어 주고, ‘주는 것이 받는 것보다 더 행복하다.’고 친히 이르신 주 예수님의 말씀을 명심하라는 것입니다.”","나는 여러분도 이렇게 수고하여 약한 사람들을 도와주고 또 '주는 것이 받는 것보다 더 행복하다.' 하신 주 예수의 말씀을 명심하도록 언제나 본을 보여왔습니다.\"","범사에 여러분에게 모본을 보여준 바와 같이 수고하여 약한 사람들을 돕고 또 주 예수께서 친히 말씀하신 바 주는 것이 받는 것보다 복이 있다 하심을 기억하여야 할지니라","범사에 너희에게 모본을 보였노니 곧 이같이 수고하여 약한 사람들을 돕고 또 주 예수의 친히 말씀하신바 주는 것이 받는 것보다 복이 있다 하심을 기억하여야 할찌니라","그리고 나는 가난한 사람들을 돕는 일에도 언제나 여러분에게 본보기가 되려고 하였습니다. \"주는 것이 받는 것보다 복이 있다\"고 하신 주님의 말씀이 내 머리에서 떠나지 않았기 때문입니다.\"","In every way I have shown you that by hard work of that sort we must help the weak, and keep in mind the words of the Lord Jesus who himself said, ‘It is more blessed to give than to receive.’”","I have shewed you all things, how that so labouring ye ought to support the weak, and to remember the words of the Lord Jesus, how he said, It is more blessed to give than to receive.","In everything I did, I showed you that by this kind of hard work we must help the weak, remembering the words the Lord Jesus himself said: 'It is more blessed to give than to receive.'\"","Omnia ostendi vobis quoniam sic laborantes oportet suscipere infirmos, ac meminisse verborum Domini Iesu, quoniam ipse dixit:  “Beatius est magis dare quam accipere! “ “.",null],["51","20","36","바오로는 이렇게 말하고 나서 무릎을 꿇고 그들과 함께 기도하였다.","바울로는 이 말을 마치고 그들과 함께 무릎을 꿇고 기도를 드렸다.","이 말을 한 후 무릎을 꿇고 그 모든 사람들과 함께 기도하니","이 말을 한 후 무릎을 꿇고 저희 모든 사람과 함께 기도하니","바울은 연설을 다 끝내자 무릎을 꿇고 그들과 함께 기도를 드렸다.","When he had finished speaking he knelt down and prayed with them all.","And when he had thus spoken, he kneeled down, and prayed with them all.","When he had said this, he knelt down with all of them and prayed.","Et cum haec dixisset, positis genibus suis, cum omnibus illis oravit.",null],["51","20","37","그들은 모두 흐느껴 울면서 바오로의 목을 껴안고 입을 맞추었다.","그들은 모두 많이 울었으며 바울로의 목을 끌어안고 입을 맞추었다.","다 크게 울며 바울의 목을 안고 입을 맞추고","다 크게 울며 바울의 목을 안고 입을 맞추고","그들은 작별을 슬퍼하며 모두 한 사람씩 바울을 끌어안고 울음을 터뜨렸다.","They were all weeping loudly as they threw their arms around Paul and kissed him,","And they all wept sore, and fell on Paul's neck, and kissed him,","They all wept as they embraced him and kissed him.","Magnus autem fletus factus est omnium; et procumbentes super collum Pauli osculabantur eum",null],["51","20","38","다시는 자기 얼굴을 볼 수 없으리라고 한 바오로의 말에 마음이 매우 아팠던 것이다. 그들은 바오로를 배 안까지 배웅하였다.","그들을 가장 마음 아프게 한 것은 다시는 자기 얼굴을 보지 못하리라고 한 바울로의 말이었다. 그들은 바울로를 배에까지 전송하였다.","다시 그 얼굴을 보지 못하리라 한 말로 말미암아 더욱 근심하고 배에까지 그를 전송하니라","다시 그 얼굴을 보지 못하리라 한 말을 인하여 더욱 근심하고 배에까지 그를 전송하니라","그들은 다시는 만나지 못하게 될 것이라는 말에 애가 끊어지는 것 같았다. 그들은 바울을 배가 있는 곳까지 전송하였다.","for they were deeply distressed that he had said that they would never see his face again. Then they escorted him to the ship.","Sorrowing most of all for the words which he spake, that they should see his face no more. And they accompanied him unto the ship.","What grieved them most was his statement that they would never see his face again. Then they accompanied him to the ship. ACT","dolentes maxime in verbo, quod dixerat, quoniam amplius faciem eius non essent visuri. Et deducebant eum ad navem.",null],["51","21","1","우리는 그들과 헤어져 배를 타고 곧장 코스로 갔다가, 이튿날 로도스를 거쳐 거기에서 다시 파타라로 갔다.","우리는 그들과 작별하고 나서 배를 타고 곧장 코스로 갔다가 이튿날 로도스를 거쳐 바다라로 갔다.","우리가 그들을 작별하고 배를 타고 바로 고스로 가서 이튿날 로도에 이르러 거기서부터 바다라로 가서","우리가 저희를 작별하고 행선하여 바로 고스로 가서 이튿날 로도에 이르러 거기서부터 바다라로 가서","에베소의 장로들과 작별한 우리는 배를 타고 고스로 직행하여 이튿날 로도에 들렀다가 기기서 바다라로 갔다.","When we had taken leave of them we set sail, made a straight run for Cos, and on the next day for Rhodes, and from there to Patara.","And it came to pass, that after we were gotten from them, and had launched, we came with a straight course unto Coos, and the day following unto Rhodes, and from thence unto Patara:","After we had torn ourselves away from them, we put out to sea and sailed straight to Cos. The next day we went to Rhodes and from there to Patara.","Cum autem factum esset, ut navigaremus abstracti ab eis, recto cursu venimus Cho et sequenti die Rhodum et inde Patara;","ויהי כאשר נפרדנו מהם ונרד באניה ונבוא דרך ישרה אל קוס וממחרת אל רודוס ומשם אל פטרה׃"],["51","21","2","그리고 페니키아로 건너가는 배를 만나 그것을 타고 떠났다.","거기에서 우리는 페니키아로 가는 배를 만나 그것을 타고 떠났다.","베니게로 건너가는 배를 만나서 타고 가다가","베니게로 건너가는 배를 만나서 타고 가다가","바다라에서는 수리아 지방의 베니게로 가는 배를 바꾸어 타고","Finding a ship crossing to Phoenicia, we went on board and put out to sea.","And finding a ship sailing over unto Phenicia, we went aboard, and set forth.","We found a ship crossing over to Phoenicia, went on board and set sail.","et cum invenissemus navem transfretantem in Phoenicen, ascendentes navigavimus.","שם מצאנו אניה עברת אל פינוקיא ונרד בה ונעבר׃"],["51","21","3","키프로스가 눈에 들어오자 우리는 그 섬을 왼쪽에 두고 시리아로 항진하여 티로에 닿았다. 그 배가 거기에서 짐을 내리기로 되어 있었던 것이다.","우리는 키프로스를 바라보며 그 섬을 왼편에 끼고 시리아를 향하여 내려가 띠로에 닿았다. 거기에서 그 배는 짐을 풀기로 되어 있었던 것이다.","구브로를 바라보고 이를 왼편에 두고 수리아로 항해하여 두로에서 상륙하니 거기서 배의 짐을 풀려 함이러라","구브로를 바라보고 이를 왼편에 두고 수리아로 행선하여 두로에서 상륙하니 거기서 배가 짐을 풀려 함이러라","멀리 바라보이는 구브로 섬을 왼편에 끼고 수리아를 향하여 남쪽으로 내려가 두로에 닿았다. 거기서 그 배는 짐을 풀기로 되어 있었던 것이다.","We caught sight of Cyprus but passed by it on our left and sailed on toward Syria and put in at Tyre where the ship was to unload cargo.","Now when we had discovered Cyprus, we left it on the left hand, and sailed into Syria, and landed at Tyre: for there the ship was to unlade her burden.","After sighting Cyprus and passing to the south of it, we sailed on to Syria. We landed at Tyre, where our ship was to unload its cargo.","Cum paruissemus autem Cypro, et relinquentes eam ad sinistram navigabamus in Syriam et venimus Tyrum, ibi enim navis erat expositura onus.","ונרא את פני קפרוס ונעזבנה לשמאל ונעבר אל סוריא ונגיע אל צור כי שמה יוציאו את מעמסת האניה׃"],["51","21","4","우리는 제자들을 찾아내어 그곳에 이레 동안 머물렀다. 그런데 그들은 성령의 지시를 받아, 예루살렘으로 올라가지 말라고 바오로에게 거듭 이야기하였다.","우리는 띠로에서 신도들을 만나 이레 동안 머물렀는데 그들은 성령의 지시를 받아 바울로에게 예루살렘으로 올라가지 말라고 만류하였다.","제자들을 찾아 거기서 이레를 머물더니 그 제자들이 성령의 감동으로 바울더러 예루살렘에 들어가지 말라 하더라","제자들을 찾아 거기서 이레를 머물더니 그 제자들이 성령의 감동으로 바울더러 예루살렘에 들어가지 말라 하더라","우리는 배에서 내리자 신도들을 찾아가 그들과 함께 한 주일을 지냈다. 그 신도들은 성령께서 이르신 대로 바울에게 예루살렘으로 올라가지 말라고 만류하였다.","There we sought out the disciples and stayed for a week. They kept telling Paul through the Spirit not to embark for Jerusalem.","And finding disciples, we tarried there seven days: who said to Paul through the Spirit, that he should not go up to Jerusalem.","Finding the disciples there, we stayed with them seven days. Through the Spirit they urged Paul not to go on to Jerusalem.","Inventis autem discipulis, mansimus ibi diebus septem; qui Paulo dicebant per Spiritum, ne iret Hierosolymam.","ונמצא את התלמידים ונשב שם שבעת ימים והם אמרו אל פולוס על פי הרוח לבלתי עלות ירושלים׃"],["51","21","5","그러나 기일이 다 차자 우리는 그곳을 떠나 여행길에 올랐다. 그들은 모두 부인들과 아이들과 함께 우리를 도시 밖까지 배웅하였다. 이윽고 바닷가에서 우리는 무릎을 꿇고 기도한 다음,","그러나 이레가 지난 뒤 우리는 그 곳을 떠났는데 그 때 모든 신도들은 부인들과 아이들과 함께 동네 밖까지 우리를 따라 나왔다. 우리는 모두 바닷가에서 무릎을 꿇고 기도를 드렸다.","이 여러 날을 지낸 후 우리가 떠나갈새 그들이 다 그 처자와 함께 성문 밖까지 전송하거늘 우리가 바닷가에서 무릎을 꿇어 기도하고","이 여러 날을 지난 후 우리가 떠나갈쌔 저희가 다 그 처자와 함께 성문 밖까지 전송하거늘 우리가 바닷가에서 무릎을 꿇어 기도하고","한 주일이 지나서 우리가 배로 되돌아가게 되자 온 교회는 물론 심지어 부인들과 아이들까지 모두 바닷가에 나와서 우리를 전송해 주었다. 우리는 거기서 다같이 기도를 드렸다.","At the end of our stay we left and resumed our journey. All of them, women and children included, escorted us out of the city, and after kneeling on the beach to pray,","And when we had accomplished those days, we departed and went our way; and they all brought us on our way, with wives and children, till we were out of the city: and we kneeled down on the shore, and prayed.","But when our time was up, we left and continued on our way. All the disciples and their wives and children accompanied us out of the city, and there on the beach we knelt to pray.","Et explicitis diebus, profecti ibamus, deducentibus nos omnibus cum uxoribus et filiis usque foras civitatem; et positis genibus in litore orantes,","ויהי אחרי מלאת לנו הימים האלה ונצא ללכת לדרכנו וילוו אתנו כלם עם נשיהם ועם טפם עד מחוץ לעיר ונכרע על ברכינו על חוף הים ונתפלל׃"],["51","21","6","서로 작별 인사를 하였다. 우리는 배에 올랐고 그들은 집으로 돌아갔다.","작별 인사를 나누고 우리는 배에 올랐고 그들은 집으로 돌아갔다.","서로 작별한 후 우리는 배에 오르고 그들은 집으로 돌아가니라","서로 작별한 후 우리는 배에 오르고 저희는 집으로 돌아가니라","작별인사를 하고 우리가 배에 오른 뒤에야 그들도 집으로 돌아갔다.","we bade farewell to one another. Then we boarded the ship, and they returned home.","And when we had taken our leave one of another, we took ship; and they returned home again.","After saying good-by to each other, we went aboard the ship, and they returned home.","valefecimus invicem et ascendimus in navem; illi autem redierunt in sua.","ונברך איש את רעהו ונעל אל האניה והמה שבו איש לביתו׃"],["51","21","7","우리는 티로를 떠나 항해를 마치고 프톨레마이스에 다다랐다. 거기에서 형제들에게 인사하고 그들과 함께 하루를 지냈다.","우리는 항해를 계속하여 띠로에서 프톨레마이스로 가서 교우들에게 인사하고 거기에서 그들과 함께 하루를 지냈다.","두로를 떠나 항해를 다 마치고 돌레마이에 이르러 형제들에게 안부를 묻고 그들과 함께 하루를 있다가","두로로부터 수로를 다 행하여 돌레마이에 이르러 형제들에게 안부를 묻고 그들과 함께 하루를 있다가","두로를 떠난 우리는 그 다음 항구인 돌레마이로 가서 신도들의 안부를 묻고 그들과 함께 하루를 지냈다.","We continued the voyage and came from Tyre to Ptolemais, where we greeted the brothers and stayed a day with them.","And when we had finished our course from Tyre, we came to Ptolemais, and saluted the brethren, and abode with them one day.","We continued our voyage from Tyre and landed at Ptolemais, where we greeted the brothers and stayed with them for a day.","Nos vero, navigatione explicita, a Tyro devenimus Ptolemaida et, salutatis fratribus, mansimus die una apud illos.","ואנחנו כלינו את דרך הים ונרד מצור אל עכו ונשאל לשלום האחים ונשב אתם יום אחד׃"],["51","21","8","이튿날 그곳을 떠나 카이사리아에 이르러, 일곱 봉사자 가운데 하나로서 복음 선포자인 필리포스의 집에 들어가 그와 함께 머물렀다.","그리고 이튿날 그 곳을 떠나 가이사리아에 이르러 일곱 보조자 가운데 하나인 전도자 필립보의 집에 들어가 그와 함께 머무르게 되었다.","이튿날 떠나 가이사랴에 이르러 일곱 집사 중 하나인 전도자 빌립의 집에 들어가서 머무르니라","이튿날 떠나 가이사랴에 이르러 일곱 집사 중 하나인 전도자 빌립의 집에 들어가서 유하니라","그리고 이튿날 그곳을 떠나 가이사랴로 가서 전도자 빌립의 집에 머물렀다. 일곱 집사 가운데 한 사람인","On the next day we resumed the trip and came to Caesarea, where we went to the house of Philip the evangelist, who was one of the Seven, and stayed with him.","And the next day we that were of Paul's company departed, and came unto Caesarea: and we entered into the house of Philip the evangelist, which was one of the seven; and abode with him.","Leaving the next day, we reached Caesarea and stayed at the house of Philip the evangelist, one of the Seven.","Alia autem die profecti venimus Caesaream et intrantes in domum Philippi evangelistae, qui erat de septem, mansimus apud eum.","וממחרת נסענו פולוס ואשר אתו ונבא אל קסרין ונלך אל בית פילפוס המבשר אשר הוא אחד מן השבעה ונשב עמו׃"],["51","21","9","그에게는 처녀 딸이 넷 있었는데 그들은 예언 능력을 가지고 있었다.","그에게는 결혼하지 않은 딸 넷이 있었는데 모두 예언자였다.","그에게 딸 넷이 있으니 처녀로 예언하는 자라","그에게 딸 넷이 있으니 처녀로 예언하는 자라","그에게는 예언의 은사를 받은 딸이 4명이나 있었는데 모두가 미혼이었다.","He had four virgin daughters gifted with prophecy.","And the same man had four daughters, virgins, which did prophesy.","He had four unmarried daughters who prophesied.","Huic autem erant filiae quattuor virgines prophetantes.","ולו היו ארבע בנות בתולות מתנבאות׃"],["51","21","10","그런데 우리가 여러 날을 머무르는 동안 유다에서 하가보스라는 예언자가 내려왔다.","우리가 여러 날 머물러 있는 동안 하가보라는 예언자가 유다에서 내려와","여러 날 머물러 있더니 아가보라 하는 한 선지자가 유대로부터 내려와","여러 날 있더니 한 선지자 아가보라 하는 이가 유대로부터 내려와","우리가 그곳에 며칠 머물러 있는 동안에 역시 예언의 은사를 받은 아가보라는 사람이 유대에서 와서","We had been there several days when a prophet named Agabus came down from Judea.","And as we tarried there many days, there came down from Judaea a certain prophet, named Agabus.","After we had been there a number of days, a prophet named Agabus came down from Judea.","Et cum moraremur plures dies, supervenit quidam a Iudaea propheta nomine Agabus;","ויהי בהיותנו שם ימים רבים וירד נביא אחד מיהודה ושמו אגבוס׃"],["51","21","11","그가 우리에게 와서는 바오로의 허리띠를 가지고 자기 발과 손을 결박하고 나서 말하였다. “성령께서 이렇게 말씀하십니다. ‘예루살렘에서 유다인들이 이 허리띠의 임자를 이렇게 결박하여 다른 민족들에게 넘길 것이다.’”","우리에게 와서 바울로의 허리띠를 가지고 자기 손발을 묶더니 \"성령께서 '이 허리띠의 주인을 유다인들이 예루살렘에서 이렇게 묶어 이방인들의 손에 넘겨줄 것이다.' 하고 말씀하십니다.\" 하고 말하였다.","우리에게 와서 바울의 띠를 가져다가 자기 수족을 잡아매고 말하기를 성령이 말씀하시되 예루살렘에서 유대인들이 이같이 이 띠 임자를 결박하여 이방인의 손에 넘겨 주리라 하거늘","우리에게 와서 바울의 띠를 가져다가 자기 수족을 잡아매고 말하기를 성령이 말씀하시되 예루살렘에서 유대인들이 이같이 이 띠 임자를 결박하여 이방인의 손에 넘겨주리라 하거늘","우리를 방문하였다. 아가보는 바울의 허리띠로 자기 손발을 묶더니 말하였다. \"이 허리띠의 주인이 예루살렘에서 유대인들에게 이렇게 묶여 로마로 끌려갈 것이다\"라고 성령께서 말씀하십니다.\"","He came up to us, took Paul’s belt, bound his own feet and hands with it, and said, “Thus says the holy Spirit: This is the way the Jews will bind the owner of this belt in Jerusalem, and they will hand him over to the Gentiles.”","And when he was come unto us, he took Paul's girdle, and bound his own hands and feet, and said, Thus saith the Holy Ghost, So shall the Jews at Jerusalem bind the man that owneth this girdle, and shall deliver him into the hands of the Gentiles.","Coming over to us, he took Paul's belt, tied his own hands and feet with it and said, \"The Holy Spirit says, 'In this way the Jews of Jerusalem will bind the owner of this belt and will hand him over to the Gentiles.'\"","is cum venisset ad nos et tulisset zonam Pauli, alligans sibi pedes et manus dixit:  “Haec dicit Spiritus Sanctus: Virum, cuius est zona haec, sic alligabunt in Ierusalem Iudaei et tradent in manus gentium “.","ויבא אצלנו ויקח את אזור פולוס ויאסר בו את ידיו ואת רגליו ויאמר כה אמר רוח הקדש ככה יאסרו היהודים בירושלים את האיש אשר לו האזור הזה ויסגירהו בידי הגוים׃"],["51","21","12","이 말씀을 듣고 우리는 그곳 사람들과 함께 바오로에게 예루살렘으로 올라가지 말라고 간곡히 권하였다.","이 말을 듣고 우리는 그 곳 사람들과 함께 바울로에게 예루살렘으로 올라가지 말라고 간곡히 권하였다.","우리가 그 말을 듣고 그 곳 사람들과 더불어 바울에게 예루살렘으로 올라가지 말라 권하니","우리가 그 말을 듣고 그곳 사람들로 더불어 바울에게 예루살렘으로 올라가지 말라 권하니","이 말을 들은 그 도시의 신도들이나 바울과 동행한 우리 모두는 예루살렘에 가지 말 것을 바울에게 울면서 간곡히 권하였다.","When we heard this, we and the local residents begged him not to go up to Jerusalem.","And when we heard these things, both we, and they of that place, besought him not to go up to Jerusalem.","When we heard this, we and the people there pleaded with Paul not to go up to Jerusalem.","Quod cum audissemus, rogabamus nos et, qui loci illius erant, ne ipse ascenderet Ierusalem.","ויהי כאשר שמענו את זאת ונבקש ממנו אנחנו ואנשי המקום אשר לא יעלה ירושלים׃"],["51","21","13","그때에 바오로가 대답하였다. “왜 그렇게 울면서 내 마음을 아프게 합니까? 나는 주 예수님의 이름을 위하여 예루살렘에서 결박될 뿐만 아니라 죽을 각오까지 되어 있습니다.”","그러자 바울로는 \"왜들 이렇게 울면서 남의 마음을 흔들어놓는 겁니까? 주 예수를 위해서 나는 예루살렘에 가서 묶일 뿐만 아니라 죽을 각오까지도 되어 있습니다.\" 하고 대답하였다.","바울이 대답하되 여러분이 어찌하여 울어 내 마음을 상하게 하느냐 나는 주 예수의 이름을 위하여 결박 당할 뿐 아니라 예루살렘에서 죽을 것도 각오하였노라 하니","바울이 대답하되 너희가 어찌하여 울어 내 마음을 상하게 하느냐 나는 주 예수의 이름을 위하여 결박 받을 뿐아니라 예루살렘에서 죽을 것도 각오하였노라 하니","그러나 바울이 말하였다. \"왜 이렇게 모두들 울고 있습니까? 내 결심을 꺾지 마십시오. 주님 예수를 위해서라면 나는 투옥은 물론이고 죽을 각오도 이미 서 있습니다.\"","Then Paul replied, “What are you doing, weeping and breaking my heart? I am prepared not only to be bound but even to die in Jerusalem for the name of the Lord Jesus.”","Then Paul answered, What mean ye to weep and to break mine heart? for I am ready not to be bound only, but also to die at Jerusalem for the name of the Lord Jesus.","Then Paul answered, \"Why are you weeping and breaking my heart? I am ready not only to be bound, but also to die in Jerusalem for the name of the Lord Jesus.\"","Tunc respondit Paulus:  “Quid facitis flentes et affligentes cor meum? Ego enim non solum alligari sed et mori in Ierusalem paratus sum propter nomen Domini Iesu “.","ויען פולוס ויאמר מה לכם אשר תבכו ותשברו לבבי כי נכון אנכי לא לבד להאסר כי גם למות בירושלים על שם ישוע האדון׃"],["51","21","14","바오로가 단념하지 않자 우리는 포기하고, “주님의 뜻이 이루어지기를 빕니다.” 하고만 말하였다.","바울로가 우리의 권고를 받아들이지 않으므로 우리는 다만 \"주님의 뜻대로 되게 하여주십시오.\" 하고 기도할 뿐 그 이상 더 말하지 않았다.","그가 권함을 받지 아니하므로 우리가 주의 뜻대로 이루어지이다 하고 그쳤노라","저가 권함을 받지 아니하므로 우리가 주의 뜻대로 이루어지이다 하고 그쳤노라","아무리 권해도 소용 없다는 걸 알고 우리는 단념하며 \"주님의 뜻이 이루어지기를 바랍니다\" 하고 말하였다.","Since he would not be dissuaded we let the matter rest, saying, “The Lord’s will be done.”","And when he would not be persuaded, we ceased, saying, The will of the Lord be done.","When he would not be dissuaded, we gave up and said, \"The Lord's will be done.\"","Et cum ei suadere non possemus, quievimus dicentes:  “Domini voluntas fiat! “.","ולא אבה שמע ונרף ממנו לאמר רצון יהוה יעשה׃"],["51","21","15","그렇게 며칠을 보낸 뒤 우리는 여행 준비를 하고 예루살렘으로 올라갔다.","며칠 뒤에 우리는 행장을 꾸려가지고 예루살렘으로 올라갔다.","이 여러 날 후에 여장을 꾸려 예루살렘으로 올라갈새","이 여러 날 후에 행장을 준비하여 예루살렘으로 올라갈쌔","며칠 뒤에 우리는 짐을 꾸려 가지고 예루살렘을 향하여 떠났다.","After these days we made preparations for our journey, then went up to Jerusalem.","And after those days we took up our carriages, and went up to Jerusalem.","After this, we got ready and went up to Jerusalem.","Post dies autem istos praeparati ascendebamus Hierosolymam;","ואחרי הימים האלה נשאנו את כלינו ונעל ירושלים׃"],["51","21","16","카이사리아의 제자 몇 사람도 우리와 함께 갔는데, 그들이 우리를 므나손의 집으로 데려가 그곳에 머무르게 하였다. 그는 키프로스인으로서 오래전에 제자가 된 사람이었다.","가이사리아의 신도 몇 사람도 같이 가서 오래 전부터 신도가 된 키프로스 사람 므나손의 집에 우리를 데려다 주었다. 우리는 그 집에서 묵게 되었다.","가이사랴의 몇 제자가 함께 가며 한 오랜 제자 구브로 사람 나손을 데리고 가니 이는 우리가 그의 집에 머물려 함이라","가이사랴의 몇 제자가 함께 가며 한 오랜 제자 구브로 사람 나손을 데리고 가니 이는 우리가 그의 집에 유하려 함이라","우리와 동행한 가이사랴의 신도 몇 사람이 예루살렘에 도착하는 즉시 우리를 나손의 집으로 안내해 주었다. 나손은 구브로 섬 출신으로 일찍이 신도가 된 사람이었다.","Some of the disciples from Caesarea came along to lead us to the house of Mnason, a Cypriot, a disciple of long standing, with whom we were to stay.","There went with us also certain of the disciples of Caesarea, and brought with them one Mnason of Cyprus, an old disciple, with whom we should lodge.","Some of the disciples from Caesarea accompanied us and brought us to the home of Mnason, where we were to stay. He was a man from Cyprus and one of the early disciples.","venerunt autem et ex discipulis a Caesarea nobiscum adducentes apud quem hospitaremur, Mnasonem quendam Cyprium, antiquum discipulum.","וילכו אתנו גם תלמידים מקסרין ויביאו אתנו ללון בבית איש כתי ושמו מנסון והוא תלמיד ישן׃"],["51","21","17","우리가 예루살렘에 다다르자 형제들이 반가이 맞아 주었다.","예루살렘에 도착한 우리는 교우들의 따뜻한 영접을 받았다.","예루살렘에 이르니 형제들이 우리를 기꺼이 영접하거늘","예루살렘에 이르니 형제들이 우리를 기꺼이 영접하거늘","예루살렘에 있는 신도들은 우리를 진심으로 환영해 주었다.","When we reached Jerusalem the brothers welcomed us warmly.","And when we were come to Jerusalem, the brethren received us gladly.","When we arrived at Jerusalem, the brothers received us warmly.","Et cum venissemus Hierosolymam, libenter exceperunt nos fratres.","ויהי כבאנו ירושלים ויקבלו אתנו האחים בשמחה׃"],["51","21","18","이튿날 바오로는 우리와 함께 야고보를 찾아갔는데 원로들도 모두 와 있었다.","다음날 우리는 바울로를 따라 야고보를 찾아갔는데 원로들도 다 거기에 모여 있었다.","그 이튿날 바울이 우리와 함께 야고보에게로 들어가니 장로들도 다 있더라","그 이튿날 바울이 우리와 함께 야고보에게로 들어가니 장로들도 다 있더라","예루살렘에 도착한 그 다음날 바울은 우리를 데리고 야고보를 비롯한 예루살렘 교회 장로들을 만나러 갔다.","The next day, Paul accompanied us on a visit to James, and all the presbyters were present.","And the day following Paul went in with us unto James; and all the elders were present.","The next day Paul and the rest of us went to see James, and all the elders were present.","Sequenti autem die introibat Paulus nobiscum ad Iacobum, omnesque collecti sunt presbyteri.","וממחרת היום נכנס פולוס עמנו אל יעקב ויבאו שמה כל הזקנים׃"],["51","21","19","바오로는 그들에게 인사하고 나서, 자기의 직무 수행을 통하여 하느님께서 다른 민족들에게 하신 일들을 낱낱이 이야기하였다.","바울로는 그들에게 인사한 다음, 자기의 활동을 통하여 하느님께서 이방인들에게 해놓으신 일들을 낱낱이 보고하였다.","바울이 문안하고 하나님이 자기의 사역으로 말미암아 이방 가운데서 하신 일을 낱낱이 말하니","바울이 문안하고 하나님이 자기의 봉사로 말미암아 이방 가운데서 하신 일을 낱낱이 고하니","한차례 인사가 끝난 다음 바울은 그의 전도여행을 통하여 하나님께서 이방인들 가운데 이루어 놓으신 많은 일들을 낱낱이 보고하였다.","He greeted them, then proceeded to tell them in detail what God had accomplished among the Gentiles through his ministry.","And when he had saluted them, he declared particularly what things God had wrought among the Gentiles by his ministry.","Paul greeted them and reported in detail what God had done among the Gentiles through his ministry.","Quos cum salutasset, narrabat per singula, quae fecisset Deus in gentibus per ministerium ipsius.","וישאלם לשלום ויספר אחת לאחת את אשר עשה האלהים לגוים בשרותו׃"],["51","21","20","이야기를 들은 그들은 하느님을 찬양하고 나서 그에게 말하였다. “바오로 형제, 보시다시피 유다인들 가운데에서 신자가 된 이들이 수만 명이나 되는데, 그들은 모두 율법을 열성으로 지키는 사람들입니다.","그들은 그 보고를 듣고 하느님을 찬양하며 바울로에게 이렇게 말하였다. \"아시겠지만 유다인들 가운데서도 예수를 믿는 사람이 대단히 많습니다. 그들은 모두 율법을 지키는 데 골몰한 사람들입니다.","그들이 듣고 하나님께 영광을 돌리고 바울더러 이르되 형제여 그대도 보는 바에 유대인 중에 믿는 자 수만 명이 있으니 다 율법에 열성을 가진 자라","저희가 듣고 하나님께 영광을 돌리고 바울더러 이르되 형제여 그대도 보는 바에 유대인 중에 믿는 자 수만명이 있으니 다 율법에 열심 있는 자라","그들은 하나님을 찬양하며 바울에게 말하였다. \"사랑하는 형제여, 당신도 아시다시피 수많은 유대인들도 신도가 되었습니다. 그러나 그들은 그리스도인이 된 후에도 유대의 전통과 관습만은 반드시 지켜 나가야 한다고 주장하고 있습니다.","They praised God when they heard it but said to him, “Brother, you see how many thousands of believers there are from among the Jews, and they are all zealous observers of the law.","And when they heard it, they glorified the Lord, and said unto him, Thou seest, brother, how many thousands of Jews there are which believe; and they are all zealous of the law:","When they heard this, they praised God. Then they said to Paul: \"You see, brother, how many thousands of Jews have believed, and all of them are zealous for the law.","At illi cum audissent, glorificabant Deum dixeruntque ei:  “Vides, frater, quot milia sint in Iudaeis, qui crediderunt, et omnes aemulatores sunt legis;","וישמעו ויהללו את האלהים ויאמרו אליו הנך ראה אחינו כמה רבבות יהודים באו להאמין וכלם מקנאים לתורה׃"],["51","21","21","그런데 당신이 다른 민족들 가운데에서 사는 모든 유다인에게 모세를 배신하라고 가르치면서 자식들에게 할례를 베풀지도 말고 우리 관습을 따르지도 말라고 한다는 이야기를 그들이 들었습니다.","그런데 그들은 당신이 이방인들 가운데서 사는 모든 유다인들에게 모세를 배척하고 자식들에게 할례도 베풀지 말고 유다인의 풍속을 지키지도 말라고 가르친다는 말을 전해 듣고 있습니다.","네가 이방에 있는 모든 유대인을 가르치되 모세를 배반하고 아들들에게 할례를 행하지 말고 또 관습을 지키지 말라 한다 함을 그들이 들었도다","네가 이방에 있는 모든 유대인을 가르치되 모세를 배반하고 아들들에게 할례를 하지 말고 또 규모를 지키지 말라 한다 함을 저희가 들었도다","그런데 그들 모두가 당신이 이방에 있는 유대인들에게 모세의 율법과 우리 유대인의 관습을 어겨 아이들에게 할례 베푸는 것을 금하라고 가르치고 있다는 말을 들었으니","They have been informed that you are teaching all the Jews who live among the Gentiles to abandon Moses and that you are telling them not to circumcise their children or to observe their customary practices.","And they are informed of thee, that thou teachest all the Jews which are among the Gentiles to forsake Moses, saying that they ought not to circumcise their children, neither to walk after the customs.","They have been informed that you teach all the Jews who live among the Gentiles to turn away from Moses, telling them not to circumcise their children or live according to our customs.","audierunt autem de te quia discessionem doceas a Moyse omnes, qui per gentes sunt, Iudaeos, dicens non debere circumcidere eos filios suos neque secundum consuetudines ambulare.","והם שמעו עליך שמועה כי תלמד את כל היהודים אשר בקרב הגוים לסור ממשה באמרך כי אין עליהם למול את בניהם וללכת בחקות התורה׃"],["51","21","22","그러니 어떻게 하면 좋겠습니까? 그들도 당신이 왔다는 것을 틀림없이 듣게 될 것입니다.","그들은 당신이 여기 온 것을 틀림없이 알게 될 터이니 어떻게 하면 좋겠습니까?","그러면 어찌할꼬 그들이 필연 그대가 온 것을 들으리니","그러면 어찌할꼬 저희가 필연 그대의 온 것을 들으리니","이제 어떻게 하면 좋겠습니까? 당신이 여기 왔다는 것도 틀림없이 그들이 알게 될 것입니다.","What is to be done? They will surely hear that you have arrived.","What is it therefore? the multitude must needs come together: for they will hear that thou art come.","What shall we do? They will certainly hear that you have come,","Quid ergo est? Utique audient te supervenisse.","ועתה מה לעשות הנה האסף יאסף המון העם כי ישמעו כי באת׃"],["51","21","23","그러니 우리가 말하는 대로 하십시오. 우리 가운데에 서원을 한 사람이 넷 있습니다.","그러니 당신은 우리가 일러주는 대로만 하시오. 여기에 하느님 앞에 맹세를 한 사람 넷이 있습니다.","우리가 말하는 이대로 하라 서원한 네 사람이 우리에게 있으니","우리의 말하는 이대로 하라 서원한 네 사람이 우리에게 있으니","그러니 당신은 이렇게 하십시오. 여기에 하나님께 서원을 한 네 사람이 있습니다.","So do what we tell you. We have four men who have taken a vow.","Do therefore this that we say to thee: We have four men which have a vow on them;","so do what we tell you. There are four men with us who have made a vow.","Hoc ergo fac, quod tibi dicimus. Sunt nobis viri quattuor votum habentes super se;","לכן עשה זאת אפוא אשר נאמר אליך׃"],["51","21","24","그 사람들을 데리고 가서 함께 정결 예식을 거행하고, 그들이 머리를 깎을 수 있도록 그 비용을 대십시오. 그러면 당신에 관한 이야기가 아무것도 아닐 뿐만 아니라 오히려 당신도 율법을 정확히 지키며 산다는 것을 모든 사람이 알게 될 것입니다.","이 사람들을 데리고 가서 함께 정결예식을 행하고 그 비용을 대십시오. 그러면 그들이 삭발을 하게 될 것이고 유다인들은 당신에 관한 소문이 전혀 사실이 아닐 뿐더러 도리어 당신도 모세의 율법을 지키며 산다는 것을 다 알게 될 것입니다.","그들을 데리고 함께 결례를 행하고 그들을 위하여 비용을 내어 머리를 깎게 하라 그러면 모든 사람이 그대에 대하여 들은 것이 사실이 아니고 그대도 율법을 지켜 행하는 줄로 알 것이라","저희를 데리고 함께 결례를 행하고 저희를 위하여 비용을 내어 머리를 깎게 하라 그러면 모든 사람이 그대에게 대하여 들은 것이 헛된 것이고 그대도 율법을 지켜 행하는 줄로 알 것이라","그들과 같이 성전에 가서 함께 머리를 깍은 다음 그 비용을 모두 대신 물어주십시오. 그러면 당신이 유대의 관습을 인정할 뿐 아니라 스스로도 잘 지켜 가고 있다고 믿고 다시는 그들이 당신을 의심하지 않을 것입니다.","Take these men and purify yourself with them, and pay their expenses that they may have their heads shaved. In this way everyone will know that there is nothing to the reports they have been given about you but that you yourself live in observance of the law.","Them take, and purify thyself with them, and be at charges with them, that they may shave their heads: and all may know that those things, whereof they were informed concerning thee, are nothing; but that thou thyself also walkest orderly, and keepest the law.","Take these men, join in their purification rites and pay their expenses, so that they can have their heads shaved. Then everybody will know there is no truth in these reports about you, but that you yourself are living in obedience to the law.","his assumptis, sanctifica te cum illis et impende pro illis, ut radant capita, et scient omnes quia, quae de te audierunt, nihil sunt, sed ambulas et ipse custodiens legem.","הנה יש אתנו ארבעה אנשים אשר נדר עליהם אתם קח לך והטהר אתם ושלם ההוצאות בעדם למען אשר יגלחו את ראשם וידעו כלם כי שמועת שוא שמעו עליך וכי אתה בעצמך מתהלך בחקות התורה׃"],["51","21","25","그리고 신자가 된 다른 민족들에 관해서는, 우상에게 바쳤던 제물과 피와 목 졸라 죽인 짐승의 고기와 불륜을 삼가라는 우리의 결정을 이미 편지로 써 보낸 바 있습니다.”","이방인 신도들에게는 우상에게 바쳤던 제물을 먹지 말고 피와 목 졸라 죽인 짐승을 먹지 말고 음란한 행동을 하지 말아야 한다는 우리의 결정을 이미 써 보낸 바 있습니다.\"","주를 믿는 이방인에게는 우리가 우상의 제물과 피와 목매어 죽인 것과 음행을 피할 것을 결의하고 편지하였느니라 하니","주를 믿는 이방인에게는 우리가 우상의 제물과 피와 목매어 죽인 것과 음행을 피할 것을 결의하고 편지하였느니라 하니","이방인 그리스도인에게는 이런 유대인의 관습을 지키라고 요구할 생각이 전혀 없습니다. 그들은 다만 전에 편지로 써보낸 대로 우상에게 바쳤던 음식을 먹지 말고, 목졸라 죽인 짐승의 고기를 피를 빼지 않은 채 먹지 말고, 음행을 하지 말라고 하는 것만 지키면 될 것입니다.\"","As for the Gentiles who have come to believe, we sent them our decision that they abstain from meat sacrificed to idols, from blood, from the meat of strangled animals, and from unlawful marriage.”","As touching the Gentiles which believe, we have written and concluded that they observe no such thing, save only that they keep themselves from things offered to idols, and from blood, and from strangled, and from fornication.","As for the Gentile believers, we have written to them our decision that they should abstain from food sacrificed to idols, from blood, from the meat of strangled animals and from sexual immorality.\"","De his autem, qui crediderunt, gentibus nos scripsimus iudicantes, ut abstineant ab idolothyto et sanguine et suffocato et fornicatione “.","ועל דבר המאמינים בגוים כתבנו וגזרנו אשר לא ישמרו דבר מאלה רק להשמר מזבחי אלילים ומן הדם ומבשר הנחנק ומן הזנות׃"],["51","21","26","그래서 바오로는 그 사람들을 데리고 가서, 이튿날 그들과 함께 정결 예식을 거행한 다음 성전으로 들어갔다. 그리고 정결 예식 기한이 차는 날, 곧 그들 각자를 위하여 예물을 바칠 날을 신고하였다.","바울로는 그 이튿날 그 네 사람을 데리고 함께 정결예식을 행하고 성전으로 들어갔다. 그리고 정결의 기간이 끝나는 날짜 곧 각 사람이 예물을 바칠 날짜를 신고하였다.","바울이 이 사람들을 데리고 이튿날 그들과 함께 결례를 행하고 성전에 들어가서 각 사람을 위하여 제사 드릴 때까지의 결례 기간이 만기된 것을 신고하니라","바울이 이 사람들을 데리고 이튿날 저희와 함께 결례를 행하고 성전에 들어가서 각 사람을 위하여 제사 드릴 때까지의 결례의 만기 된것을 고하니라","바울은 그들의 제안를 받아들여 다음날 그 네 사람과 같이 의식을 치르고 성전으로 갔다. 그리고 그들과 함께 정결예식이 끝나는 이레 뒤에는 희생제물을 바치겠다고 사람들 앞에서 서약하였다.","So Paul took the men, and on the next day after purifying himself together with them entered the temple to give notice of the day when the purification would be completed and the offering made for each of them.","Then Paul took the men, and the next day purifying himself with them entered into the temple, to signify the accomplishment of the days of purification, until that an offering should be offered for every one of them.","The next day Paul took the men and purified himself along with them. Then he went to the temple to give notice of the date when the days of purification would end and the offering would be made for each of them.","Tunc Paulus, assumptis viris, postera die purificatus cum illis intravit in templum annuntians expletionem dierum purificationis, donec offerretur pro unoquoque eorum oblatio.","ויקח פולוס את האנשים ויטהר אתם וממחרת בא אל המקדש ויגד כי מלאו ימי טהרתם עד כי הקרב קרבן כל אחד מהם׃"],["51","21","27","그 이레가 거의 끝날 무렵, 아시아에서 온 유다인들이 성전에서 바오로를 보고서는, 온 군중을 선동하여 그를 붙잡고","이레 동안의 정결 기간이 거의 끝날 무렵, 아시아에서 온 유다인들이 바울로가 성전에 있는 것을 보고 군중을 선동하여 그를 붙잡고","그 이레가 거의 차매 아시아로부터 온 유대인들이 성전에서 바울을 보고 모든 무리를 충동하여 그를 붙들고","그 이레가 거의 차매 아시아로부터 온 유대인들이 성전에서 바울을 보고 모든 무리를 충동하여 그를 붙들고","이레가 거의 다 되어갈 무렵이었다. 아시아에서 온 유대인들이 성전 안에 있는 바울을 보고 군중을 선동하여 그를 붙잡은 후에 말하였다.","When the seven days were nearly completed, the Jews from the province of Asia noticed him in the temple, stirred up the whole crowd, and laid hands on him,","And when the seven days were almost ended, the Jews which were of Asia, when they saw him in the temple, stirred up all the people, and laid hands on him,","When the seven days were nearly over, some Jews from the province of Asia saw Paul at the temple. They stirred up the whole crowd and seized him,","Dum autem septem dies consummarentur, hi, qui de Asia erant, Iudaei cum vidissent eum in templo, concitaverunt omnem turbam et iniecerunt ei manus","ויהי כאשר קרבו שבעת הימים לכלות והיהודים אשר מאסיא ראו אתו במקדש ויעוררו את כל ההמון וישלחו בו את ידיהם׃"],["51","21","28","외쳤다. “이스라엘인 여러분, 우리를 도와주십시오. 이자는 어디에서건 누구에게나 우리 백성과 율법과 이 성전을 거슬러 가르치는 사람입니다. 더군다나 그리스인들까지 성전 안으로 데리고 들어와서 이 거룩한 곳을 부정하게 만들었습니다.”","\"이스라엘 동포 여러분, 우리를 도와주시오. 이자는 어디 가든지 누구에게나 우리 동포와 율법과 이 성전을 반대하라고 가르치는 사람입니다. 그뿐만 아니라 이자는 이방인들까지 성전으로 데리고 들어와서 이 거룩한 곳을 더럽혀 놓았습니다.\" 하고 소리쳤다.","외치되 이스라엘 사람들아 도우라 이 사람은 각처에서 우리 백성과 율법과 이 곳을 비방하여 모든 사람을 가르치는 그 자인데 또 헬라인을 데리고 성전에 들어가서 이 거룩한 곳을 더럽혔다 하니","외치되 이스라엘 사람들아 도우라 이 사람은 각처에서 우리 백성과 율법과 이곳을 훼방하여 모든 사람을 가르치는 그 자인데 또 헬라인을 데리고 성전에 들어가서 이 거룩한 곳을 더럽게 하였다 하니","\"이스라엘 동포 여러분! 우리 말을 들어주오. 이 자는 우리 민족을 반대하고 모든 사람에게 유대인의 율법을 거역하라고 가르치고 있소. 게다가 이 신성한 성전에까지 이방인들을 끌어들여 성전을 더럽히고 있소.\"","shouting, “Fellow Israelites, help us. This is the man who is teaching everyone everywhere against the people and the law and this place, and what is more, he has even brought Greeks into the temple and defiled this sacred place.”","Crying out, Men of Israel, help: This is the man, that teacheth all men every where against the people, and the law, and this place: and further brought Greeks also into the temple, and hath polluted this holy place.","shouting, \"Men of Israel, help us! This is the man who teaches all men everywhere against our people and our law and this place. And besides, he has brought Greeks into the temple area and defiled this holy place.\"","clamantes:  “Viri Israelitae, adiuvate! Hic est homo, qui adversus populum et legem et locum hunc omnes ubique docens, insuper et Graecos induxit in templum et polluit sanctum locum istum “.","ויצעקו לאמר אנשי ישראל עזרו זה הוא האיש המלמד את כל אדם אשר בכל הארץ סרה על העם הזה ועל התורה ועל המקום הזה וגם הביא אל המקדש אנשים יונים ויחלל את המקום הקדוש הזה׃"],["51","21","29","그들은 전에 에페소 사람 트로피모스가 바오로와 함께 성안에 있는 것을 보고, 바오로가 그를 성전 안으로 데리고 들어갔다고 생각한 것이다.","그들은 바울로가 시내에서 에페소 사람 드로피모와 함께 있는 것을 보았으므로 필경 바울로가 그 이방인을 성전에까지 데리고 들어갔으리라고 생각하였던 것이다.","이는 그들이 전에 에베소 사람 드로비모가 바울과 함께 시내에 있음을 보고 바울이 그를 성전에 데리고 들어간 줄로 생각함이러라","이는 저희가 전에 에베소 사람 드로비모가 바울과 함께 성내에 있음을 보고 바울이 저를 성전에 데리고 들어간 줄로 생각함일러라","그들은 바울이 에베소에서 온 드로비모와 같이 있는 것을 보고 바울이 으레 그를 성전으로 데리고 들어온 줄로 알았던 것이다.","For they had previously seen Trophimus the Ephesian in the city with him and supposed that Paul had brought him into the temple.","(For they had seen before with him in the city Trophimus an Ephesian, whom they supposed that Paul had brought into the temple.)","(They had previously seen Trophimus the Ephesian in the city with Paul and assumed that Paul had brought him into the temple area.)","Viderant enim Trophimum Ephesium in civitate cum ipso, quem aestimabant quoniam in templum induxisset Paulus.","כי היו ראים את טרופימוס האפסי בעיר אתו ויחשבו כי פולוס הביא אתו אל המקדש׃"],["51","21","30","그래서 온 도시가 소란해지면서 백성이 몰려들었다. 그들은 바오로를 붙잡아 성전 밖으로 끌어냈다. 그러자 성전 문들이 곧 닫혔다.","이 때문에 온 도시가 소란해지고 사람들이 몰려들었다. 그들은 바울로를 붙잡아서 성전 밖으로 끌어냈다. 그러자 성전문은 곧 닫혔다.","온 성이 소동하여 백성이 달려와 모여 바울을 잡아 성전 밖으로 끌고 나가니 문들이 곧 닫히더라","온 성이 소동하여 백성이 달려와 모여 바울을 잡아 성전 밖으로 끌고 나가니 문들이 곧 닫히더라","이 말을 들은 사람들이 흥분해서 소란을 피우며 들끓기 시작하였다. 몰려든 군중이 바울을 성전 밖으로 끌고 나가자 성전 문이 곧 닫혔다.","The whole city was in turmoil with people rushing together. They seized Paul and dragged him out of the temple, and immediately the gates were closed.","And all the city was moved, and the people ran together: and they took Paul, and drew him out of the temple: and forthwith the doors were shut.","The whole city was aroused, and the people came running from all directions. Seizing Paul, they dragged him from the temple, and immediately the gates were shut.","Commotaque est civitas tota, et facta est concursio populi, et apprehendentes Paulum trahebant eum extra templum, et statim clausae sunt ianuae.","ותהם כל העיר וירץ העם ויקבץ ויאחזו את פולוס וימשכהו אל מחוץ למקדש ופתאם סגרו הדלתות׃"]]