[["50","12","37","예수님께서는 그들 앞에서 그토록 많은 표징을 일으키셨지만, 그들은 그분을 믿지 않았다.","예수께서 그렇게도 많은 기적을 사람들 앞에서 행하셨건만 그들은 예수를 믿으려 하지 않았다.","이렇게 많은 표적을 그들 앞에서 행하셨으나 그를 믿지 아니하니","이렇게 많은 3)표적을 저희 앞에서 행하셨으나 저를 믿지 아니하니 혹 이적","예수께서 그렇게 많은 이적을 보이셨음에도 불구하고 대부분의 사람들은 그분을 믿지 않았다.","Although he had performed so many signs in their presence they did not believe in him,","But though he had done so many miracles before them, yet they believed not on him:","Even after Jesus had done all these miraculous signs in their presence, they still would not believe in him.","Cum autem tanta signa fecisset coram eis, non credebant in eum,","רבים האתות אשר עשה לעיניהם ובכל זאת לא האמינו בו׃"],["50","12","38","이는 이사야 예언자가 한 말이 이루어지려고 그리된 것이다. “주님, 저희가 전한 말을 누가 믿었습니까? 주님의 권능이 누구에게 드러났습니까?”","그리하여 예언자 이사야가, \"3)주여, 우리가 전한 말을 누가 믿었으며 주께서 보여주신 능력을 누가 깨달았습니까?\" 한 말이 이루어졌다. 이사 53:1.","이는 선지자 이사야의 말씀을 이루려 하심이라 이르되 ㄴ)주여 우리에게서 들은 바를 누가 믿었으며 주의 팔이 누구에게 나타났나이까 하였더라","이는 선지자 이사야의 말씀을 이루려 하심이라 가로되 ㄴ)주여 우리에게 들은 바를 누가 믿었으며 주의 팔이 뉘게 나타났나이까 하였더라 사 53:1","이것은 예언자 이사야가 예언한 그대로 이루어진 것이다. ㄱ) \"우리가 들은 소식을 아무나 믿겠느냐? 여호와의 권능과 승리가 그토록 비천하고 멸시받는 사람에게서 나타난다는 것을 도대체 믿을 사람이 어디에 있겠는가?\" (ㄱ. 70인역 사53:1)","in order that the word which Isaiah the prophet spoke might be fulfilled: “Lord, who has believed our preaching, to whom has the might of the Lord been revealed?”","That the saying of Esaias the prophet might be fulfilled, which he spake, Lord, who hath believed our report? and to whom hath the arm of the Lord been revealed?","This was to fulfill the word of Isaiah the prophet: \"Lord, who has believed our message and to whom has the arm of the Lord been revealed?\"","ut sermo Isaiae prophetae impleretur, quem dixit:  “Domine, quis credidit auditui nostro, et brachium Domini cui revelatum est? “.","למלאת דבר ישעיהו הנביא אשר אמר יהוה מי האמין לשמעתנו וזרוע יהוה על מי נגלתה׃"],["50","12","39","그들이 믿을 수 없었던 까닭을 이사야는 또 이렇게 말하였다.","그들이 믿을 수가 없었던 이유를 이사야는 또 이렇게 말하였다.","그들이 능히 믿지 못한 것은 이 때문이니 곧 이사야가 다시 일렀으되","저희가 능히 믿지 못한 것은 이 까닭이니 곧 이사야가 다시 일렀으되","또한 그들이 믿을 수 없었던 이유를 이사야는 이렇게 예언하였다.","For this reason they could not believe, because again Isaiah said:","Therefore they could not believe, because that Esaias said again,","For this reason they could not believe, because, as Isaiah says elsewhere:","Propterea non poterant credere, quia iterum dixit Isaias:","על כן לא יכלו להאמין כי עוד אמר ישעיהו׃"],["50","12","40","“주님이 그들의 눈을 멀게 하고 그들의 마음을 무디게 하였다. 이는 그들이 눈으로 보고 마음으로 깨닫고서는 돌아와 내가 그들을 고쳐 주는 일이 없게 하려는 것이다.”","\"4)주께서 그들의 눈을 멀게 하시고 그들의 마음을 둔하게 하셨으니 이는 그들이 눈을 가지고도 알아보지 못하고 마음으로도 깨닫지 못하여 끝내 나에게로 돌아오지 못하고 나한테 온전히 고쳐지지 못하게 하시려는 것이다.\"이사 6:10.","ㄷ)그들의 눈을 멀게 하시고 그들의 마음을 완고하게 하셨으니 이는 그들로 하여금 눈으로 보고 마음으로 깨닫고 돌이켜 내게 고침을 받지 못하게 하려 함이라 하였음이더라","ㄷ)저희 눈을 멀게 하시고 저희 마음을 완고하게 하셨으니 이는 저희로 하여금 눈으로 보고 마음으로 깨닫고 돌이켜 내게 고침을 받지 못하게 하려 함이니라 하였음이더라 사 6:10","ㄴ) \"이 백성의 마음을 둔하게 하여라. 귀를 막아 버려라. 눈을 아예 감겨 버려라. 그들이 눈으로 보거나 귀로 듣거나 마음으로 깨달아 내게로 돌아오지 못하게 하여라. 그들이 고침받는 일이 없게 하여라.\" (ㄴ. 70인역 사6:10)","“He blinded their eyes and hardened their heart, so that they might not see with their eyes and understand with their heart and be converted, and I would heal them.”","He hath blinded their eyes, and hardened their heart; that they should not see with their eyes, nor understand with their heart, and be converted, and I should heal them.","\"He has blinded their eyes and deadened their hearts, so they can neither see with their eyes, nor understand with their hearts, nor turn--and I would heal them.\"","Excaecavit oculos eorum et induravit eorum cor, ut non videant oculis et intellegant corde et convertantur, et sanem eos.","השע עיניהם והשמין לבבם פן יראו בעיניהם ולבבם יבין ושבו ורפאתי להם׃"],["50","12","41","이사야가 이렇게 말한 것은, 그가 예수님의 영광을 보았기 때문이다. 그는 그분에 관하여 이야기한 것이다.","이것은 이사야가 예수의 영광을 보았기 때문에 말한 것이며 또 예수를 가리켜서 한 말이었다.","이사야가 이렇게 말한 것은 주의 영광을 보고 주를 가리켜 말한 것이라","이사야가 이렇게 말한 것은 주의 영광을 보고 주를 가리켜 말한 것이라","이사야는 주님의 영광을 보았고 주님을 가리켜 이러한 예언을 한 것이었다.","Isaiah said this because he saw his glory and spoke about him.","These things said Esaias, when he saw his glory, and spake of him.","Isaiah said this because he saw Jesus' glory and spoke about him.","Haec dixit Isaias, quia vidit gloriam eius et locutus est de eo.","כזאת דבר ישעיהו בראותו את תפארתו וינבא עליו׃"],["50","12","42","사실 지도자들 가운데에서도 많은 사람이 예수님을 믿었지만, 바리사이들 때문에 회당에서 내쫓길까 두려워 그것을 고백하지 못하였다.","유다 지도자들 중에서도 예수를 믿는 사람들이 많았으나 바리사이파 사람들이 두려워서 예수 믿는다는 말을 드러내 놓고 하지는 못하였다. 회당에서 쫓겨날까 겁이 났던 것이다.","그러나 관리 중에도 그를 믿는 자가 많되 바리새인들 때문에 드러나게 말하지 못하니 이는 출교를 당할까 두려워함이라","그러나 관원 중에도 저를 믿는 자가 많되 바리새인들을 인하여 드러나게 말하지 못하니 이는 출회를 당할까 두려워함이라","유대인 지도자들 중에도 예수를 믿는 사람이 많았지만 아무도 그것을 내색하지 못하였다. 바리새파 사람들이 그들을 회당에서 쫓아낼까봐 두려웠기 때문이다.","Nevertheless, many, even among the authorities, believed in him, but because of the Pharisees they did not acknowledge it openly in order not to be expelled from the synagogue.","Nevertheless among the chief rulers also many believed on him; but because of the Pharisees they did not confess him, lest they should be put out of the synagogue:","Yet at the same time many even among the leaders believed in him. But because of the Pharisees they would not confess their faith for fear they would be put out of the synagogue;","Verumtamen et ex principibus multi crediderunt in eum, sed propter pharisaeos non confitebantur, ut de synagoga non eicerentur;","אולם רבים אף מן השרים האמינו בו אך בגלל הפרושים לא הודו למען אשר לא ינדו׃"],["50","12","43","그들이 하느님에게서 받는 영광보다 사람에게서 받는 영광을 더 사랑하였기 때문이다.","그들은 하느님께서 주시는 영광보다도 인간이 주는 영광을 더 사랑하는 사람들이었다.","그들은 사람의 영광을 하나님의 영광보다 더 사랑하였더라","저희는 사람의 영광을 하나님의 영광보다 더 사랑하였더라","그들은 하나님의 영광보다는 인간의 영광을 더 원했던 것이다.","For they preferred human praise to the glory of God.","For they loved the praise of men more than the praise of God.","for they loved praise from men more than praise from God.","dilexerunt enim gloriam hominum magis quam gloriam Dei.","כי אהבו כבוד אנשים יותר מכבוד האלהים׃"],["50","12","44","예수님께서 큰 소리로 말씀하셨다. “나를 믿는 사람은 나를 믿는 것이 아니라 나를 보내신 분을 믿는 것이다.","예수께서 큰소리로 이렇게 말씀하셨다. \"나를 믿는 사람은 나뿐 아니라 나를 보내신 분까지 믿는 것이고","예수께서 외쳐 이르시되 나를 믿는 자는 나를 믿는 것이 아니요 나를 보내신 이를 믿는 것이며","예수께서 외쳐 가라사대 나를 믿는 자는 나를 믿는 것이 아니요 나를 보내신 이를 믿는 것이며","예수께서 군중들에게 큰소리로 말씀하셨다. \"나를 믿는 사람은 나를 믿는 것이 아니라 나를 보내신 하나님을 믿는 것이다.","Jesus cried out and said, “Whoever believes in me believes not only in me but also in the one who sent me,","Jesus cried and said, He that believeth on me, believeth not on me, but on him that sent me.","Then Jesus cried out, \"When a man believes in me, he does not believe in me only, but in the one who sent me.","Iesus autem clamavit et dixit: “Qui credit in me, non credit in me sed in eum, qui misit me;","ויקרא ישוע ויאמר המאמין בי לא בי הוא מאמין כי אם בשלח אתי׃"],["50","12","45","그리고 나를 보는 사람은 나를 보내신 분을 보는 것이다.","나를 보는 사람은 나를 보내신 분도 보는 것이다.","나를 보는 자는 나를 보내신 이를 보는 것이니라","나를 보는 자는 나를 보내신 이를 보는 것이니라","나를 보는 사람은 곧 나를 보내신 분을 보는 것이 되기 때문이다.","and whoever sees me sees the one who sent me.","And he that seeth me seeth him that sent me.","When he looks at me, he sees the one who sent me.","et, qui videt me, videt eum, qui misit me.","והראה אתי את אשר שלחני הוא ראה׃"],["50","12","46","나는 빛으로서 이 세상에 왔다. 나를 믿는 사람은 누구나 어둠 속에 머무르지 않게 하려는 것이다.","나는 빛으로서 이 세상에 왔다. 그러므로 누구든지 나를 믿는 사람은 어둠 속에서 살지 않을 것이다.","나는 빛으로 세상에 왔나니 무릇 나를 믿는 자로 어둠에 거하지 않게 하려 함이로라","나는 빛으로 세상에 왔나니 무릇 나를 믿는 자로 어두움에 거하지 않게 하려 함이로라","나는 이 어두운 세상을 비추는 빛으로 왔다. 그러므로 나를 믿는 사람은 아무도 더 이상 어둠 속을 헤매지 않게 될 것이다.","I came into the world as light, so that everyone who believes in me might not remain in darkness.","I am come a light into the world, that whosoever believeth on me should not abide in darkness.","I have come into the world as a light, so that no one who believes in me should stay in darkness.","Ego lux in mundum veni, ut omnis, qui credit in me, in tenebris non maneat.","אני באתי לאור אל העולם למען כל אשר יאמין בי לא ישב בחשך׃"],["50","12","47","누가 내 말을 듣고 그것을 지키지 않는다 하여도, 나는 그를 심판하지 않는다. 나는 세상을 심판하러 온 것이 아니라 세상을 구원하러 왔기 때문이다.","어떤 사람이 내 말을 듣고 지키지 않는다 하더라도 나는 그를 단죄하지 않을 것이다. 나는 이 세상을 단죄하러 온 것이 아니라 구원하러 왔기 때문이다.","사람이 내 말을 듣고 지키지 아니할지라도 내가 그를 심판하지 아니하노라 내가 온 것은 세상을 심판하려 함이 아니요 세상을 구원하려 함이로라","사람이 내 말을 듣고 지키지 아니할찌라도 내가 저를 심판하지 아니하노라 내가 온 것은 세상을 심판하려 함이 아니요 세상을 구원하려 함이로라","내 말을 듣고서 나를 따르지 않는 사람이 있다 하더라도 나는 그를 심판하지 않겠다. 나는 세상을 심판하러 온 것이 아니고 구원하러 왔기 때문이다.","And if anyone hears my words and does not observe them, I do not condemn him, for I did not come to condemn the world but to save the world.","And if any man hear my words, and believe not, I judge him not: for I came not to judge the world, but to save the world.","\"As for the person who hears my words but does not keep them, I do not judge him. For I did not come to judge the world, but to save it.","Et si quis audierit verba mea et non custodierit, ego non iudico eum; non enim veni, ut iudicem mundum, sed ut salvificem mundum.","והשמע את דברי ולא ישמרם אני לא אשפט אתו כי לא באתי לשפט את העולם כי אם להושיע את העולם׃"],["50","12","48","나를 물리치고 내 말을 받아들이지 않는 자를 심판하는 것이 따로 있다. 내가 한 바로 그 말이 마지막 날에 그를 심판할 것이다.","그러나 나를 배척하고 내 말을 받아들이지 않는 사람을 단죄하는 것이 따로 있다. 내가 한 바로 그 말이 세상 끝날에 그를 단죄할 것이다.","나를 저버리고 내 말을 받지 아니하는 자를 심판할 이가 있으니 곧 내가 한 그 말이 마지막 날에 그를 심판하리라","나를 저버리고 내 말을 받지 아니하는 자를 심판할 이가 있으니 곧 나의 한 그 말이 마지막 날에 저를 심판하리라","그러나 나를 배척하는 사람은 모두 마지막 날에 가서 내가 말한 진리에 따라 심판받을 것이다.","Whoever rejects me and does not accept my words has something to judge him: the word that I spoke, it will condemn him on the last day,","He that rejecteth me, and receiveth not my words, hath one that judgeth him: the word that I have spoken, the same shall judge him in the last day.","There is a judge for the one who rejects me and does not accept my words; that very word which I spoke will condemn him at the last day.","Qui spernit me et non accipit verba mea, habet, qui iudicet eum: sermo, quem locutus sum, ille iudicabit eum in novissimo die,","ואיש אשר יבזני ולא יקח אמרי יש אחד אשר ידין אתו הדבר אשר דברתי הוא ידין אתו ביום האחרון׃"],["50","12","49","내가 스스로 말하지 않고, 나를 보내신 아버지께서 무엇을 말하고 무엇을 이야기할 것인지 친히 나에게 명령하셨기 때문이다.","나는 내 마음대로 말하지 않고 나를 보내신 아버지께서 무엇을 어떻게 말하라고 친히 명령하시는 대로 말하였다.","내가 내 자의로 말한 것이 아니요 나를 보내신 아버지께서 내가 말할 것과 이를 것을 친히 명령하여 주셨으니","내가 내 자의로 말한 것이 아니요 나를 보내신 아버지께서 나의 말할 것과 이를 것을 친히 명령하여 주셨으니","이 진리는 내 생각대로 하는 말이 아니다. 나는 아버지께서 너희에게 말하라고 하신 그대로를 전할 뿐이다.","because I did not speak on my own, but the Father who sent me commanded me what to say and speak.","For I have not spoken of myself; but the Father which sent me, he gave me a commandment, what I should say, and what I should speak.","For I did not speak of my own accord, but the Father who sent me commanded me what to say and how to say it.","quia ego ex meipso non sum locutus, sed, qui misit me, Pater, ipse mihi mandatum dedit quid dicam et quid loquar.","כי אני לא מלבי דברתי כי אם אבי השלח אתי הוא צוני את אשר אמר ואת אשר אדבר׃"],["50","12","50","나는 그분의 명령이 영원한 생명임을 안다. 그래서 내가 하는 말은 아버지께서 나에게 말씀하신 그대로 하는 말이다.”","나는 그 명령이 영원한 생명을 준다는 것을 안다. 그래서 나는 무엇이나 아버지께서 나에게 일러주신 대로 말하는 것뿐이다.\"","나는 그의 명령이 영생인 줄 아노라 그러므로 내가 이르는 것은 내 아버지께서 내게 말씀하신 그대로니라 하시니라","나는 그의 명령이 영생인줄 아노라 그러므로 나의 이르는 것은 내 아버지께서 내게 말씀하신 그대로 이르노라 하시니라","나는 그 가르치심이 영원한 생명에로 인도하는 것임을 안다. 그러므로 나는 아버지께서 내게 말씀해 주신 그대로를 말한다\"","And I know that his commandment is eternal life. So what I say, I say as the Father told me.”","And I know that his commandment is life everlasting: whatsoever I speak therefore, even as the Father said unto me, so I speak.","I know that his command leads to eternal life. So whatever I say is just what the Father has told me to say.\"","Et scio quia mandatum eius vita aeterna est. Quae ergo ego loquor, sicut dixit mihi Pater, sic loquor “.","ואני ידעתי כי מצותו חיי עולם לכן כל אשר אדבר כאשר אמר אלי אבי כן אני מדבר׃"],["50","13","1","파스카 축제가 시작되기 전, 예수님께서는 이 세상에서 아버지께로 건너가실 때가 온 것을 아셨다. 그분께서는 이 세상에서 사랑하신 당신의 사람들을 끝까지 사랑하셨다.","과월절을 하루 앞두고 예수께서는 이제 이 세상을 떠나 아버지께로 가실 때가 된 것을 아시고 이 세상에서 사랑하시던 제자들을 더욱 극진히 사랑해 주셨다.","유월절 전에 예수께서 자기가 세상을 떠나 아버지께로 돌아가실 때가 이른 줄 아시고 세상에 있는 자기 사람들을 사랑하시되 끝까지 사랑하시니라","유월절 전에 예수께서 자기가 세상을 떠나 아버지께로 돌아가실 때가 이른줄 아시고 세상에 있는 자기 사람들을 사랑하시되 끝까지 사랑하시니라","예수께서는 유월절 전날이 아버지께로 돌아가시기 전에 세상에서 지내실 마지막 밤인 것을 알고 계셨다.","Before the feast of Passover, Jesus knew that his hour had come to pass from this world to the Father. He loved his own in the world and he loved them to the end.","Now before the feast of the passover, when Jesus knew that his hour was come that he should depart out of this world unto the Father, having loved his own which were in the world, he loved them unto the end.","It was just before the Passover Feast. Jesus knew that the time had come for him to leave this world and go to the Father. Having loved his own who were in the world, he now showed them the full extent of his love.","Ante diem autem festum Pa schae, sciens Iesus quia venit eius hora, ut transeat ex hoc mundo ad Patrem, cum dilexisset suos, qui erant in mundo, in finem dilexit eos.","ולפני חג הפסח כשידע ישוע כי באה שעתו לעבר מן העולם הזה אל אביו כאשר אהב את בחיריו אשר בעולם כן אהבם עד הקץ׃"],["50","13","2","만찬 때의 일이다. 악마가 이미 시몬 이스카리옷의 아들 유다의 마음속에 예수님을 팔아넘길 생각을 불어넣었다.","예수께서 제자들과 같이 저녁을 잡수실 때 악마는 이미 가리옷 사람 시몬의 아들 유다의 마음속에 예수를 팔아넘길 생각을 불어넣었다.","마귀가 벌써 시몬의 아들 가룟 유다의 마음에 예수를 팔려는 생각을 넣었더라","마귀가 벌써 시몬의 아들 가룟 유다의 마음에 예수를 팔려는 생각을 넣었더니","마귀는 이미 예수께서 제자들과 함께 식사하시는 때를 이용해서 시몬의 아들 가룟 유다를 꾀어 그 밤 안으로 예수를 배신할 계획을 진행하도록 일러두었다. 예수께서는 아버지께서 모든 것을 자신에게 맡기신 것과 자신이 하나님께로부터 왔다가 하나님께로 가실 것을 알고 자기의 제자들을 사랑하는 마음이 한층 더하셨다.","The devil had already induced Judas, son of Simon the Iscariot, to hand him over. So, during supper,","And supper being ended, the devil having now put into the heart of Judas Iscariot, Simon's son, to betray him;","The evening meal was being served, and the devil had already prompted Judas Iscariot, son of Simon, to betray Jesus.","Et in cena, cum Diabolus iam misisset in corde, ut traderet eum Iudas Simonis Iscariotis,","ויהי אחרי החל הסעודה והשטן נתן בלב יהודה בן שמעון איש קריות למסרו׃"],["50","13","3","예수님께서는 아버지께서 모든 것을 당신 손에 내주셨다는 것을, 또 당신이 하느님에게서 나왔다가 하느님께 돌아간다는 것을 아시고,","한편 예수께서는 아버지께서 모든 것을 당신의 손에 맡겨주신 것과 당신이 하느님께로부터 왔다가 다시 하느님께 돌아가게 되었다는 것을 아시고","저녁 먹는 중 예수는 아버지께서 모든 것을 자기 손에 맡기신 것과 또 자기가 하나님께로부터 오셨다가 하나님께로 돌아가실 것을 아시고","저녁 먹는 중 예수는 아버지께서 모든 것을 자기 손에 맡기신 것과 또 자기가 하나님께로부터 오셨다가 하나님께로 돌아가실 것을 아시고","(2절에 포함되어 있음)","fully aware that the Father had put everything into his power and that he had come from God and was returning to God,","Jesus knowing that the Father had given all things into his hands, and that he was come from God, and went to God;","Jesus knew that the Father had put all things under his power, and that he had come from God and was returning to God;","sciens quia omnia dedit ei Pater in manus, et quia a Deo exivit et ad Deum vadit,","וידע ישוע כי נתן אביו את הכל בידו וכי מאלהים בא ואל אלהים ישוב׃"],["50","13","4","식탁에서 일어나시어 겉옷을 벗으시고 수건을 들어 허리에 두르셨다.","식탁에서 일어나 겉옷을 벗고 수건을 허리에 두르신 뒤","저녁 잡수시던 자리에서 일어나 겉옷을 벗고 수건을 가져다가 허리에 두르시고","저녁 잡수시던 자리에서 일어나 겉옷을 벗고 수건을 가져다가 허리에 두르시고","그래서 예수께서는 식탁에서 일어나셔서 겉옷을 벗고 수건을 허리에 동이고는","he rose from supper and took off his outer garments. He took a towel and tied it around his waist.","He riseth from supper, and laid aside his garments; and took a towel, and girded himself.","so he got up from the meal, took off his outer clothing, and wrapped a towel around his waist.","surgit a cena et ponit vestimenta sua et, cum accepisset linteum, praecinxit se.","ויקם מעל השלחן ויפשט את בגדיו ויקח מטפחת ויחגרה׃"],["50","13","5","그리고 대야에 물을 부어 제자들의 발을 씻어 주시고, 허리에 두르신 수건으로 닦기 시작하셨다.","대야에 물을 떠서 제자들의 발을 차례로 씻고 허리에 두르셨던 수건으로 닦아주셨다.","이에 대야에 물을 떠서 제자들의 발을 씻으시고 그 두르신 수건으로 닦기를 시작하여","이에 대야에 물을 담아 제자들의 발을 씻기시고 그 두르신 수건으로 씻기기를 시작하여","대야에 물을 떠다 제자들의 발을 씻기고 허리에 둘렀던 수건으로 그들의 발을 닦아 주기 시작하셨다.","Then he poured water into a basin and began to wash the disciples’ feet and dry them with the towel around his waist.","After that he poureth water into a bason, and began to wash the disciples' feet, and to wipe them with the towel wherewith he was girded.","After that, he poured water into a basin and began to wash his disciples' feet, drying them with the towel that was wrapped around him.","Deinde mittit aquam in pelvem et coepit lavare pedes discipulorum et extergere linteo, quo erat praecinctus.","ואחר יצק מים בכיור ויחל לרחץ את רגלי תלמידיו ולנגב במטפחת אשר הוא חגור בה׃"],["50","13","6","그렇게 하여 예수님께서 시몬 베드로에게 이르시자 베드로가, “주님, 주님께서 제 발을 씻으시렵니까?” 하고 말하였다.","시몬 베드로의 차례가 되자 그는 \"주께서 제 발을 씻으시렵니까?\" 하고 말하였다.","시몬 베드로에게 이르시니 베드로가 이르되 주여 주께서 내 발을 씻으시나이까","시몬 베드로에게 이르시니 가로되 주여 주께서 내 발을 씻기시나이까","이렇게 하여 시몬 베드로 차례가 되었을 때 베드로가 예수께 말하였다. \"주님, 주께서 제 발을 씻기시다니 말도 안 됩니다.\"","He came to Simon Peter, who said to him, “Master, are you going to wash my feet?”","Then cometh he to Simon Peter: and Peter saith unto him, Lord, dost thou wash my feet?","He came to Simon Peter, who said to him, \"Lord, are you going to wash my feet?\"","Venit ergo ad Simonem Petrum. Dicit ei: “Domine, tu mihi lavas pedes? “.","ויקרב אל שמעון פטרוס והוא אמר אליו אדני האתה תרחץ את רגלי׃"],["50","13","7","예수님께서는 “내가 하는 일을 네가 지금은 알지 못하지만 나중에는 깨닫게 될 것이다.” 하고 대답하셨다.","예수께서는 \"너는 내가 왜 이렇게 하는지 지금은 모르지만 나중에는 알게 될 것이다.\" 하고 대답하셨다.","예수께서 대답하여 이르시되 내가 하는 것을 네가 지금은 알지 못하나 이 후에는 알리라","예수께서 대답하여 가라사대 나의 하는 것을 네가 이제는 알지 못하나 이 후에는 알리라","예수께서 말씀하셨다. \"내가 이렇게 하는 까닭을 네가 지금은 모르겠지만 훗날에 가면 알게 될 것이다\"","Jesus answered and said to him, “What I am doing, you do not understand now, but you will understand later.”","Jesus answered and said unto him, What I do thou knowest not now; but thou shalt know hereafter.","Jesus replied, \"You do not realize now what I am doing, but later you will understand.\"","Respondit Iesus et dixit ei: “Quod ego facio, tu nescis modo, scies autem postea “.","ויען ישוע ויאמר אליו את אשר אני עשה אינך ידע כעת ואחרי כן תדע׃"],["50","13","8","그래도 베드로가 예수님께 “제 발은 절대로 씻지 못하십니다.” 하니, 예수님께서 그에게 대답하셨다. “내가 너를 씻어 주지 않으면 너는 나와 함께 아무런 몫도 나누어 받지 못한다.”","베드로가 \"안 됩니다. 제 발만은 결코 씻지 못하십니다.\" 하고 사양하자 예수께서는 \"내가 너를 씻어주지 않으면 너는 이제 나와 아무 상관도 없게 된다.\" 하셨다.","베드로가 이르되 내 발을 절대로 씻지 못하시리이다 예수께서 대답하시되 내가 너를 씻어 주지 아니하면 네가 나와 상관이 없느니라","베드로가 가로되 내 발을 1)절대로 씻기지 못하시리이다 예수께서 대답하시되 내가 너를 씻기지 아니하면 네가 나와 상관이 없느니라 혹 영원히","\"안 됩니다. 주님, 제 발은 절대로 못 씻기십니다\" 하고 베드로가 우겨대자 예수께서 말씀하셨다. \"내가 너를 씻어 주지 않으면 너는 내 친구가 될 수 없다.\"","Peter said to him, “You will never wash my feet.” Jesus answered him, “Unless I wash you, you will have no inheritance with me.”","Peter saith unto him, Thou shalt never wash my feet. Jesus answered him, If I wash thee not, thou hast no part with me.","\"No,\" said Peter, \"you shall never wash my feet.\" Jesus answered, \"Unless I wash you, you have no part with me.\"","Dicit ei Petrus: “Non lavabis mihi pedes in aeternum! “. Respondit Iesus ei: “Si non lavero te, non habes partem mecum “.","ויאמר אליו פטרוס לעולם לא תרחץ את רגלי ויען ישוע אם לא ארחץ אתך אין לך חלק עמי׃"],["50","13","9","그러자 시몬 베드로가 예수님께 말하였다. “주님, 제 발만 아니라 손과 머리도 씻어 주십시오.”","그러자 시몬 베드로는 \"주님, 그러면 발뿐 아니라 손과 머리까지도 씻어주십시오.\" 하고 간청하였다.","시몬 베드로가 이르되 주여 내 발뿐 아니라 손과 머리도 씻어 주옵소서","시몬 베드로가 가로되 주여 내 발 뿐아니라 손과 머리도 씻겨 주옵소서","시몬 베드로가 소리쳤다. \"그러시다면 제 발만이 아니라 손과 머리까지도 씻어 주십시오!\"","Simon Peter said to him, “Master, then not only my feet, but my hands and head as well.”","Simon Peter saith unto him, Lord, not my feet only, but also my hands and my head.","\"Then, Lord,\" Simon Peter replied, \"not just my feet but my hands and my head as well!\"","Dicit ei Simon Petrus: “Domine, non tantum pedes meos sed et manus et caput! “.","ויאמר אליו שמעון פטרוס אדני לא לבד את רגלי כי אם גם את ידי ואת ראשי׃"],["50","13","10","예수님께서 그에게 말씀하셨다. “목욕을 한 이는 온몸이 깨끗하니 발만 씻으면 된다. 너희는 깨끗하다. 그러나 다 그렇지는 않다.”","예수께서는 \"목욕을 한 사람은 온몸이 깨끗하니 발만 씻으면 그만이다. 너희도 그처럼 깨끗하다. 그러나 모두가 다 깨끗한 것은 아니다.\" 하고 말씀하셨다.","예수께서 이르시되 이미 목욕한 자는 발밖에 씻을 필요가 없느니라 온 몸이 깨끗하니라 너희가 깨끗하나 다는 아니니라 하시니","예수께서 가라사대 이미 목욕한 자는 발 밖에 씻을 필요가 없느니라 온 몸이 깨끗하니라 너희가 깨끗하나 다는 아니니라 하시니","예수께서 말씀하셨다. \"이미 목욕한 사람은 온몸이 깨끗하니 발만 씻으면 된다. 이제 너희는 깨끗하다. 그러나 여기 있는 사람이 다 깨끗한 것은 아니다\"","Jesus said to him, “Whoever has bathed has no need except to have his feet washed, for he is clean all over; so you are clean, but not all.”","Jesus saith to him, He that is washed needeth not save to wash his feet, but is clean every whit: and ye are clean, but not all.","Jesus answered, \"A person who has had a bath needs only to wash his feet; his whole body is clean. And you are clean, though not every one of you.\"","Dicit ei Iesus: “Qui lotus est, non indiget nisi ut pedes lavet, sed est mundus totus; et vos mundi estis sed non omnes “.","ויאמר אליו ישוע המרחץ אין לו לרחץ עוד כי אם את הרגלים כי כלו טהור הוא ואתם טהורים אך לא כלכם׃"],["50","13","11","예수님께서는 이미 당신을 팔아넘길 자를 알고 계셨다. 그래서 “너희가 다 깨끗한 것은 아니다.” 하고 말씀하신 것이다.","예수께서는 이미 당신을 팔아넘길 사람이 누군지 알고 계셨으므로 모두가 깨끗한 것은 아니라고 하신 것이다.","이는 자기를 팔 자가 누구인지 아심이라 그러므로 다는 깨끗하지 아니하다 하시니라","이는 자기를 팔 자가 누구인지 아심이라 그러므로 다는 깨끗지 아니하다 하시니라","예수께서는 이미 배신할 자가 누구인지를 알고 계셨으므로 모두가 다 깨끗한 것은 아니라고 말씀하신 것이다.","For he knew who would betray him; for this reason, he said, “Not all of you are clean.”","For he knew who should betray him; therefore said he, Ye are not all clean.","For he knew who was going to betray him, and that was why he said not every one was clean.","Sciebat enim quisnam esset, qui traderet eum; propterea dixit: “Non estis mundi omnes “.","כי ידע מי ימסרהו על כן אמר לא כלכם טהורים׃"],["50","13","12","예수님께서는 제자들의 발을 씻어 주신 다음, 겉옷을 입으시고 다시 식탁에 앉으셔서 그들에게 이르셨다. “내가 너희에게 한 일을 깨닫겠느냐?","예수께서는 제자들의 발을 씻고 나서 겉옷을 입고 다시 식탁에 돌아와 앉으신 다음 제자들에게 이렇게 말씀하셨다. \"내가 왜 지금 너희의 발을 씻어주었는지 알겠느냐?","그들의 발을 씻으신 후에 옷을 입으시고 다시 앉아 그들에게 이르시되 내가 너희에게 행한 것을 너희가 아느냐","저희 발을 씻기신 후에 옷을 입으시고 다시 앉아 저희에게 이르시되 내가 너희에게 행한 것을 너희가 아느냐","제자들의 발을 다 씻어 주신 예수께서는 겉옷을 다시 입고 식탁에 앉아서 말씀하셨다. \"내가 너희의 발을 씻긴 뜻을 알겠느냐?","So when he had washed their feet [and] put his garments back on and reclined at table again, he said to them, “Do you realize what I have done for you?","So after he had washed their feet, and had taken his garments, and was set down again, he said unto them, Know ye what I have done to you?","When he had finished washing their feet, he put on his clothes and returned to his place. \"Do you understand what I have done for you?\" he asked them.","Postquam ergo lavit pedes eorum et accepit vestimenta sua, cum recubuisset iterum, dixit eis: “Scitis quid fecerim vobis?","ויהי אחרי אשר רחץ את רגלים וילבש את בגדיו וישב להסב ויאמר אליהם הידעתם מה הדבר אשר עשיתי לכם׃"],["50","13","13","너희가 나를 ‘스승님’, 또 ‘주님’ 하고 부르는데, 그렇게 하는 것이 옳다. 나는 사실 그러하다.","너희는 나를 스승 또는 주라고 부른다. 그것은 사실이니 그렇게 부르는 것이 옳다.","너희가 나를 선생이라 또는 주라 하니 너희 말이 옳도다 내가 그러하다","너희가 나를 선생이라 또는 주라 하니 너희 말이 옳도다 내가 그러하다","너희는 나를 \"선생님\" 또는 \"주님\"이라고 부른다. 그것은 옳은 말이다. 사실이 그렇다.","You call me ‘teacher’ and ‘master,’ and rightly so, for indeed I am.","Ye call me Master and Lord: and ye say well; for so I am.","\"You call me 'Teacher' and 'Lord,' and rightly so, for that is what I am.","Vos vocatis me: “Magister “ et: “Domine “, et bene dicitis; sum etenim.","אתם קראים לי רב ואדון והיטבתם אשר דברתם כי אני הוא׃"],["50","13","14","주님이며 스승인 내가 너희의 발을 씻었으면, 너희도 서로 발을 씻어 주어야 한다.","그런데 스승이며 주인 내가 너희의 발을 씻어주었으니 너희도 서로 발을 씻어주어야 한다.","내가 주와 또는 선생이 되어 너희 발을 씻었으니 너희도 서로 발을 씻어 주는 것이 옳으니라","내가 주와 또는 선생이 되어 너희 발을 씻겼으니 너희도 서로 발을 씻기는 것이 옳으니라","그렇다면 주요, 선생인 내가 너희의 발을 씻어 주었으니 너희도 남의 발을 씻어 주어야 옳지 않겠느냐?","If I, therefore, the master and teacher, have washed your feet, you ought to wash one another’s feet.","If I then, your Lord and Master, have washed your feet; ye also ought to wash one another's feet.","Now that I, your Lord and Teacher, have washed your feet, you also should wash one another's feet.","Si ergo ego lavi vestros pedes, Dominus et Magister, et vos debetis alter alterius lavare pedes.","לכן אם אני המורה והאדון רחצתי את רגליכם גם אתם חיבים לרחץ איש את רגלי אחיו׃"],["50","13","15","내가 너희에게 한 것처럼 너희도 하라고, 내가 본을 보여 준 것이다.","내가 너희에게 한 일을 너희도 그대로 하라고 본을 보여준 것이다.","내가 너희에게 행한 것 같이 너희도 행하게 하려 하여 본을 보였노라","내가 너희에게 행한것 같이 너희도 행하게 하려하여 본을 보였노라","내가 너희에게 베푼 것같이 너희도 남에게 베풀도록 내가 본을 보여준 것이다.","I have given you a model to follow, so that as I have done for you, you should also do.","For I have given you an example, that ye should do as I have done to you.","I have set you an example that you should do as I have done for you.","Exemplum enim dedi vobis, ut, quemadmodum ego feci vobis, et vos faciatis.","כי מופת נתתי לכם למען תעשו גם אתם כאשר עשיתי לכם׃"],["50","13","16","내가 진실로 진실로 너희에게 말한다. 종은 주인보다 높지 않고, 파견된 이는 파견한 이보다 높지 않다.","정말 잘 들어두어라. 종이 주인보다 더 나을 수 없고 파견된 사람이 파견한 사람보다 더 나을 수는 없다.","내가 진실로 진실로 너희에게 이르노니 종이 주인보다 크지 못하고 보냄을 받은 자가 보낸 자보다 크지 못하나니","내가 진실로 진실로 너희에게 이르노니 종이 상전보다 크지 못하고 보냄을 받은 자가 보낸 자보다 크지 못하니","내가 진정으로 말한다. 종이 주인보다 높지 못하며 보냄을 받은 사람은 보낸 사람보다 높지 않다.","Amen, amen, I say to you, no slave is greater than his master nor any messenger greater than the one who sent him.","Verily, verily, I say unto you, The servant is not greater than his lord; neither he that is sent greater than he that sent him.","I tell you the truth, no servant is greater than his master, nor is a messenger greater than the one who sent him.","Amen, amen dico vobis: Non est servus maior domino suo, neque apostolus maior eo, qui misit illum.","אמן אמן אני אמר לכם כי העבד איננו גדול מאדניו והשלוח איננו גדול משלחו׃"],["50","13","17","이것을 알고 그대로 실천하면 너희는 행복하다.","이제 너희는 이것을 알았으니 그대로 실천하면 복을 받을 것이다.","너희가 이것을 알고 행하면 복이 있으리라","너희가 이것을 알고 행하면 복이 있으리라","너희가 이것을 깨달아 이제 그대로 행하면 복을 받을 것이다.","If you understand this, blessed are you if you do it.","If ye know these things, happy are ye if ye do them.","Now that you know these things, you will be blessed if you do them.","Si haec scitis, beati estis, si facitis ea.","אם ידעתם זאת אשריכם אם כן תעשו׃"],["50","13","18","내가 너희를 모두 가리켜 말하는 것은 아니다. 내가 뽑은 이들을 나는 안다. 그러나 ‘제 빵을 먹던 그가 발꿈치를 치켜들며 저에게 대들었습니다.’라는 성경 말씀이 이루어져야 한다.","이것은 너희 모두를 두고 하는 말은 아니다. 나는 내가 뽑은 사람들을 알고 있다. 그러나 '1)나와 함께 빵을 먹는 자가 나를 배반하였다.' 한 성경 말씀은 이루어질 것이다. 시편 41:9.","내가 너희 모두를 가리켜 말하는 것이 아니니라 나는 내가 택한 자들이 누구인지 앎이라 그러나 ㄱ)내 떡을 먹는 자가 내게 발꿈치를 들었다 한 성경을 응하게 하려는 것이니라","내가 너희를 다 가리켜 말하는 것이 아니라 내가 나의 택한 자들이 누구인지 앎이라 그러나 ㄱ)내 떡을 먹는 자가 내게 발꿈치를 들었다 한 성경을 응하게 하려는 것이니라 시 41:9","이것은 너희 모두에게 들으라고 하는 말이 아니다. 나는 내가 택한 너희 한 사람 한 사람을 다 알고 있다. 그러나 ㄱ) \"나와 한솥밥 먹던 친구들도 내게 등을 돌릴 것이다\" 라고 한 성경의 말씀은 곧 이루어질 것이다. (ㄱ. 시41:9)","I am not speaking of all of you. I know those whom I have chosen. But so that the scripture might be fulfilled, ‘The one who ate my food has raised his heel against me.’","I speak not of you all: I know whom I have chosen: but that the scripture may be fulfilled, He that eateth bread with me hath lifted up his heel against me.","\"I am not referring to all of you; I know those I have chosen. But this is to fulfill the scripture: 'He who shares my bread has lifted up his heel against me.'","Non de omnibus vobis dico, ego scio, quos elegerim, sed ut impleatur Scriptura: “Qui manducat meum panem, levavit contra me calcaneum suum “.","לא על כלכם דברתי יודע אני את אשר בחרתי בהם אך למען ימלא הכתוב אוכל לחמי הגדיל עלי עקב׃"],["50","13","19","일이 일어나기 전에 내가 미리 너희에게 말해 둔다. 일이 일어날 때에 내가 나임을 너희가 믿게 하려는 것이다.","내가 미리 이 일을 일러주는 것은 그 일이 일어날 때 너희로 하여금 내가 누구라는 것을 믿게 하려는 것이다.","지금부터 일이 일어나기 전에 미리 너희에게 일러 둠은 일이 일어날 때에 내가 그인 줄 너희가 믿게 하려 함이로라","지금부터 일이 이루기 전에 미리 너희에게 이름은 일이 이룰 때에 내가 그인줄 너희로 믿게 하려 함이로라","내가 지금 이 말을 하는 것은 그 일이 일어날 때에 내가 바로 그 사람이라는 것을 너희가 믿도록 하기 위한 것이다.","From now on I am telling you before it happens, so that when it happens you may believe that I AM.","Now I tell you before it come, that, when it is come to pass, ye may believe that I am he.","\"I am telling you now before it happens, so that when it does happen you will believe that I am He.","Amodo dico vobis priusquam fiat, ut credatis, cum factum fuerit, quia ego sum.","מעתה אני אמר לכם בטרם היותה למען בבואה תאמינו כי אני הוא׃"],["50","13","20","내가 진실로 진실로 너희에게 말한다. 내가 보내는 이를 맞아들이는 사람은 나를 맞아들이는 것이고, 나를 맞아들이는 사람은 나를 보내신 분을 맞아들이는 것이다.”","정말 잘 들어두어라. 내가 보내는 사람을 받아들이는 사람은 나를 받아들이고 또 나를 받아들이는 사람은 나를 보내신 분을 받아들인다.\"","내가 진실로 진실로 너희에게 이르노니 내가 보낸 자를 영접하는 자는 나를 영접하는 것이요 나를 영접하는 자는 나를 보내신 이를 영접하는 것이니라","내가 진실로 진실로 너희에게 이르노니 나의 보낸 자를 영접하는 자는 나를 영접하는 것이요 나를 영접하는 자는 나를 보내신 이를 영접하는 것이니라","내가 진정으로 말한다. 내가 보내는 사람을 환영하는 것은 곧 나를 환영하는 것이며 나를 환영하는 것은 곧 나를 보내신 아버지를 환영하는 것이다.\"","Amen, amen, I say to you, whoever receives the one I send receives me, and whoever receives me receives the one who sent me.”","Verily, verily, I say unto you, He that receiveth whomsoever I send receiveth me; and he that receiveth me receiveth him that sent me.","I tell you the truth, whoever accepts anyone I send accepts me; and whoever accepts me accepts the one who sent me.\"","Amen, amen dico vobis: Qui accipit, si quem misero, me accipit; qui autem me accipit, accipit eum, qui me misit “.","אמן אמן אני אמר לכם כי כל המקבל את אשר אשלחהו אתי הוא מקבל והמקבל אתי הוא מקבל את שלחי׃"],["50","13","21","예수님께서는 이렇게 이르시고 나서 마음이 산란하시어 드러내 놓고 말씀하셨다. “내가 진실로 진실로 너희에게 말한다. 너희 가운데 한 사람이 나를 팔아넘길 것이다.”","예수께서 이 말씀을 하시고 나서 몹시 번민하시며 \"정말 잘 들어두어라. 너희 가운데 나를 팔아넘길 사람이 하나 있다.\" 하고 내놓고 말씀하셨다.","예수께서 이 말씀을 하시고 심령이 괴로워 증언하여 이르시되 내가 진실로 진실로 너희에게 이르노니 너희 중 하나가 나를 팔리라 하시니","예수께서 이 말씀을 하시고 심령에 민망하여 증거하여 가라사대 내가 진실로 진실로 너희에게 이르노니 너희 중 하나가 나를 팔리라 하시니","이 말씀을 하신 뒤 예수께서는 몹시 괴로워하시며 \"내가 분명히 말한다. 너희 가운데 나를 배신할 사람이 앉아 있다\" 하고 말씀하셨다.","When he had said this, Jesus was deeply troubled and testified, “Amen, amen, I say to you, one of you will betray me.”","When Jesus had thus said, he was troubled in spirit, and testified, and said, Verily, verily, I say unto you, that one of you shall betray me.","After he had said this, Jesus was troubled in spirit and testified, \"I tell you the truth, one of you is going to betray me.\"","Cum haec dixisset Iesus, turbatus est spiritu et protestatus est et dixit: “Amen, amen dico vobis: Unus ex vobis tradet me “.","ויהי ככלות ישוע לדבר הדברים האלה ויבהל ברוחו ויעד ויאמר אמן אמן אני אמר לכם כי אחד מכם ימסרני׃"],["50","13","22","제자들은 누구를 두고 하시는 말씀인지 몰라 어리둥절하여 서로 바라보기만 하였다.","제자들은 누구를 가리켜서 하시는 말씀인지를 몰라 서로 쳐다보았다.","제자들이 서로 보며 누구에게 대하여 말씀하시는지 의심하더라","제자들이 서로 보며 뉘게 대하여 말씀하시는지 의심하더라","제자들은 누구를 두고 하시는 말씀인지 몰라서 서로 얼굴을 쳐다보았다.","The disciples looked at one another, at a loss as to whom he meant.","Then the disciples looked one on another, doubting of whom he spake.","His disciples stared at one another, at a loss to know which of them he meant.","Aspiciebant ad invicem discipuli, haesitantes de quo diceret.","ויתראו תלמידיו ויתמהו איש אל רעהו לדעת על מי דבר׃"],["50","13","23","제자 가운데 한 사람이 예수님 품에 기대어 앉아 있었는데, 그는 예수님께서 사랑하시는 제자였다.","그 때 제자 한 사람이 바로 예수 곁에 앉아 있었는데 그는 예수의 사랑을 받던 제자였다.","예수의 제자 중 하나 곧 그가 사랑하시는 자가 예수의 품에 의지하여 누웠는지라","예수의 제자 중 하나 곧 그의 사랑하시는 자가 예수의 품에 의지하여 누웠는지라","제자들 중 예수와 가장 가까운 사이였던 한 제자가 바로 예수 옆에 앉아 있었는데","One of his disciples, the one whom Jesus loved, was reclining at Jesus’ side.","Now there was leaning on Jesus' bosom one of his disciples, whom Jesus loved.","One of them, the disciple whom Jesus loved, was reclining next to him.","Erat recumbens unus ex discipulis eius in sinu Iesu, quem diligebat Iesus.","ואחד מתלמידיו מסב על חיק ישוע אשר ישוע אהבו׃"],["50","13","24","그래서 시몬 베드로가 그에게 고갯짓을 하여, 예수님께서 말씀하시는 사람이 누구인지 여쭈어 보게 하였다.","그래서 시몬 베드로가 그에게 눈짓을 하며 누구를 두고 하시는 말씀인지 여쭈어보라고 하였다.","시몬 베드로가 머릿짓을 하여 말하되 말씀하신 자가 누구인지 말하라 하니","시몬 베드로가 머릿짓을 하여 말하되 말씀하신 자가 누구인지 말하라 한대","시몬 베드로가 그에게 눈짓으로 이 무서운 일을 할 자가 누구인지를 예수께 여쭈어 보라고 하였다.","So Simon Peter nodded to him to find out whom he meant.","Simon Peter therefore beckoned to him, that he should ask who it should be of whom he spake.","Simon Peter motioned to this disciple and said, \"Ask him which one he means.\"","Innuit ergo huic Simon Petrus, ut interrogaret: “Quis est, de quo dicit? “.","וירמז לו שמעון פטרוס לדרש מי הוא זה אשר דבר עליו׃"],["50","13","25","그 제자가 예수님께 더 다가가, “주님, 그가 누구입니까?” 하고 물었다.","그 제자가 예수께 바싹 다가앉으며 \"주님, 그게 누굽니까?\" 하고 묻자","그가 예수의 가슴에 그대로 의지하여 말하되 주여 누구니이까","그가 예수의 가슴에 그대로 의지하여 말하되 주여 누구오니이까","그래서 그 제자가 예수를 바라보며 \"주님, 그자가 누구입니까?\" 하고 물었다.","He leaned back against Jesus’ chest and said to him, “Master, who is it?”","He then lying on Jesus' breast saith unto him, Lord, who is it?","Leaning back against Jesus, he asked him, \"Lord, who is it?\"","Cum ergo recumberet ille ita supra pectus Iesu, dicit ei: “Domine, quis est? “.","ויפל על לב ישוע ויאמר אליו אדני מי הוא׃"],["50","13","26","예수님께서는 “내가 빵을 적셔서 주는 자가 바로 그 사람이다.” 하고 대답하셨다. 그리고 빵을 적신 다음 그것을 들어 시몬 이스카리옷의 아들 유다에게 주셨다.","예수께서는 \"내가 빵을 적셔서 줄 사람이 바로 그 사람이다.\" 하셨다. 그리고는 빵을 적셔서 가리옷 사람 시몬의 아들 유다에게 주셨다.","예수께서 대답하시되 내가 떡 한 조각을 적셔다 주는 자가 그니라 하시고 곧 한 조각을 적셔서 가룟 시몬의 아들 유다에게 주시니","예수께서 대답하시되 내가 한 조각을 찍어다가 주는 자가 그니라 하시고 곧 한 조각을 찍으셔다가 가룟 시몬의 아들 유다를 주시니","예수께서는 \"내가 이 떡을 적셔 주는 사람이 그 사람이다\" 하고 말씀하시면서 떡을 적셔서 가룟 시몬의 아들 유다에게 주셨다.","Jesus answered, “It is the one to whom I hand the morsel after I have dipped it.” So he dipped the morsel and [took it and] handed it to Judas, son of Simon the Iscariot.","Jesus answered, He it is, to whom I shall give a sop, when I have dipped it. And when he had dipped the sop, he gave it to Judas Iscariot, the son of Simon.","Jesus answered, \"It is the one to whom I will give this piece of bread when I have dipped it in the dish.\" Then, dipping the piece of bread, he gave it to Judas Iscariot, son of Simon.","Respondet Iesus: “Ille est, cui ego intinctam buccellam porrexero “. Cum ergo intinxisset buccellam, dat Iudae Simonis Iscariotis.","ויען ישוע הנה זה הוא אשר אטבל פתי לתתו לו ויטבל את פתו ויתן אל יהודה בן שמעון איש קריות׃"],["50","13","27","유다가 그 빵을 받자 사탄이 그에게 들어갔다. 그때에 예수님께서 유다에게 말씀하셨다. “네가 하려는 일을 어서 하여라.”","유다가 그 빵을 받아 먹자마자 사탄이 그에게 들어갔다. 그 때 예수께서는 유다에게 \"네가 할 일을 어서 하여라.\" 하고 이르셨다.","조각을 받은 후 곧 사탄이 그 속에 들어간지라 이에 예수께서 유다에게 이르시되 네가 하는 일을 속히 하라 하시니","조각을 받은 후 곧 사단이 그 속에 들어간지라 이에 예수께서 유다에게 이르시되 네 하는 일을 속히 하라 하시니","유다가 떡을 받아먹자마자 사단이 그에게 들어갔다. 그때 예수께서 그에게 말씀하셨다. \"이제 빨리 네가 할 일을 하라.\"","After he took the morsel, Satan entered him. So Jesus said to him, “What you are going to do, do quickly.”","And after the sop Satan entered into him. Then said Jesus unto him, That thou doest, do quickly.","As soon as Judas took the bread, Satan entered into him. \"What you are about to do, do quickly,\" Jesus told him,","Et post buccellam tunc introivit in illum Satanas. Dicit ergo ei Iesus: “Quod facis, fac citius “.","ואחרי בלעו בא השטן אל קרבו ויאמר אליו ישוע את אשר תעשה עשה מהרה׃"],["50","13","28","식탁에 함께 앉은 이들은 예수님께서 그에게 왜 그런 말씀을 하셨는지 아무도 몰랐다.","그러나 그 자리에 앉아 있던 사람들은 예수께서 왜 그에게 이런 말씀을 하셨는지 아무도 몰랐다.","이 말씀을 무슨 뜻으로 하셨는지 그 앉은 자 중에 아는 자가 없고","이 말씀을 무슨 뜻으로 하셨는지 그 2)앉은 자 중에 아는 이가 없고 헬, 기대어 눕게 (유대인의 음식 먹을 때에 가지는 자세)","식탁에 앉아 있던 제자들은 예수께서 무슨 뜻으로 그런 말씀을 하시는지 알지 못하였다.","[Now] none of those reclining at table realized why he said this to him.","Now no man at the table knew for what intent he spake this unto him.","but no one at the meal understood why Jesus said this to him.","Hoc autem nemo scivit discumbentium ad quid dixerit ei;","ומן המסבים לא ידע איש על מה דבר אליו כזאת׃"],["50","13","29","어떤 이들은 유다가 돈주머니를 가지고 있었으므로, 예수님께서 그에게 축제에 필요한 것을 사라고 하셨거나, 또는 가난한 이들에게 무엇을 주라고 말씀하신 것이려니 생각하였다.","유다가 돈주머니를 맡아보고 있었기 때문에 더러는 예수께서 유다에게 명절에 쓸 물건을 사오라고 하셨거나 가난한 사람들에게 무엇을 주라고 하신 줄로만 알았다.","어떤 이들은 유다가 돈궤를 맡았으므로 명절에 우리가 쓸 물건을 사라 하시는지 혹은 가난한 자들에게 무엇을 주라 하시는 줄로 생각하더라","어떤이들은 유다가 돈 궤를 맡았으므로 명절에 우리의 쓸 물건을 사라 하시는지 혹 가난한 자들에게 무엇을 주라 하시는 줄로 생각하더라","어떤 제자들은 예수께서 돈 관리하는 일을 맡은 유다에게 명절에 쓸 물건을 사오라고 하셨거나 가난한 사람들에게 무엇을 좀 주라고 하시는 말씀인 줄로 생각하였다.","Some thought that since Judas kept the money bag, Jesus had told him, “Buy what we need for the feast,” or to give something to the poor.","For some of them thought, because Judas had the bag, that Jesus had said unto him, Buy those things that we have need of against the feast; or, that he should give something to the poor.","Since Judas had charge of the money, some thought Jesus was telling him to buy what was needed for the Feast, or to give something to the poor.","quidam enim putabant quia loculos habebat Iudas, quia dicit ei Iesus: “Eme ea, quae opus sunt nobis ad diem festum “, aut egenis ut aliquid daret.","כי יש אשר חשבו כי אמר אליו ישוע קנה לנו צרכי החג או לתת לאביונים יען אשר כיס הכסף תחת יד יהודה׃"],["50","13","30","유다는 빵을 받고 바로 밖으로 나갔다. 때는 밤이었다.","유다는 빵을 받은 뒤에 곧 밖으로 나갔다. 때는 밤이었다.","유다가 그 조각을 받고 곧 나가니 밤이러라","유다가 그 조각을 받고 곧 나가니 밤이러라","유다는 곧 그 자리를 떠나 밖으로 나갔다. 밖은 캄캄한 어둠으로 뒤덮여 있었다.","So he took the morsel and left at once. And it was night.","He then having received the sop went immediately out: and it was night.","As soon as Judas had taken the bread, he went out. And it was night.","Cum ergo accepisset ille buccellam, exivit continuo; erat autem nox.","והוא בקחתו את פת הלחם מהר לצאת החוצה ויהי לילה׃"],["50","13","31","유다가 나간 뒤에 예수님께서 말씀하셨다. “이제 사람의 아들이 영광스럽게 되었고, 또 사람의 아들을 통하여 하느님께서도 영광스럽게 되셨다.","유다가 나간 뒤에 예수께서 이렇게 말씀하셨다. \"이제 사람의 아들이 영광을 받게 되었고 또 사람의 아들로 말미암아 하느님께서도 영광을 받으시게 되었다.","그가 나간 후에 예수께서 이르시되 지금 인자가 영광을 받았고 하나님도 인자로 말미암아 영광을 받으셨도다","저가 나간 후에 예수께서 가라사대 지금 인자가 영광을 얻었고 하나님도 인자를 인하여 영광을 얻으셨도다","유다가 방을 나가자 예수께서 말씀하셨다. \"나의 때가 왔다. 하나님의 영광이 곧 나를 둘러쌀 것이다. 내게서 일어나는 모든 일로 하나님께서는 크게 찬양을 받으실 것이며","When he had left, Jesus said, “Now is the Son of Man glorified, and God is glorified in him.","Therefore, when he was gone out, Jesus said, Now is the Son of man glorified, and God is glorified in him.","When he was gone, Jesus said, \"Now is the Son of Man glorified and God is glorified in him.","Cum ergo exisset, dicit Iesus: “Nunc clarificatus est Filius hominis, et Deus clarificatus est in eo;","הוא יצא וישוע אמר עתה נתפאר בן האדם והאלהים נתפאר בו׃"],["50","13","32","하느님께서 사람의 아들을 통하여 영광스럽게 되셨으면, 하느님께서도 몸소 사람의 아들을 영광스럽게 하실 것이다. 이제 곧 그를 영광스럽게 하실 것이다.","하느님께서 사람의 아들로 말미암아 영광을 받으신다면 하느님께서도 몸소 사람의 아들에게 영광을 주실 것이다. 아니, 이제 곧 주실 것이다.","만일 하나님이 그로 말미암아 영광을 받으셨으면 하나님도 자기로 말미암아 그에게 영광을 주시리니 곧 주시리라","만일 하나님이 저로 인하여 영광을 얻으셨으면 하나님도 자기로 인하여 저에게 영광을 주시리니 곧 주시리라","자신의 영광을 내게 주실 것이다. 이 일은 머지 않아 곧 이루어진다.","[If God is glorified in him,] God will also glorify him in himself, and he will glorify him at once.","If God be glorified in him, God shall also glorify him in himself, and shall straightway glorify him.","If God is glorified in him, God will glorify the Son in himself, and will glorify him at once.","si Deus clarificatus est in eo, et Deus clarificabit eum in semetipso et continuo clarificabit eum.","אם האלהים נתפאר בו גם האלהים הוא יפארהו בעצמו ובמהרה יפארהו׃"],["50","13","33","얘들아, 내가 너희와 함께 있는 것도 잠시뿐이다. 너희는 나를 찾을 터인데, 내가 유다인들에게 말한 것처럼 이제 너희에게도 말한다. ‘내가 가는 곳에 너희는 올 수 없다.’","나의 사랑하는 제자들아, 내가 너희와 같이 있는 것도 이제 잠시뿐이다. 내가 가면 너희는 나를 찾아다닐 것이다. 일찍이 유다인들에게 말한 대로 이제 너희에게도 말하거니와 내가 가는 곳에 너희는 올 수 없다.","작은 자들아 내가 아직 잠시 너희와 함께 있겠노라 너희가 나를 찾을 것이나 일찍이 내가 유대인들에게 너희는 내가 가는 곳에 올 수 없다고 말한 것과 같이 지금 너희에게도 이르노라","소자들아 내가 아직 잠시 너희와 함께 있겠노라 너희가 나를 찾을터이나 그러나 일찍 내가 유대인들에게 너희는 나의 가는 곳에 올 수 없다고 말한 것과 같이 지금 너희에게도 이르노라","내 사랑하는 자녀들아, 내가 너희를 떠나갈 시간이 얼마 남지 않았다! 내가 떠나가면 유대인 지도자들에게 말하였던 것과 같이 너희가 나를 찾더라도 찾지 못할 것이다.","My children, I will be with you only a little while longer. You will look for me, and as I told the Jews, ‘Where I go you cannot come,’ so now I say it to you.","Little children, yet a little while I am with you. Ye shall seek me: and as I said unto the Jews, Whither I go, ye cannot come; so now I say to you.","\"My children, I will be with you only a little longer. You will look for me, and just as I told the Jews, so I tell you now: Where I am going, you cannot come.","Filioli, adhuc modicum vobiscum sum; quaeretis me, et sicut dixi Iudaeis: Quo ego vado, vos non potestis venire, et vobis dico modo.","בני עוד מעט מזער אהיה עמכם אתם תבקשוני וכאשר אמרתי אל היהודים כי אל אשר אני הולך לא תוכלו לבוא שמה כן אליכם אמר אני עתה׃"],["50","13","34","내가 너희에게 새 계명을 준다. 서로 사랑하여라. 내가 너희를 사랑한 것처럼 너희도 서로 사랑하여라.","나는 너희에게 새 계명을 주겠다. 서로 사랑하여라. 내가 너희를 사랑한 것처럼 너희도 서로 사랑하여라.","새 계명을 너희에게 주노니 서로 사랑하라 내가 너희를 사랑한 것 같이 너희도 서로 사랑하라","새 계명을 너희에게 주노니 서로 사랑하라 내가 너희를 사랑한것 같이 너희도 서로 사랑하라","그러므로 이제 내가 너희에게 새 계명을 준다. 내가 너희를 사랑한 것같이 서로 사랑하라.","I give you a new commandment: love one another. As I have loved you, so you also should love one another.","A new commandment I give unto you, That ye love one another; as I have loved you, that ye also love one another.","\"A new command I give you: Love one another. As I have loved you, so you must love one another.","Mandatum novum do vobis, ut diligatis invicem; sicut dilexi vos, ut et vos diligatis invicem.","מצוה חדשה אני נתן לכם כי תאהבו איש את אחיו כאשר אהבתי אתכם כן גם אתם איש את אחיו תאהבון׃"],["50","13","35","너희가 서로 사랑하면, 모든 사람이 그것을 보고 너희가 내 제자라는 것을 알게 될 것이다.”","너희가 서로 사랑하면 세상 사람들이 그것을 보고 너희가 내 제자라는 것을 알게 될 것이다.\"","너희가 서로 사랑하면 이로써 모든 사람이 너희가 내 제자인 줄 알리라","너희가 서로 사랑하면 이로써 모든 사람이 너희가 내 제자인줄 알리라","너희가 서로 사랑하면 세상 사람들이 그것으로 너희가 네 제자인 것을 알게 될 것이다.\"","This is how all will know that you are my disciples, if you have love for one another.”","By this shall all men know that ye are my disciples, if ye have love one to another.","By this all men will know that you are my disciples, if you love one another.\"","In hoc cognoscent omnes quia mei discipuli estis: si dilectionem habueritis ad invicem “.","בזאת ידעו כלם כי תלמידי אתם בהיות אהבה ביניכם׃"],["50","13","36","시몬 베드로가 예수님께 “주님, 어디로 가십니까?” 하고 물었다. 예수님께서는 그에게, “내가 가는 곳에 네가 지금은 따라올 수 없다. 그러나 나중에는 따라오게 될 것이다.” 하고 대답하셨다.","그 때 시몬 베드로가 \"주님, 어디로 가시겠습니까?\" 하고 물었다. 예수께서는 \"지금은 내가 가는 곳으로 따라올 수 없다. 그러나 나중에는 따라오게 될 것이다.\" 하고 대답하셨다.","시몬 베드로가 이르되 주여 어디로 가시나이까 예수께서 대답하시되 내가 가는 곳에 네가 지금은 따라올 수 없으나 후에는 따라오리라","시몬 베드로가 가로되 주여 어디로 가시나이까 예수께서 대답하시되 나의 가는 곳에 네가 지금은 따라 올 수 없으나 후에는 따라 오리라","시몬 베드로가 물었다. \"주님, 어디로 가십니까?\" 그러자 예수께서 말씀하셨다. \"지금은 네가 나와 함께 갈 수 없다. 그러나 언젠가는 네가 나를 따라올 것이다.\"","Simon Peter said to him, “Master, where are you going?” Jesus answered [him], “Where I am going, you cannot follow me now, though you will follow later.”","Simon Peter said unto him, Lord, whither goest thou? Jesus answered him, Whither I go, thou canst not follow me now; but thou shalt follow me afterwards.","Simon Peter asked him, \"Lord, where are you going?\" Jesus replied, \"Where I am going, you cannot follow now, but you will follow later.\"","Dicit ei Simon Petrus: “Domine, quo vadis? “. Respondit Iesus: “Quo vado, non potes me modo sequi, sequeris autem postea “.","ויאמר אליו פטרוס אדני אנה תלך ויען אתו ישוע אל אשר אני הולך שמה לא תוכל עתה ללכת אחרי אך אחרי כן תלך אחרי׃"],["50","13","37","베드로가 다시 “주님, 어찌하여 지금은 주님을 따라갈 수 없습니까? 주님을 위해서라면 저는 목숨까지 내놓겠습니다.” 하자,","\"주님, 어찌하여 지금은 따라갈 수 없습니까? 주님을 위해서라면 목숨이라도 바치겠습니다.\" 베드로가 이렇게 장담하자","베드로가 이르되 주여 내가 지금은 어찌하여 따라갈 수 없나이까 주를 위하여 내 목숨을 버리겠나이다","베드로가 가로되 주여 내가 지금은 어찌하여 따를 수 없나이까 주를 위하여 내 목숨을 버리겠나이다","\"왜 지금은 제가 갈 수 없습니까? 저는 주님을 위해 죽을 각오가 되어 있습니다\" 하고 베드로가 말하자","Peter said to him, “Master, why can’t I follow you now? I will lay down my life for you.”","Peter said unto him, Lord, why cannot I follow thee now? I will lay down my life for thy sake.","Peter asked, \"Lord, why can't I follow you now? I will lay down my life for you.\"","Dicit ei Petrus: “Domine, quare non possum te sequi modo? Animam meam pro te ponam “.","ויאמר אליו פטרוס מדוע לא אוכל עתה ללכת אחריך הן נפשי בעד נפשך אתן׃"],["50","13","38","예수님께서 대답하셨다. “나를 위하여 목숨을 내놓겠다는 말이냐? 내가 진실로 진실로 너에게 말한다. 닭이 울기 전에 너는 세 번이나 나를 모른다고 할 것이다.”","예수께서는 \"나를 위해서 목숨을 바치겠다고? 정말 잘 들어두어라. 새벽 닭이 울기 전에 너는 나를 세 번이나 모른다고 할 것이다.\" 하셨다.","예수께서 대답하시되 네가 나를 위하여 네 목숨을 버리겠느냐 내가 진실로 진실로 네게 이르노니 닭 울기 전에 네가 세 번 나를 부인하리라","예수께서 대답하시되 네가 나를 위하여 네 목숨을 버리겠느냐 내가 진실로 진실로 네게 이르노니 닭 울기 전에 네가 세번 나를 부인하리라","예수께서 말씀하셨다. \"나를 위해 죽겠다고 했느냐? 내가 진정으로 말한다. 내일 아침 닭이 울기 전에 너는 세 번이나 나를 모른다고 할 것이다.","Jesus answered, “Will you lay down your life for me? Amen, amen, I say to you, the cock will not crow before you deny me three times.”","Jesus answered him, Wilt thou lay down thy life for my sake? Verily, verily, I say unto thee, The cock shall not crow, till thou hast denied me thrice.","Then Jesus answered, \"Will you really lay down your life for me? I tell you the truth, before the rooster crows, you will disown me three times!","Respondet Iesus: “Animam tuam pro me pones? Amen, amen dico tibi: Non cantabit gallus, donec me ter neges.","ויען אתו ישוע הכי תתן נפשך בעד נפשי אמן אמן אני אמר לך בטרם יקרא התרנגל תכחש בי שלש פעמים׃"],["50","14","1","“너희 마음이 산란해지는 일이 없도록 하여라. 하느님을 믿고 또 나를 믿어라.","\"너희는 걱정하지 마라. 하느님을 믿고 또 나를 믿어라.","너희는 마음에 근심하지 말라 하나님을 믿으니 또 나를 믿으라","너희는 마음에 근심하지 말라 하나님을 1)믿으니 또 나를 믿으라 혹 믿고","너희는 마음에 근심하지 말라. 하나님을 믿고 또 나를 믿으라.","“Do not let your hearts be troubled. You have faith in God; have faith also in me.","Let not your heart be troubled: ye believe in God, believe also in me.","\"Do not let your hearts be troubled. Trust in God; trust also in me.","Non turbetur cor vestrum. Creditis in Deum et in me credite.","אל יבהל לבבכם האמינו באלהים ובי האמינו׃"],["50","14","2","내 아버지의 집에는 거처할 곳이 많다. 그렇지 않으면 내가 너희를 위하여 자리를 마련하러 간다고 말하였겠느냐?","내 아버지 집에는 있을 곳이 많다. 그리고 나는 너희가 있을 곳을 마련하러 간다. 만일 거기에 있을 곳이 없다면 내가 이렇게 말하겠느냐?","내 아버지 집에 거할 곳이 많도다 그렇지 않으면 너희에게 일렀으리라 내가 너희를 위하여 거처를 예비하러 가노니","내 아버지 집에 거할 곳이 많도다 그렇지 않으면 너희에게 일렀으리라 내가 너희를 위하여 처소를 예비하러 가노니","내 아버지가 계시는 집에는 있을 곳이 많다. 나는 너희를 위하여 있을 곳을 준비하러 간다. 모든 준비가 끝나면 다시 와서 너희를 데려다가 내가 있는 곳에 항상 같이 있도록 하겠다.","In my Father’s house there are many dwelling places. If there were not, would I have told you that I am going to prepare a place for you?","In my Father's house are many mansions: if it were not so, I would have told you. I go to prepare a place for you.","In my Father's house are many rooms; if it were not so, I would have told you. I am going there to prepare a place for you.","In domo Patris mei mansiones multae sunt; si quo minus, dixissem vobis, quia vado parare vobis locum?","בבית אבי מעונות רבות ואם לא כן הוא כי עתה הגדתי לכם הנני הלך להכין מקום לכם׃"],["50","14","3","내가 가서 너희를 위하여 자리를 마련하면, 다시 와서 너희를 데려다가 내가 있는 곳에 너희도 같이 있게 하겠다.","가서 너희가 있을 곳을 마련하면 다시 와서 너희를 데려다가 내가 있는 곳에 같이 있게 하겠다.","가서 너희를 위하여 거처를 예비하면 내가 다시 와서 너희를 내게로 영접하여 나 있는 곳에 너희도 있게 하리라","가서 너희를 위하여 처소를 예비하면 내가 다시 와서 너희를 내게로 영접하여 나 있는 곳에 너희도 있게 하리라","(2절에 포함되어 있음)","And if I go and prepare a place for you, I will come back again and take you to myself, so that where I am you also may be.","And if I go and prepare a place for you, I will come again, and receive you unto myself; that where I am, there ye may be also.","And if I go and prepare a place for you, I will come back and take you to be with me that you also may be where I am.","Et si abiero et praeparavero vobis locum, iterum venio et accipiam vos ad meipsum, ut, ubi sum ego, et vos sitis.","והיה כי הלכתי והכינותי לכם מקום שוב אשוב ולקחתי אתכם אלי למען באשר אהיה שם תהיו גם אתם׃"],["50","14","4","너희는 내가 어디로 가는지 그 길을 알고 있다.”","너희는 내가 어디로 가는지 그 길을 알고 있다.\"","내가 어디로 가는지 그 길을 너희가 아느니라","내가 가는 곳에 그 길을 너희가 알리라","너희는 내가 어디로 가는지 그 길을 알고 있다.\"","Where [I] am going you know the way.”","And whither I go ye know, and the way ye know.","You know the way to the place where I am going.\"","Et quo ego vado, scitis viam “.","ואל אשר אני הולך שמה ידעתם ואת הדרך ידעתם׃"],["50","14","5","그러자 토마스가 예수님께 말하였다. “주님, 저희는 주님께서 어디로 가시는지 알지도 못하는데, 어떻게 그 길을 알 수 있겠습니까?”","그러자 토마가 \"주님, 저희는 주님이 어디로 가시는지도 모르는데 어떻게 그 길을 알겠습니까?\" 하고 말하였다.","도마가 이르되 주여 주께서 어디로 가시는지 우리가 알지 못하거늘 그 길을 어찌 알겠사옵나이까","도마가 가로되 주여 어디로 가시는지 우리가 알지 못하거늘 그 길을 어찌 알겠삽나이까","도마가 말하였다. \"아닙니다. 저희는 알지 못합니다. 주님이 어디로 가시는지도 모르는데 어떻게 그 길을 알겠습니까?\"","Thomas said to him, “Master, we do not know where you are going; how can we know the way?”","Thomas saith unto him, Lord, we know not whither thou goest; and how can we know the way?","Thomas said to him, \"Lord, we don't know where you are going, so how can we know the way?\"","Dicit ei Thomas: “Domine, nescimus quo vadis; quomodo possumus viam scire? “.","ויאמר אליו תומא אדני לא ידענו אנה אתה הלך ואיככה נדע את הדרך׃"],["50","14","6","예수님께서 그에게 말씀하셨다. “나는 길이요 진리요 생명이다. 나를 통하지 않고서는 아무도 아버지께 갈 수 없다.","예수께서는 \"나는 길이요 진리요 생명이다. 나를 거치지 않고서는 아무도 아버지께 갈 수 없다.","예수께서 이르시되 내가 곧 길이요 진리요 생명이니 나로 말미암지 않고는 아버지께로 올 자가 없느니라","예수께서 가라사대 내가 곧 길이요 진리요 생명이니 나로 말미암지 않고는 아버지께로 올 자가 없느니라","예수께서 말씀하셨다. \"내가 곧 길이요 진리요 생명이다. 나를 통하지 않고는 아무도 아버지께로 오지 못한다.","Jesus said to him, “I am the way and the truth and the life. No one comes to the Father except through me.","Jesus saith unto him, I am the way, the truth, and the life: no man cometh unto the Father, but by me.","Jesus answered, \"I am the way and the truth and the life. No one comes to the Father except through me.","Dicit ei Iesus: “Ego sum via et veritas et vita; nemo venit ad Patrem nisi per me.","ויאמר אליו ישוע אנכי הנני הדרך והאמת והחיים לא יבא איש אל האב כי אם על ידי׃"],["50","14","7","너희가 나를 알게 되었으니 내 아버지도 알게 될 것이다. 이제부터 너희는 그분을 아는 것이고, 또 그분을 이미 뵌 것이다.”","너희가 나를 알았으니 나의 아버지도 알게 될 것이다. 이제부터 너희는 그분을 알게 되었다. 아니 이미 뵈었다.\" 하고 말씀하셨다.","너희가 나를 알았더라면 내 아버지도 알았으리로다 이제부터는 너희가 그를 알았고 또 보았느니라","너희가 나를 알았더면 내 아버지도 알았으리로다 이제부터는 너희가 그를 알았고 또 보았느니라","내가 누구인지를 알았더라면 내 아버지가 어떤 분인지도 알았을 것이다. 이제는 너희가 그분을 알았고 또 보았다\"","If you know me, then you will also know my Father. From now on you do know him and have seen him.”","If ye had known me, ye should have known my Father also: and from henceforth ye know him, and have seen him.","If you really knew me, you would know my Father as well. From now on, you do know him and have seen him.\"","Si cognovistis me, et Patrem meum utique cognoscetis; et amodo cognoscitis eum et vidistis eum “.","לו ידעתם אתי גם את אבי ידעתם ומעתה ידעתם אתו וראיתם אתו׃"],["50","14","8","필립보가 예수님께, “주님, 저희가 아버지를 뵙게 해 주십시오. 저희에게는 그것으로 충분하겠습니다.” 하자,","이번에는 필립보가 \"주님, 저희에게 아버지를 뵙게 하여주시면 더 바랄 것이 없겠습니다.\" 하고 간청하였다.","빌립이 이르되 주여 아버지를 우리에게 보여 주옵소서 그리하면 족하겠나이다","빌립이 가로되 주여 아버지를 우리에게 보여 주옵소서 그리하면 족하겠나이다","빌립이 말하였다. \"주님, 저희에게 아버지를 보여주십시오. 그러면 저희가 무엇을 더 바라겠습니까?\"","Philip said to him, “Master, show us the Father, and that will be enough for us.”","Philip saith unto him, Lord, shew us the Father, and it sufficeth us.","Philip said, \"Lord, show us the Father and that will be enough for us.\"","Dicit ei Philippus: “Domine, ostende nobis Patrem, et sufficit nobis “.","ויאמר אליו פילפוס אדני הראנו נא את האב ודי לנו׃"],["50","14","9","예수님께서 그에게 말씀하셨다. “필립보야, 내가 이토록 오랫동안 너희와 함께 지냈는데도, 너는 나를 모른다는 말이냐? 나를 본 사람은 곧 아버지를 뵌 것이다. 그런데 너는 어찌하여 ‘저희가 아버지를 뵙게 해 주십시오.’ 하느냐?","예수께서는 이렇게 대답하셨다. \"필립보야, 들어라. 내가 이토록 오랫동안 너희와 같이 지냈는데도 너는 나를 모른다는 말이냐? 나를 보았으면 곧 아버지를 본 것이다. 그런데도 아버지를 뵙게 해달라니 무슨 말이냐?","예수께서 이르시되 빌립아 내가 이렇게 오래 너희와 함께 있으되 네가 나를 알지 못하느냐 나를 본 자는 아버지를 보았거늘 어찌하여 아버지를 보이라 하느냐","예수께서 가라사대 빌립아 내가 이렇게 오래 너희와 함께 있으되 네가 나를 알지 못하느냐 나를 본 자는 아버지를 보았거늘 어찌하여 아버지를 보이라 하느냐","예수께서 말씀하셨다. \"빌립아, 내가 이렇게 오랫동안 너희와 같이 있었는데 아직 내가 누구인지 모르느냐? 누구든지 나를 본 사람은 아버지를 본 것이다. 그런데도 너는 아버지를 보여 달라고 하느냐?","Jesus said to him, “Have I been with you for so long a time and you still do not know me, Philip? Whoever has seen me has seen the Father. How can you say, ‘Show us the Father’?","Jesus saith unto him, Have I been so long time with you, and yet hast thou not known me, Philip? he that hath seen me hath seen the Father; and how sayest thou then, Shew us the Father?","Jesus answered: \"Don't you know me, Philip, even after I have been among you such a long time? Anyone who has seen me has seen the Father. How can you say, 'Show us the Father'?","Dicit ei Iesus: “Tanto tempore vobiscum sum, et non cognovisti me, Philippe? Qui vidit me, vidit Patrem. Quomodo tu dicis: “Ostende nobis Patrem “?","ויאמר אליו ישוע זה כמה ימים אנכי אתכם ואתה פילפוס הטרם תדעני הראה אתי ראה את האב ולמה זה תאמר הראנו את האב׃"],["50","14","10","내가 아버지 안에 있고 아버지께서 내 안에 계시다는 것을 너는 믿지 않느냐? 내가 너희에게 하는 말은 나 스스로 하는 말이 아니다. 내 안에 머무르시는 아버지께서 당신의 일을 하시는 것이다.","너는 내가 아버지 안에 있고 아버지께서 내 안에 계시다는 것을 믿지 않느냐? 내가 너희에게 하는 말도 나 스스로 하는 말이 아니라 아버지께서 내 안에 계시면서 몸소 하시는 일이다.","내가 아버지 안에 거하고 아버지는 내 안에 계신 것을 네가 믿지 아니하느냐 내가 너희에게 이르는 말은 스스로 하는 것이 아니라 아버지께서 내 안에 계셔서 그의 일을 하시는 것이라","나는 아버지 안에 있고 아버지는 내 안에 계신 것을 네가 믿지 아니하느냐 내가 너희에게 이르는 말이 스스로 하는 것이 아니라 아버지께서 내 안에 계셔 그의 일을 하시는 것이라","내가 아버지 안에 있고 아버지께서 내 안에 계신 것을 너희가 믿지 못하느냐? 내가 하는 말은 내 자신의 말이 아니라 내 안에 계신 아버지께서 하시는 말씀이다.","Do you not believe that I am in the Father and the Father is in me? The words that I speak to you I do not speak on my own. The Father who dwells in me is doing his works.","Believest thou not that I am in the Father, and the Father in me? the words that I speak unto you I speak not of myself: but the Father that dwelleth in me, he doeth the works.","Don't you believe that I am in the Father, and that the Father is in me? The words I say to you are not just my own. Rather, it is the Father, living in me, who is doing his work.","Non credis quia ego in Patre, et Pater in me est? Verba, quae ego loquor vobis, a meipso non loquor; Pater autem in me manens facit opera sua.","האינך מאמין כי אנכי באבי ואבי בי הוא הדברים אשר אדבר אליכם לא מנפשי אנכי דבר כי אבי השכן בקרבי הוא עשה את המעשים׃"],["50","14","11","내가 아버지 안에 있고 아버지께서 내 안에 계시다고 한 말을 믿어라. 믿지 못하겠거든 이 일들을 보아서라도 믿어라.","내가 아버지 안에 있고 아버지께서 내 안에 계시다고 한 말을 믿어라. 못 믿겠거든 내가 하는 이 일들을 보아서라도 믿어라.","내가 아버지 안에 거하고 아버지께서 내 안에 계심을 믿으라 그렇지 못하겠거든 행하는 그 일로 말미암아 나를 믿으라","내가 아버지 안에 있고 아버지께서 내 안에 계심을 믿으라 그렇지 못하겠거든 행하는 그 일을 인하여 나를 믿으라","내가 아버지 안에 있고 아버지께서 내 안에 계신다는 이 사실을 믿어라. 그렇지 못하겠거든 내가 행하는 일을 보고 이 사실을 믿어라.","Believe me that I am in the Father and the Father is in me, or else, believe because of the works themselves.","Believe me that I am in the Father, and the Father in me: or else believe me for the very works' sake.","Believe me when I say that I am in the Father and the Father is in me; or at least believe on the evidence of the miracles themselves.","Credite mihi quia ego in Patre, et Pater in me est; alioquin propter opera ipsa credite.","האמינו לי כי אנכי באבי ואבי בי הוא ואם לא אך בגלל המעשים האמינו לי׃"],["50","14","12","내가 진실로 진실로 너희에게 말한다. 나를 믿는 사람은 내가 하는 일을 할 뿐만 아니라, 그보다 더 큰 일도 하게 될 것이다. 내가 아버지께 가기 때문이다.","정말 잘 들어두어라. 나를 믿는 사람은 내가 하는 일을 할 뿐만 아니라 그보다 더 큰 일도 하게 될 것이다. 그것은 내가 이제 아버지께 가서","내가 진실로 진실로 너희에게 이르노니 나를 믿는 자는 내가 하는 일을 그도 할 것이요 또한 그보다 큰 일도 하리니 이는 내가 아버지께로 감이라","내가 진실로 진실로 너희에게 이르노니 나를 믿는 자는 나의 하는 일을 저도 할 것이요 또한 이보다 큰 것도 하리니 이는 내가 아버지께로 감이니라","내가 진정으로 말한다. 누구든지 나를 믿는 사람은 내가 행하는 일을 그도 행할 것이다. 아니, 그보다 더 큰 일도 이룰 수 있다. 그것은 내가 아버지께로 가기 때문이다. 너희는 내 이름으로 아버지께 무엇이나 구하라. 내가 그것을 이루어 줄 것이다. 아들인 내가 너희를 위하여 이루어 주는 것은 그것을 통하여 아버지께서 찬양을 받으시게 될 것이기 때문이다.","Amen, amen, I say to you, whoever believes in me will do the works that I do, and will do greater ones than these, because I am going to the Father.","Verily, verily, I say unto you, He that believeth on me, the works that I do shall he do also; and greater works than these shall he do; because I go unto my Father.","I tell you the truth, anyone who has faith in me will do what I have been doing. He will do even greater things than these, because I am going to the Father.","Amen, amen dico vobis: Qui credit in me, opera, quae ego facio, et ipse faciet et maiora horum faciet, quia ego ad Patrem vado.","אמן אמן אני אמר לכם המאמין בי יעשה גם הוא את המעשים אשר אנכי עשה וגדלות מאלה יעשה כי אני הולך אל אבי׃"],["50","14","13","너희가 내 이름으로 청하는 것은 무엇이든지 내가 다 이루어 주겠다. 그리하여 아버지께서 아들을 통하여 영광스럽게 되시도록 하겠다.","너희가 내 이름으로 구하는 것이면 무엇이든지 이루어주겠기 때문이다. 그러면 아들로 말미암아 아버지께서 영광을 받으실 것이다.","너희가 내 이름으로 무엇을 구하든지 내가 행하리니 이는 아버지로 하여금 아들로 말미암아 영광을 받으시게 하려 함이라","너희가 내 이름으로 무엇을 구하든지 내가 시행하리니 이는 아버지로 하여금 아들을 인하여 영광을 얻으시게 하려 함이라","(12절에 포함되어 있음)","And whatever you ask in my name, I will do, so that the Father may be glorified in the Son.","And whatsoever ye shall ask in my name, that will I do, that the Father may be glorified in the Son.","And I will do whatever you ask in my name, so that the Son may bring glory to the Father.","Et quodcumque petieritis in nomine meo, hoc faciam, ut glorificetur Pater in Filio;","וכל אשר תשאלו בשמי אעשנו למען יכבד האב בבנו׃"],["50","14","14","너희가 내 이름으로 청하면 내가 다 이루어 주겠다.”","너희가 내 이름으로 구하는 것이면 무엇이든지 다 내가 이루어주겠다.\"","내 이름으로 무엇이든지 내게 구하면 내가 행하리라","내 이름으로 무엇이든지 내게 구하면 내가 시행하리라","그렇다. 내 이름으로 무엇이든지 구하라. 내가 다 이루어 주겠다.","If you ask anything of me in my name, I will do it.","If ye shall ask any thing in my name, I will do it.","You may ask me for anything in my name, and I will do it.","si quid petieritis me in nomine meo, ego faciam.","כי תשאלו דבר בשמי אני אעשנו׃"],["50","14","15","“너희가 나를 사랑하면 내 계명을 지킬 것이다.","\"너희가 나를 사랑하면 내 계명을 지키게 될 것이다.","너희가 나를 사랑하면 나의 계명을 지키리라","너희가 나를 사랑하면 나의 계명을 지키리라","너희가 나를 사랑한다면 나의 말을 지키라.","“If you love me, you will keep my commandments.","If ye love me, keep my commandments.","\"If you love me, you will obey what I command.","Si diligitis me, mandata mea servabitis;","אם אהבתם אתי את מצותי תשמרו׃"],["50","14","16","그리고 내가 아버지께 청하면, 아버지께서는 다른 보호자를 너희에게 보내시어, 영원히 너희와 함께 있도록 하실 것이다.","내가 아버지께 구하면 다른 협조자를 보내주셔서 너희와 영원히 함께 계시도록 하실 것이다.","내가 아버지께 구하겠으니 그가 또 다른 보혜사를 너희에게 주사 영원토록 너희와 함께 있게 하리니","내가 아버지께 구하겠으니 그가 또 다른 보혜사를 너희에게 주사 영원토록 너희와 함께 있게 하시리니","그러면 내가 아버지께 구할 것이며, 아버지께서는 다른 돕는 자를 너희에게 보내 너희와 영원히 같이 계시게 할 것이다.","And I will ask the Father, and he will give you another Advocate to be with you always,","And I will pray the Father, and he shall give you another Comforter, that he may abide with you for ever;","And I will ask the Father, and he will give you another Counselor to be with you forever--","et ego rogabo Patrem, et alium Paraclitum dabit vobis, ut maneat vobiscum in aeternum,","ואני אשאלה מאבי והוא יתן לכם פרקליט אחר אשר ישכן אתכם לנצח׃"],["50","14","17","그분은 진리의 영이시다. 세상은 그분을 보지도 못하고 알지도 못하기 때문에 그분을 받아들이지 못하지만, 너희는 그분을 알고 있다. 그분께서 너희와 함께 머무르시고 너희 안에 계시기 때문이다.","그분은 곧 진리의 성령이시다. 세상은 그분을 보지도 못하고 알지도 못하기 때문에 그분을 받아들일 수 없지만 너희는 그분을 알고 있다. 그분이 너희와 함께 사시며 너희 안에 계시기 때문이다.","그는 진리의 영이라 세상은 능히 그를 받지 못하나니 이는 그를 보지도 못하고 알지도 못함이라 그러나 너희는 그를 아나니 그는 너희와 함께 거하심이요 또 너희 속에 계시겠음이라","저는 진리의 영이라 세상은 능히 저를 받지 못하나니 이는 저를 보지도 못하고 알지도 못함이라 그러나 너희는 저를 아나니 저는 너희와 함께 거하심이요 또 너희 속에 계시겠음이라","그분은 진리로 인도하시는 영이다. 세상은 그분을 맞이들일 수 없다. 세상이 그분을 찾지도 않고 알지도 못하기 때문이다. 그러나 너희는 그분을 알고 있다. 지금은 그분이 너희와 함께 계시고 훗날에는 너희 안에 계실 것이기 때문이다.","the Spirit of truth, which the world cannot accept, because it neither sees nor knows it. But you know it, because it remains with you, and will be in you.","Even the Spirit of truth; whom the world cannot receive, because it seeth him not, neither knoweth him: but ye know him; for he dwelleth with you, and shall be in you.","the Spirit of truth. The world cannot accept him, because it neither sees him nor knows him. But you know him, for he lives with you and will be in you.","Spiritum veritatis, quem mundus non potest accipere, quia non videt eum nec cognoscit. Vos cognoscitis eum, quia apud vos manet; et in vobis erit.","את רוח האמת אשר לא יכל העולם להשיגו באשר לא יראהו ולא ידעהו ואתם ידעתם אתו כי אתכם שכן הוא אף יהיה בתוככם׃"],["50","14","18","나는 너희를 고아로 버려두지 않고 너희에게 다시 오겠다.","나는 너희를 고아들처럼 버려두지 않겠다. 기어이 너희에게로 돌아오겠다.","내가 너희를 고아와 같이 버려두지 아니하고 너희에게로 오리라","내가 너희를 고아와 같이 버려두지 아니하고 너희에게로 오리라","나는 너희를 벌판에 버려진 고아처럼 내버려 두지 않고 너희에게 다시 오겠다.","I will not leave you orphans; I will come to you.","I will not leave you comfortless: I will come to you.","I will not leave you as orphans; I will come to you.","Non relinquam vos orphanos; venio ad vos.","לא אעזבכם יתומים אבואה אליכם׃"],["50","14","19","이제 조금만 있으면, 세상은 나를 보지 못하겠지만 너희는 나를 보게 될 것이다. 내가 살아 있고 너희도 살아 있을 것이기 때문이다.","이제 조금만 지나면 세상은 나를 보지 못하게 되겠지만 내가 살아 있고 너희도 살아 있을 터이니 너희는 나를 보게 될 것이다.","조금 있으면 세상은 다시 나를 보지 못할 것이로되 너희는 나를 보리니 이는 내가 살아 있고 너희도 살아 있겠음이라","조금 있으면 세상은 다시 나를 보지 못할 터이로되 너희는 나를 보리니 이는 내가 살았고 너희도 살겠음이라","얼마 안 있어 나는 세상을 떠나겠지만 너희는 나를 다시 보게 될 것이다. 내가 살아 있고 너희도 살아날 것이기 때문이다.","In a little while the world will no longer see me, but you will see me, because I live and you will live.","Yet a little while, and the world seeth me no more; but ye see me: because I live, ye shall live also.","Before long, the world will not see me anymore, but you will see me. Because I live, you also will live.","Adhuc modicum, et mundus me iam non videt; vos autem videtis me, quia ego vivo et vos vivetis.","עוד מעט והעולם לא יוסיף לראות אתי ואתם תראוני כי חי אני וגם אתם חיה תחיו׃"],["50","14","20","그날, 너희는 내가 아버지 안에 있고 또 너희가 내 안에 있으며 내가 너희 안에 있음을 깨닫게 될 것이다.","그 날이 오면 너희는 내가 아버지 안에 있다는 것과 너희가 내 안에 있고 내가 너희 안에 있다는 것을 깨닫게 될 것이다.","그 날에는 내가 아버지 안에, 너희가 내 안에, 내가 너희 안에 있는 것을 너희가 알리라","그 날에는 내가 아버지 안에, 너희가 내 안에, 내가 너희 안에 있는 것을 너희가 알리라","너희가 다시 살아나면 너희는 내가 아버지 안에 있고 너희가 내 안에 있고 또 내가 너희 안에 있다는 것을 알게 될 것이다.","On that day you will realize that I am in my Father and you are in me and I in you.","At that day ye shall know that I am in my Father, and ye in me, and I in you.","On that day you will realize that I am in my Father, and you are in me, and I am in you.","In illo die vos cognoscetis quia ego sum in Patre meo, et vos in me, et ego in vobis.","והיה ביום ההוא ידוע תדעו כי אני באבי ואתם בי ואני בכם׃"],["50","14","21","내 계명을 받아 지키는 이야말로 나를 사랑하는 사람이다. 나를 사랑하는 사람은 내 아버지께 사랑을 받을 것이다. 그리고 나도 그를 사랑하고 그에게 나 자신을 드러내 보일 것이다.”","내 계명을 받아들이고 지키는 사람이 바로 나를 사랑하는 사람이다. 나를 사랑하는 사람은 내 아버지에게 사랑을 받을 것이다. 나도 또한 그를 사랑하고 그에게 나를 나타내 보이겠다.\"","나의 계명을 지키는 자라야 나를 사랑하는 자니 나를 사랑하는 자는 내 아버지께 사랑을 받을 것이요 나도 그를 사랑하여 그에게 나를 나타내리라","나의 계명을 가지고 지키는 자라야 나를 사랑하는 자니 나를 사랑하는 자는 내 아버지께 사랑을 받을 것이요 나도 그를 사랑하여 그에게 나를 나타내리라","내 말을 지키는 사람은 나를 사랑하는 사람이다. 나를 사랑하는 사람은 아버지께서도 그를 사랑하신다. 그리고 나도 그를 사랑하여 내 자신을 그에게 나타내 보일 것이다.\"","Whoever has my commandments and observes them is the one who loves me. And whoever loves me will be loved by my Father, and I will love him and reveal myself to him.”","He that hath my commandments, and keepeth them, he it is that loveth me: and he that loveth me shall be loved of my Father, and I will love him, and will manifest myself to him.","Whoever has my commands and obeys them, he is the one who loves me. He who loves me will be loved by my Father, and I too will love him and show myself to him.\"","Qui habet mandata mea et servat ea, ille est, qui diligit me; qui autem diligit me, diligetur a Patre meo, et ego diligam eum et manifestabo ei meipsum “.","מי אשר מצותי אתו וינצרן זה הוא אשר יאהבני ואהבי אהוב הוא לאבי ואני אהבהו ואליו אתודע׃"],["50","14","22","이스카리옷이 아닌 다른 유다가 예수님께, “주님, 저희에게는 주님 자신을 드러내시고 세상에는 드러내지 않으시겠다니 무슨 까닭입니까?” 하자,","가리옷 사람이 아닌 다른 유다가 \"주님, 주님께서 왜 세상에는 나타내 보이지 않으시고 저희에게만 나타내 보이시려고 하십니까?\" 하고 물었다.","가룟인 아닌 유다가 이르되 주여 어찌하여 자기를 우리에게는 나타내시고 세상에는 아니하려 하시나이까","가룟인 아닌 유다가 가로되 주여 어찌하여 자기를 우리에게는 나타내시고 세상에게는 아니하려 하시나이까","가룟 사람이 아닌 다른 유다가 물었다. \"주님, 주께서 저희 제자들에게만 자신을 나타내 보이시고 세상에는 나타내시지 않는 이유가 무엇입니까?\"","Judas, not the Iscariot, said to him, “Master, [then] what happened that you will reveal yourself to us and not to the world?”","Judas saith unto him, not Iscariot, Lord, how is it that thou wilt manifest thyself unto us, and not unto the world?","Then Judas (not Judas Iscariot) said, \"But, Lord, why do you intend to show yourself to us and not to the world?\"","Dicit ei Iudas, non ille Iscariotes: “Domine, et quid factum est, quia nobis manifestaturus es teipsum et non mundo? “.","ויאמר אליו יהודה לא יהודה איש קריות אדני מה הוא זה כי תחפץ להתודע אלינו ולא לעולם׃"],["50","14","23","예수님께서 그에게 대답하셨다. “누구든지 나를 사랑하면 내 말을 지킬 것이다. 그러면 내 아버지께서 그를 사랑하시고, 우리가 그에게 가서 그와 함께 살 것이다.","예수께서는 이렇게 대답하셨다. \"나를 사랑하는 사람은 내 말을 잘 지킬 것이다. 그러면 나의 아버지께서도 그를 사랑하시겠고 아버지와 나는 그를 찾아가 그와 함께 살 것이다.","예수께서 대답하여 이르시되 사람이 나를 사랑하면 내 말을 지키리니 내 아버지께서 그를 사랑하실 것이요 우리가 그에게 가서 거처를 그와 함께 하리라","예수께서 대답하여 가라사대 사람이 나를 사랑하면 내 말을 지키리니 내 아버지께서 저를 사랑하실 것이요 우리가 저에게 와서 거처를 저와 함께 하리라","예수께서 말씀하셨다. \"나를 사랑하는 사람은 내 말을 지킬 것이다. 그러면 아버지께서도 그를 사랑하실 것이고, 아버지와 나는 그에게 가서 그와 함께 살 것이다.","Jesus answered and said to him, “Whoever loves me will keep my word, and my Father will love him, and we will come to him and make our dwelling with him.","Jesus answered and said unto him, If a man love me, he will keep my words: and my Father will love him, and we will come unto him, and make our abode with him.","Jesus replied, \"If anyone loves me, he will obey my teaching. My Father will love him, and we will come to him and make our home with him.","Respondit Iesus et dixit ei: “Si quis diligit me, sermonem meum servabit, et Pater meus diliget eum, et ad eum veniemus et mansionem apud eum faciemus;","ויען ישוע ויאמר אליו איש כי יאהבני ישמר את דברי ואבי יאהב אתו ונבואה אליו ונשים אצלו מעונתנו׃"],["50","14","24","그러나 나를 사랑하지 않는 사람은 내 말을 지키지 않는다. 너희가 듣는 말은 내 말이 아니라 나를 보내신 아버지의 말씀이다.","그러나 나를 사랑하지 않는 사람은 내 말을 지키지 않는다. 내가 너희에게 들려주는 것은 내 말이 아니라 나를 보내신 아버지의 말씀이다.\"","나를 사랑하지 아니하는 자는 내 말을 지키지 아니하나니 너희가 듣는 말은 내 말이 아니요 나를 보내신 아버지의 말씀이니라","나를 사랑하지 아니하는 자는 내 말을 지키지 아니하나니 너희의 듣는 말은 내 말이 아니요 나를 보내신 아버지의 말씀이니라","내 말을 지키지 않는 사람은 나를 사랑하지 않는 것이다. 기억하라. 너희 질문에 대한 이 대답은 내 마음대로 한 것이 아니라 아버지께서 일러주신 것이다.","Whoever does not love me does not keep my words; yet the word you hear is not mine but that of the Father who sent me.","He that loveth me not keepeth not my sayings: and the word which ye hear is not mine, but the Father's which sent me.","He who does not love me will not obey my teaching. These words you hear are not my own; they belong to the Father who sent me.","qui non diligit me, sermones meos non servat. Et sermo, quem auditis, non est meus, sed eius qui misit me, Patris.","ואשר לא יאהבני הוא לא ישמר את דברי והדבר אשר שמעתם לא שלי הוא כי אם של אבי אשר שלחני׃"],["50","14","25","나는 너희와 함께 있는 동안에 이것들을 이야기하였다.","\"나는 너희와 함께 있는 동안에 여러 가지 이야기를 들려주었거니와","내가 아직 너희와 함께 있어서 이 말을 너희에게 하였거니와","내가 아직 너희와 함께 있어서 이 말을 너희에게 하였거니와","너희와 함께 있는 동안에 나는 많은 것을 너희에게 당부하였다.","“I have told you this while I am with you.","These things have I spoken unto you, being yet present with you.","\"All this I have spoken while still with you.","Haec locutus sum vobis apud vos manens.","את אלה דברתי אליכם בעוד היותי עמכם׃"],["50","14","26","보호자, 곧 아버지께서 내 이름으로 보내실 성령께서 너희에게 모든 것을 가르치시고 내가 너희에게 말한 모든 것을 기억하게 해 주실 것이다.","이제 아버지께서 내 이름으로 보내주실 성령 곧 그 협조자는 모든 것을 너희에게 가르쳐주실 뿐만 아니라 내가 너희에게 한 말을 모두 되새기게 하여주실 것이다.\"","보혜사 곧 아버지께서 내 이름으로 보내실 성령 그가 너희에게 모든 것을 가르치고 내가 너희에게 말한 모든 것을 생각나게 하리라","보혜사 곧 아버지께서 내 이름으로 보내실 성령 그가 너희에게 모든 것을 가르치시고 내가 너희에게 말한 모든 것을 생각나게 하시리라","이제 아버지께서 내 대신에 보내실 돕는 자이신 성령이 오시면 또다시 많은 것을 너희에게 가르쳐 주실 것이다. 그리고 내가 너희에게 말한 모든 것을 또다시 일깨워 주실 것이다.","The Advocate, the holy Spirit that the Father will send in my name—he will teach you everything and remind you of all that [I] told you.","But the Comforter, which is the Holy Ghost, whom the Father will send in my name, he shall teach you all things, and bring all things to your remembrance, whatsoever I have said unto you.","But the Counselor, the Holy Spirit, whom the Father will send in my name, will teach you all things and will remind you of everything I have said to you.","Paraclitus autem, Spiritus Sanctus, quem mittet Pater in nomine meo, ille vos docebit omnia et suggeret vobis omnia, quae dixi vobis.","והפרקליט תוח הקדש אשר ישלחנו אבי בשמי הוא ילמדכם את כל ויזכירכם את כל אשר הגדתי לכם׃"],["50","14","27","나는 너희에게 평화를 남기고 간다. 내 평화를 너희에게 준다. 내가 주는 평화는 세상이 주는 평화와 같지 않다. 너희 마음이 산란해지는 일도, 겁을 내는 일도 없도록 하여라.","\"나는 너희에게 평화를 주고 간다. 내 평화를 너희에게 주는 것이다. 내가 주는 평화는 세상이 주는 평화와는 다르다. 걱정하거나 두려워하지 마라.","평안을 너희에게 끼치노니 곧 나의 평안을 너희에게 주노라 내가 너희에게 주는 것은 세상이 주는 것과 같지 아니하니라 너희는 마음에 근심하지도 말고 두려워하지도 말라","평안을 너희에게 끼치노니 곧 나의 평안을 너희에게 주노라 내가 너희에게 주는 것은 세상이 주는 것 같지 아니하니라 너희는 마음에 근심도 말고 두려워하지도 말라","나는 너희 마음에 평안을 남기고 간다. 내가 주는 평안은 세상이 주는 평안과는 다르다. 그러니 불안해하거나 두려워하지 말라.","Peace I leave with you; my peace I give to you. Not as the world gives do I give it to you. Do not let your hearts be troubled or afraid.","Peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you: not as the world giveth, give I unto you. Let not your heart be troubled, neither let it be afraid.","Peace I leave with you; my peace I give you. I do not give to you as the world gives. Do not let your hearts be troubled and do not be afraid.","Pacem relinquo vobis, pacem meam do vobis; non quomodo mundus dat, ego do vobis. Non turbetur cor vestrum neque formidet.","שלום אניח לכם את שלומי אתן לכם לא כאשר יתן העולם אנכי נתן לכם אל יבהל לבבכם ואל יחת׃"],["50","14","28","‘나는 갔다가 너희에게 돌아온다.’고 한 내 말을 너희는 들었다. 너희가 나를 사랑한다면 내가 아버지께 가는 것을 기뻐할 것이다. 아버지께서 나보다 위대하신 분이시기 때문이다.","내가 떠나갔다가 너희에게로 다시 오겠다는 말을 너희가 듣지 않았느냐? 아버지께서는 나보다 훌륭하신 분이니 만일 너희가 나를 사랑한다면 내가 아버지께로 가는 것을 기뻐했을 것이다.","내가 갔다가 너희에게로 온다 하는 말을 너희가 들었나니 나를 사랑하였더라면 내가 아버지께로 감을 기뻐하였으리라 아버지는 나보다 크심이라","내가 갔다가 너희에게로 온다 하는 말을 너희가 들었나니 나를 사랑하였더면 나의 아버지께로 감을 기뻐하였으리라 아버지는 나보다 크심이니라","내가 너희에게 한 말을 기억하라. 나는 떠난다. 그러나 나는 너희에게 되돌아 올 것이다. 너희가 나를 진심으로 사랑한다면 지금 내가 나보다 더 위대하신 아버지께로 갈 수 있게 된 것을 기뻐할 것이다.","You heard me tell you, ‘I am going away and I will come back to you.’ If you loved me, you would rejoice that I am going to the Father; for the Father is greater than I.","Ye have heard how I said unto you, I go away, and come again unto you. If ye loved me, ye would rejoice, because I said, I go unto the Father: for my Father is greater than I.","\"You heard me say, 'I am going away and I am coming back to you.' If you loved me, you would be glad that I am going to the Father, for the Father is greater than I.","Audistis quia ego dixi vobis: Vado et venio ad vos. Si diligeretis me, gauderetis quia vado ad Patrem, quia Pater maior me est.","הלא שמעתם כי אמרתי אליכם אלך לי ואשובה אליכם אם אהב תאהבוני כי עתה תשמחו באמרי לכם כי הלך אני אל האב כי אבי גדול ממני׃"],["50","14","29","나는 일이 일어나기 전에 너희에게 미리 말하였다. 일이 일어날 때에 너희가 믿게 하려는 것이다.","내가 지금 이 일을 미리 알려주는 것은 그 일이 일어날 때 너희로 하여금 믿게 하려는 것이다.","이제 일이 일어나기 전에 너희에게 말한 것은 일이 일어날 때에 너희로 믿게 하려 함이라","이제 일이 이루기 전에 너희에게 말한 것은 일이 이룰 때에 너희로 믿게 하려 함이라","내가 미리 너희에게 이렇게 일러두는 것은 이 일이 일어날 때에 너희 믿음이 흔들리지 않게 하려는 것이다.","And now I have told you this before it happens, so that when it happens you may believe.","And now I have told you before it come to pass, that, when it is come to pass, ye might believe.","I have told you now before it happens, so that when it does happen you will believe.","Et nunc dixi vobis, priusquam fiat, ut, cum factum fuerit, credatis.","ועתה הנה הגדתי זאת לכם בטרם היותה למען בבואה תאמינו׃"],["50","14","30","나는 너희와 더 이상 많은 이야기를 나누지 않겠다. 이 세상의 우두머리가 오고 있기 때문이다. 그는 나에게 아무 권한도 없다.","너희와 이야기를 나눌 시간도 얼마 남지 않았다. 이 세상의 권력자가 가까이 오고 있다. 그가 나를 어떻게 할 수는 없지만","이 후에는 내가 너희와 말을 많이 하지 아니하리니 이 세상의 임금이 오겠음이라 그러나 그는 내게 관계할 것이 없으니","이후에는 내가 너희와 말을 많이 하지 아니하리니 이 세상 임금이 오겠음이라 그러나 저는 내게 관계할 것이 없으니","너희와 이야기할 시간도 이제는 얼마 남지 않았구나! 이 세상의 악한 통치자가 오고 있다. 그러나 그는 나를 지배할 능력이 없다.","I will no longer speak much with you, for the ruler of the world is coming. He has no power over me,","Hereafter I will not talk much with you: for the prince of this world cometh, and hath nothing in me.","I will not speak with you much longer, for the prince of this world is coming. He has no hold on me,","Iam non multa loquar vobiscum, venit enim princeps mundi et in me non habet quidquam;","לא ארבה עוד אמרים עמכם כי יבוא שר העולם הזה ובי אין לו מאומה׃"],["50","14","31","그러나 내가 아버지를 사랑한다는 것과 아버지께서 명령하신 대로 내가 한다는 것을 세상이 알아야 한다. 일어나 가자.”","나는 아버지를 사랑하고 아버지께서 분부하신 대로 실천한다는 것을 세상에 알려야 하겠다. 자, 일어나 가자.\"","오직 내가 아버지를 사랑하는 것과 아버지께서 명하신 대로 행하는 것을 세상이 알게 하려 함이로라 일어나라 여기를 떠나자 하시니라","오직 내가 아버지를 사랑하는 것과 아버지의 명하신대로 행하는 것을 세상으로 알게 하려 함이로라 일어나라 여기를 떠나자 하시니라","다만 나는 아버지께서 요구하시는 일을 이룸으로써 내가 아버지를 사랑하고 있다는 것을 세상에 알리려는 것이다. 일어나라. 가자!","but the world must know that I love the Father and that I do just as the Father has commanded me. Get up, let us go.","But that the world may know that I love the Father; and as the Father gave me commandment, even so I do. Arise, let us go hence.","but the world must learn that I love the Father and that I do exactly what my Father has commanded me. \"Come now; let us leave.","sed, ut cognoscat mundus quia diligo Patrem, et sicut mandatum dedit mihi Pater, sic facio. Surgite, eamus hinc.","אך למען ידע העולם כי את אבי אני אהב וכאשר צוני אבי כן אני עשה קומו ונלכה מזה׃"],["50","15","1","“나는 참포도나무요 나의 아버지는 농부이시다.","\"나는 참 포도나무요 나의 아버지는 농부이시다.","나는 참포도나무요 내 아버지는 농부라","내가 참 포도나무요 내 아버지는 그 농부라","나는 참포도나무요, 내 아버지는 농부이시다.","“I am the true vine, and my Father is the vine grower.","I am the true vine, and my Father is the husbandman.","\"I am the true vine, and my Father is the gardener.","Ego sum vitis vera, et Pater meus agricola est.","אנכי הגפן האמתית ואבי הוא הכרם׃"],["50","15","2","나에게 붙어 있으면서 열매를 맺지 않는 가지는 아버지께서 다 쳐내시고, 열매를 맺는 가지는 모두 깨끗이 손질하시어 더 많은 열매를 맺게 하신다.","나에게 붙어 있으면서 열매를 맺지 못하는 가지는 아버지께서 모조리 쳐내시고 열매를 맺는 가지는 더 많은 열매를 맺도록 잘 가꾸신다.","무릇 내게 붙어 있어 열매를 맺지 아니하는 가지는 아버지께서 그것을 제거해 버리시고 무릇 열매를 맺는 가지는 더 열매를 맺게 하려 하여 그것을 깨끗하게 하시느니라","무릇 내게 있어 과실을 맺지 아니하는 가지는 아버지께서 이를 제해 버리시고 무릇 과실을 맺는 가지는 더 과실을 맺게 하려하여 이를 깨끗케 하시느니라","아버지께서 열매 맺지 않는 가지는 모두 잘라 내시고 열매 맺는 가지는 손질하여 더 많은 열매를 맺게 하신다.","He takes away every branch in me that does not bear fruit, and everyone that does he prunes so that it bears more fruit.","Every branch in me that beareth not fruit he taketh away: and every branch that beareth fruit, he purgeth it, that it may bring forth more fruit.","He cuts off every branch in me that bears no fruit, while every branch that does bear fruit he prunes so that it will be even more fruitful.","Omnem palmitem in me non ferentem fructum tollit eum; et omnem, qui fert fructum, purgat eum, ut fructum plus afferat.","כל שריג בי אשר איננו עשה פרי יסירנו ואשר יעשה פרי יטהרנו להרבות את פריו׃"],["50","15","3","너희는 내가 너희에게 한 말로 이미 깨끗하게 되었다.","너희는 내 교훈을 받아 이미 잘 가꾸어진 가지들이다.","너희는 내가 일러준 말로 이미 깨끗하여졌으니","너희는 내가 일러준 말로 이미 깨끗하였으니","그분은 내가 너희에게 일러준 말을 통해서 이미 너희를 깨끗이 손질하여 주심으로써 많은 열매를 맺도록 해주셨다.","You are already pruned because of the word that I spoke to you.","Now ye are clean through the word which I have spoken unto you.","You are already clean because of the word I have spoken to you.","Iam vos mundi estis propter sermonem, quem locutus sum vobis.","אתם כעת מטהרים בעבור דברי אשר דברתי אליכם׃"],["50","15","4","내 안에 머물러라. 나도 너희 안에 머무르겠다. 가지가 포도나무에 붙어 있지 않으면 스스로 열매를 맺을 수 없는 것처럼, 너희도 내 안에 머무르지 않으면 열매를 맺지 못한다.","너희는 나를 떠나지 마라. 나도 너희를 떠나지 않겠다. 포도나무에 붙어 있지 않는 가지가 스스로 열매를 맺을 수 없는 것처럼 너희도 나에게 붙어 있지 않으면 열매를 맺지 못할 것이다.","내 안에 거하라 나도 너희 안에 거하리라 가지가 포도나무에 붙어 있지 아니하면 스스로 열매를 맺을 수 없음 같이 너희도 내 안에 있지 아니하면 그러하리라","내 안에 거하라 나도 너희 안에 거하리라 가지가 포도나무에 붙어 있지 아니하면 절로 과실을 맺을 수 없음 같이 너희도 내 안에 있지 아니하면 그러하리라","너희가 내 안에 있고 내가 너희 안에 있게 하라. 가지가 포도나무에 붙어 있지 않으면 열매를 맺을 수 없는 것과 같이 너희가 나를 떠나서는 열매를 맺을 수 없다.","Remain in me, as I remain in you. Just as a branch cannot bear fruit on its own unless it remains on the vine, so neither can you unless you remain in me.","Abide in me, and I in you. As the branch cannot bear fruit of itself, except it abide in the vine; no more can ye, except ye abide in me.","Remain in me, and I will remain in you. No branch can bear fruit by itself; it must remain in the vine. Neither can you bear fruit unless you remain in me.","Manete in me, et ego in vobis. Sicut palmes non potest ferre fructum a semetipso, nisi manserit in vite, sic nec vos, nisi in me manseritis.","עמדו בי ואני בכם כאשר השריג בל יעשה פרי מאליו אם לא יעמד בגפן כן גם אתם אם לא תעמדו בי׃"],["50","15","5","나는 포도나무요 너희는 가지다. 내 안에 머무르고 나도 그 안에 머무르는 사람은 많은 열매를 맺는다. 너희는 나 없이 아무것도 하지 못한다.","나는 포도나무요 너희는 가지다. 누구든지 나에게서 떠나지 않고 내가 그와 함께 있으면 그는 많은 열매를 맺는다. 나를 떠나서는 너희가 아무것도 할 수 없다.","나는 포도나무요 너희는 가지라 그가 내 안에, 내가 그 안에 거하면 사람이 열매를 많이 맺나니 나를 떠나서는 너희가 아무 것도 할 수 없음이라","나는 포도나무요 너희는 가지니 저가 내 안에, 내가 저 안에 있으면 이 사람은 과실을 많이 맺나니 나를 떠나서는 너희가 아무 것도 할 수 없음이라","나는 포도나무요, 너희는 가지다. 누구든지 내 안에 살고 내가 그 안에 살면 많은 열매를 맺을 것이다. 너희가 나를 떠나서는 아무 것도 할 수 없다.","I am the vine, you are the branches. Whoever remains in me and I in him will bear much fruit, because without me you can do nothing.","I am the vine, ye are the branches: He that abideth in me, and I in him, the same bringeth forth much fruit: for without me ye can do nothing.","\"I am the vine; you are the branches. If a man remains in me and I in him, he will bear much fruit; apart from me you can do nothing.","Ego sum vitis, vos palmites. Qui manet in me, et ego in eo, hic fert fructum multum, quia sine me nihil potestis facere.","אנכי הוא הגפן ואתם השריגים העמד בי ואני בו הוא יעשה פרי לרב כי בלעדי לא תוכלון עשות מאומה׃"],["50","15","6","내 안에 머무르지 않으면 잘린 가지처럼 밖에 던져져 말라 버린다. 그러면 사람들이 그런 가지들을 모아 불에 던져 태워 버린다.","나를 떠난 사람은 잘려 나간 가지처럼 밖에 버려져 말라버린다. 그러면 사람들이 이런 가지를 모아다가 불에 던져 태워버린다.","사람이 내 안에 거하지 아니하면 가지처럼 밖에 버려져 마르나니 사람들이 그것을 모아다가 불에 던져 사르느니라","사람이 내 안에 거하지 아니하면 가지처럼 밖에 버리워 말라지나니 사람들이 이것을 모아다가 불에 던져 사르느니라","만일 누구든지 나를 떠나면 필요 없는 가지처럼 버려질 것이요, 말라서 다른 것과 함께 묶인 채 불에 태워질 것이다.","Anyone who does not remain in me will be thrown out like a branch and wither; people will gather them and throw them into a fire and they will be burned.","If a man abide not in me, he is cast forth as a branch, and is withered; and men gather them, and cast them into the fire, and they are burned.","If anyone does not remain in me, he is like a branch that is thrown away and withers; such branches are picked up, thrown into the fire and burned.","Si quis in me non manserit, missus est foras sicut palmes et aruit; et colligunt eos et in ignem mittunt, et ardent.","איש אשר לא יעמד בי השלך כשריג החוצה וייבש וילקטום וישליכום אל תוך האש והיה לבער׃"],["50","15","7","너희가 내 안에 머무르고 내 말이 너희 안에 머무르면, 너희가 원하는 것은 무엇이든지 청하여라. 너희에게 그대로 이루어질 것이다.","너희가 나를 떠나지 않고 또 내 말을 간직해 둔다면 무슨 소원이든지 구하는 대로 다 이루어질 것이다.","너희가 내 안에 거하고 내 말이 너희 안에 거하면 무엇이든지 원하는 대로 구하라 그리하면 이루리라","너희가 내 안에 거하고 내 말이 너희 안에 거하면 무엇이든지 원하는대로 구하라 그리하면 이루리라","그러나 만일 너희가 내 안에 살며 내 말을 자발적으로 따르게 되거든 무엇이든지 원하는 것을 구하라. 그대로 이루어질 것이다.","If you remain in me and my words remain in you, ask for whatever you want and it will be done for you.","If ye abide in me, and my words abide in you, ye shall ask what ye will, and it shall be done unto you.","If you remain in me and my words remain in you, ask whatever you wish, and it will be given you.","Si manseritis in me, et verba mea in vobis manserint, quodcumque volueritis, petite, et fiet vobis.","והיה אם תעמדו בי ודברי יהיו בכם ככל חפצכם תשאלו ויעשה לכם׃"],["50","15","8","너희가 많은 열매를 맺고 내 제자가 되면, 그것으로 내 아버지께서 영광스럽게 되실 것이다.","너희가 많은 열매를 맺고 참으로 나의 제자가 되면 내 아버지께서 영광을 받으실 것이다.","너희가 열매를 많이 맺으면 내 아버지께서 영광을 받으실 것이요 너희는 내 제자가 되리라","너희가 과실을 많이 맺으면 내 아버지께서 영광을 받으실 것이요 너희가 내 제자가 되리라","내 참제자가 된 사람은 풍성한 열매를 맺는다. 그래서 이것으로 내 아버지께 큰 영광을 돌리게 되는 것이다.","By this is my Father glorified, that you bear much fruit and become my disciples.","Herein is my Father glorified, that ye bear much fruit; so shall ye be my disciples.","This is to my Father's glory, that you bear much fruit, showing yourselves to be my disciples.","In hoc clarificatus est Pater meus, ut fructum multum afferatis et efficiamini mei discipuli.","בזאת נכבד אבי בעשותכם פרי לרב והייתם לי לתלמידים׃"],["50","15","9","아버지께서 나를 사랑하신 것처럼 나도 너희를 사랑하였다. 너희는 내 사랑 안에 머물러라.","아버지께서 나를 사랑하신 것처럼 나도 너희를 사랑해 왔다. 그러니 너희는 언제나 내 사랑 안에 머물러 있어라.","아버지께서 나를 사랑하신 것 같이 나도 너희를 사랑하였으니 나의 사랑 안에 거하라","아버지께서 나를 사랑하신 것 같이 나도 너희를 사랑하였으니 나의 사랑 안에 거하라","아버지께서 나를 사랑하신 것처럼 나도 너희를 사랑하였으니 내 사랑 안에 살아가라.","As the Father loves me, so I also love you. Remain in my love.","As the Father hath loved me, so have I loved you: continue ye in my love.","\"As the Father has loved me, so have I loved you. Now remain in my love.","Sicut dilexit me Pater, et ego dilexi vos; manete in dilectione mea.","כאשר אהבני אבי אהבתי אתכם גם אני ואתם עמדו באהבתי׃"],["50","15","10","내가 내 아버지의 계명을 지켜 그분의 사랑 안에 머무르는 것처럼, 너희도 내 계명을 지키면 내 사랑 안에 머무를 것이다.","내가 내 아버지의 계명을 지켜 그 사랑 안에 머물러 있듯이 너희도 내 계명을 지키면 내 사랑 안에 머물러 있게 될 것이다.\"","내가 아버지의 계명을 지켜 그의 사랑 안에 거하는 것 같이 너희도 내 계명을 지키면 내 사랑 안에 거하리라","내가 아버지의 계명을 지켜 그의 사랑 안에 거하는것 같이 너희도 내 계명을 지키면 내 사랑 안에 거하리라","너희가 내 말을 지키면 내 사랑 안에 사는 것이다. 그것은 마치 내가 아버지의 말씀을 따르며 그분의 사랑 안에 사는 것과 같다.","If you keep my commandments, you will remain in my love, just as I have kept my Father’s commandments and remain in his love.","If ye keep my commandments, ye shall abide in my love; even as I have kept my Father's commandments, and abide in his love.","If you obey my commands, you will remain in my love, just as I have obeyed my Father's commands and remain in his love.","Si praecepta mea servaveritis, manebitis in dilectione mea, sicut ego Patris mei praecepta servavi et maneo in eius dilectione.","אם תשמרו את מצותי תעמדו באהבתי כאשר שמרתי גם אני את מצות אבי ועמדתי באהבתו׃"],["50","15","11","내가 너희에게 이 말을 한 이유는, 내 기쁨이 너희 안에 있고 또 너희 기쁨이 충만하게 하려는 것이다.","\"내가 이 말을 한 것은 내 기쁨을 같이 나누어 너희 마음에 기쁨이 넘치게 하려는 것이다.","내가 이것을 너희에게 이름은 내 기쁨이 너희 안에 있어 너희 기쁨을 충만하게 하려 함이라","내가 이것을 너희에게 이름은 내 기쁨이 너희 안에 있어 너희 기쁨을 충만하게 하려함이니라","내가 이런 말을 하는 것은 나와 같은 기쁨이 너희에게도 충만하게 하려는 것이다. 그렇다. 너희 기쁨의 잔이 넘칠 것이다.","“I have told you this so that my joy may be in you and your joy may be complete.","These things have I spoken unto you, that my joy might remain in you, and that your joy might be full.","I have told you this so that my joy may be in you and that your joy may be complete.","Haec locutus sum vobis, ut gaudium meum in vobis sit, et gaudium vestrum impleatur.","את אלה דברתי אליכם בעבור תהיה שמחתי בכם ותמלא שמחתכם׃"],["50","15","12","이것이 나의 계명이다. 내가 너희를 사랑한 것처럼 너희도 서로 사랑하여라.","내가 너희를 사랑한 것처럼 너희도 서로 사랑하여라. 이것이 나의 계명이다.","내 계명은 곧 내가 너희를 사랑한 것 같이 너희도 서로 사랑하라 하는 이것이니라","내 계명은 곧 내가 너희를 사랑한 것 같이 너희도 서로 사랑하라 하는 이것이니라","내가 너희를 사랑한 것같이 너희도 서로 사랑하라.","This is my commandment: love one another as I love you.","This is my commandment, That ye love one another, as I have loved you.","My command is this: Love each other as I have loved you.","Hoc est praeceptum meum, ut diligatis invicem, sicut dilexi vos;","הנה זאת מצותי כי תאהבון איש את אחיו כאשר אהבתיכם׃"],["50","15","13","친구들을 위하여 목숨을 내놓는 것보다 더 큰 사랑은 없다.","벗을 위하여 제 목숨을 바치는 것보다 더 큰 사랑은 없다.","사람이 친구를 위하여 자기 목숨을 버리면 이보다 더 큰 사랑이 없나니","사람이 친구를 위하여 자기 목숨을 버리면 이에서 더 큰 사랑이 없나니","친구를 위하여 목숨을 버리면 그보다 더 큰 사랑은 없다.","No one has greater love than this, to lay down one’s life for one’s friends.","Greater love hath no man than this, that a man lay down his life for his friends.","Greater love has no one than this, that he lay down his life for his friends.","maiorem hac dilectionem nemo habet, ut animam suam quis ponat pro amicis suis.","אין לאיש אהבה יתרה מתתו את נפשו בעד ידידיו׃"],["50","15","14","내가 너희에게 명령하는 것을 실천하면 너희는 나의 친구가 된다.","내가 명하는 것을 지키면 너희는 나의 벗이 된다.","너희는 내가 명하는 대로 행하면 곧 나의 친구라","너희가 나의 명하는대로 행하면 곧 나의 친구라","너희가 내 말을 지키면 너희는 내 친구다.","You are my friends if you do what I command you.","Ye are my friends, if ye do whatsoever I command you.","You are my friends if you do what I command.","Vos amici mei estis, si feceritis, quae ego praecipio vobis.","ואתם ידידי אתם אם תעשו את אשר אני מצוה אתכם׃"],["50","15","15","나는 너희를 더 이상 종이라고 부르지 않는다. 종은 주인이 하는 일을 모르기 때문이다. 나는 너희를 친구라고 불렀다. 내가 내 아버지에게서 들은 것을 너희에게 모두 알려 주었기 때문이다.","이제 나는 너희를 종이라고 부르지 않고 벗이라고 부르겠다. 종은 주인이 하는 일을 모른다. 그러나 나는 너희에게 내 아버지에게서 들은 것을 모두 다 알려주었다.","이제부터는 너희를 종이라 하지 아니하리니 종은 주인이 하는 것을 알지 못함이라 너희를 친구라 하였노니 내가 내 아버지께 들은 것을 다 너희에게 알게 하였음이라","이제부터는 너희를 종이라 하지 아니하리니 종은 주인의 하는 것을 알지 못함이라 너희를 친구라 하였노니 내가 내 아버지께 들은 것을 다 너희에게 알게 하였음이니라","나는 이제부터 너희를 종이라고 부르지 않겠다. 주인은 종들에게 비밀을 털어놓지 않기 때문이다. 이제 너희는 내 친구다. 아버지께서 내게 하신 모든 말씀을 너희에게 다 말하였다.","I no longer call you slaves, because a slave does not know what his master is doing. I have called you friends, because I have told you everything I have heard from my Father.","Henceforth I call you not servants; for the servant knoweth not what his lord doeth: but I have called you friends; for all things that I have heard of my Father I have made known unto you.","I no longer call you servants, because a servant does not know his master's business. Instead, I have called you friends, for everything that I learned from my Father I have made known to you.","Iam non dico vos servos, quia servus nescit quid facit dominus eius; vos autem dixi amicos, quia omnia, quae audivi a Patre meo, nota feci vobis.","לא אקרא לכם עוד עבדים כי העבד איננו ידע את אשר יעשה אדניו כי אם אמרתי ידידי אתם כי כל אשר שמעתי מאת אבי הודעתי אתכם׃"],["50","15","16","너희가 나를 뽑은 것이 아니라 내가 너희를 뽑아 세웠다. 너희가 가서 열매를 맺어 너희의 그 열매가 언제나 남아 있게 하려는 것이다. 그리하여 너희가 내 이름으로 아버지께 청하는 것을 그분께서 너희에게 주시게 하려는 것이다.","너희가 나를 택한 것이 아니라 내가 너희를 택하여 내세운 것이다. 그러니 너희는 세상에 나가 언제까지나 썩지 않을 열매를 맺어라. 그러면 아버지께서는 너희가 내 이름으로 구하는 것을 다 들어주실 것이다.","너희가 나를 택한 것이 아니요 내가 너희를 택하여 세웠나니 이는 너희로 가서 열매를 맺게 하고 또 너희 열매가 항상 있게 하여 내 이름으로 아버지께 무엇을 구하든지 다 받게 하려 함이라","너희가 나를 택한 것이 아니요 내가 너희를 택하여 세웠나니 이는 너희로 가서 과실을 맺게 하고 또 너희 과실이 항상 있게 하여 내 이름으로 아버지께 무엇을 구하든지 다 받게 하려 함이니라","너희가 나를 택한 것이 아니라 내가 너희를 택하였다. 그러니 세상에 나가 항상 아름다운 열매를 맺어 내 이름으로 아버지께 구하는 것은 무엇이나 받을 수 있는 사람이 되라.","It was not you who chose me, but I who chose you and appointed you to go and bear fruit that will remain, so that whatever you ask the Father in my name he may give you.","Ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen you, and ordained you, that ye should go and bring forth fruit, and that your fruit should remain: that whatsoever ye shall ask of the Father in my name, he may give it you.","You did not choose me, but I chose you and appointed you to go and bear fruit--fruit that will last. Then the Father will give you whatever you ask in my name.","Non vos me elegistis, sed ego elegi vos et posui vos, ut vos eatis et fructum afferatis, et fructus vester maneat, ut quodcumque petieritis Patrem in nomine meo, det vobis.","לא אתם בחרתם בי כי אם אנכי בחרתי בכם והפקדתי אתכם ללכת ולעשות פרי ופריכם יקום והיה כל אשר תשאלו מאבי בשמי יתן לכם׃"],["50","15","17","내가 너희에게 명령하는 것은 이것이다. 서로 사랑하여라.”","서로 사랑하여라. 이것이 너희에게 주는 나의 계명이다.\"","내가 이것을 너희에게 명함은 너희로 서로 사랑하게 하려 함이라","내가 이것을 너희에게 명함은 너희로 서로 사랑하게 하려함이로라","내가 이런 말을 하는 것은 너희가 서로 사랑하게 하려는 것이다.","This I command you: love one another.","These things I command you, that ye love one another.","This is my command: Love each other.","Haec mando vobis, ut diligatis invicem.","את אלה אני מצוה אתכם למען תאהבון איש את אחיו׃"],["50","15","18","“세상이 너희를 미워하거든 너희보다 먼저 나를 미워하였다는 것을 알아라.","\"세상이 너희를 미워하거든 너희보다도 나를 먼저 미워했다는 것을 알아두어라.","세상이 너희를 미워하면 너희보다 먼저 나를 미워한 줄을 알라","세상이 너희를 미워하면 너희보다 먼저 나를 미워한 줄을 알라","너희가 서로 사랑하는데도 세상이 너희를 미워한다면 세상이 너희보다 먼저 나를 미워했다는 것을 기억하라.","“If the world hates you, realize that it hated me first.","If the world hate you, ye know that it hated me before it hated you.","\"If the world hates you, keep in mind that it hated me first.","Si mundus vos odit, scitote quia me priorem vobis odio habuit.","אם העולם שנא אתכם דעו כי אתי שנא ראשונה׃"],["50","15","19","너희가 세상에 속한다면 세상은 너희를 자기 사람으로 사랑할 것이다. 그러나 너희가 세상에 속하지 않을 뿐만 아니라 내가 너희를 세상에서 뽑았기 때문에, 세상이 너희를 미워하는 것이다.","너희가 만일 세상에 속한 사람이라면 세상은 너희를 한집안 식구로 여겨 사랑할 것이다. 그러나 너희는 세상에 속하지 않았을 뿐더러 오히려 내가 세상에서 가려낸 사람들이기 때문에 세상이 너희를 미워하는 것이다.","너희가 세상에 속하였으면 세상이 자기의 것을 사랑할 것이나 너희는 세상에 속한 자가 아니요 도리어 내가 너희를 세상에서 택하였기 때문에 세상이 너희를 미워하느니라","너희가 세상에 속하였으면 세상이 자기의 것을 사랑할 터이나 너희는 세상에 속한 자가 아니요 도리어 세상에서 나의 택함을 입은 자인고로 세상이 너희를 미워하느니라","만일 너희가 세상에 속하였다면 세상이 너희를 사랑하였을 것이다. 그러나 너희는 세상에 속하지 않았다. 그것은 내가 너희를 세상에서 택해내었기 때문이다. 그래서 세상이 너희를 미워하는 것이다.","If you belonged to the world, the world would love its own; but because you do not belong to the world, and I have chosen you out of the world, the world hates you.","If ye were of the world, the world would love his own: but because ye are not of the world, but I have chosen you out of the world, therefore the world hateth you.","If you belonged to the world, it would love you as its own. As it is, you do not belong to the world, but I have chosen you out of the world. That is why the world hates you.","Si de mundo essetis, mundus, quod suum est, diligeret; quia vero de mundo non estis, sed ego elegi vos de mundo, propterea odit vos mundus.","אלו מן העולם הייתם כי אז אהב העולם את אשר לו ויען כי אינכם מן העולם כי אם בחרתי אתכם מתוך העולם לכן העולם ישנא אתכם׃"],["50","15","20","‘종은 주인보다 높지 않다.’고 내가 너희에게 한 말을 기억하여라. 사람들이 나를 박해하였으면 너희도 박해할 것이고, 내 말을 지켰으면 너희 말도 지킬 것이다.","종은 그 주인보다 더 나을 수가 없다고 한 내 말을 기억하여라. 그들이 나를 박해했으면 너희도 박해할 것이고 내 말을 지켰으면 너희의 말도 지킬 것이다.","내가 너희에게 종이 주인보다 더 크지 못하다 한 말을 기억하라 사람들이 나를 박해하였은즉 너희도 박해할 것이요 내 말을 지켰은즉 너희 말도 지킬 것이라","내가 너희더러 종이 주인보다 더 크지 못하다 한 말을 기억하라 사람들이 나를 핍박하였은즉 너희도 핍박할 터이요 내 말을 지켰은즉 너희 말도 지킬 터이라","내가 너희에게 \"종이 그의 주인보다 높지 못하다\"고 한 말을 기억하고 있느냐? 그들이 나를 박해하였다면 자연히 너희도 박해할 것이다. 반대로 만일 그들이 내 말을 들었다면 너희 말도 들을 것이다.","Remember the word I spoke to you, ‘No slave is greater than his master.’ If they persecuted me, they will also persecute you. If they kept my word, they will also keep yours.","Remember the word that I said unto you, The servant is not greater than his lord. If they have persecuted me, they will also persecute you; if they have kept my saying, they will keep yours also.","Remember the words I spoke to you: 'No servant is greater than his master.' If they persecuted me, they will persecute you also. If they obeyed my teaching, they will obey yours also.","Mementote sermonis, quem ego dixi vobis: Non est servus maior domino suo. Si me persecuti sunt, et vos persequentur; si sermonem meum servaverunt, et vestrum servabunt.","זכרו את דברי אשר דברתי אליכם העבד איננו גדול מאדניו אם רדפו אתי גם אתכם ירדפו אם שמרו את דברי גם את דברכם ישמרו׃"],["50","15","21","그러나 그들은 내 이름 때문에 너희에게 그 모든 일을 저지를 것이다. 그들이 나를 보내신 분을 알지 못하기 때문이다.","그들은 너희가 내 제자라 해서 이렇게 대할 것이다. 그들은 나를 보내신 분을 모르고 있다.","그러나 사람들이 내 이름으로 말미암아 이 모든 일을 너희에게 하리니 이는 나를 보내신 이를 알지 못함이라","그러나 사람들이 내 이름을 인하여 이 모든 일을 너희에게 하리니 이는 나 보내신 이를 알지 못함이니라","너희가 내게 속하였다는 이유로 세상 사람들은 너희를 박해할 것이다. 그것은 그들이 나를 보내신 하나님을 알지 못하기 때문이다.","And they will do all these things to you on account of my name, because they do not know the one who sent me.","But all these things will they do unto you for my name's sake, because they know not him that sent me.","They will treat you this way because of my name, for they do not know the One who sent me.","Sed haec omnia facient vobis propter nomen meum, quia nesciunt eum, qui misit me.","אבל כל זאת יעשו לכם בעבור שמי כי לא ידעו את שלחי׃"],["50","15","22","내가 와서 그들에게 말하지 않았으면 그들은 죄가 없었을 것이다. 그러나 이제는 자기들의 죄를 변명할 구실이 없다.","내가 와서 그들에게 일러주지 않았던들 그들에게는 죄가 없었을 것이다. 그러나 이제는 그들이 자기 죄를 변명할 길이 없게 되었다.","내가 와서 그들에게 말하지 아니하였더라면 죄가 없었으려니와 지금은 그 죄를 핑계할 수 없느니라","내가 와서 저희에게 말하지 아니하였더면 죄가 없었으려니와 지금은 그 죄를 핑계할 수 없느니라","만일 내가 와서 그들에게 일러주지 않았다면 그들은 죄가 없었을 것이다. 그러나 이제 그들은 자기들의 죄에 대해서 변명할 여지가 없다.","If I had not come and spoken to them, they would have no sin; but as it is they have no excuse for their sin.","If I had not come and spoken unto them, they had not had sin: but now they have no cloak for their sin.","If I had not come and spoken to them, they would not be guilty of sin. Now, however, they have no excuse for their sin.","Si non venissem et locutus fuissem eis, peccatum non haberent; nunc autem excusationem non habent de peccato suo.","לולא באתי ודברתי אליהם לא היה בהם חטא ועתה לא יוכלון להתנצל על חטאתם׃"],["50","15","23","나를 미워하는 자는 내 아버지까지 미워한다.","나를 미워하는 자는 나의 아버지까지도 미워한다.","나를 미워하는 자는 또 내 아버지를 미워하느니라","나를 미워하는 자는 또 내 아버지를 미워하느니라","누구든지 나를 미워하면 내 아버지도 미워하는 것이다.","Whoever hates me also hates my Father.","He that hateth me hateth my Father also.","He who hates me hates my Father as well.","Qui me odit et Patrem meum odit.","השנא אתי ישנא גם את אבי׃"],["50","15","24","일찍이 다른 그 누구도 하지 못한 일들을 내가 그들 가운데에서 하지 않았으면, 그들은 죄가 없었을 것이다. 그러나 그들은 내가 한 일을 보고 나와 내 아버지까지 미워하였다.","내가 일찍이 아무도 하지 못한 일들을 그들 앞에서 하지 않았던들 그들에게는 죄가 없었을 것이다. 그런데 내가 한 일을 보고서도 그들은 나와 또 나의 아버지까지 미워한다.","내가 아무도 못한 일을 그들 중에서 하지 아니하였더라면 그들에게 죄가 없었으려니와 지금은 그들이 나와 내 아버지를 보았고 또 미워하였도다","내가 아무도 못한 일을 저희 중에서 하지 아니하였더면 저희가 죄 없었으려니와 지금은 저희가 나와 및 내 아버지를 보았고 또 미워하였도다","만일 내가 그들 앞에서 아무도 행하지 못하였던 놀라운 일들을 행하지 않았다면 그들은 죄가 없었을 것이다. 그러나 그들은 내가 행한 일을 보고서도 나와 내 아버지를 미워하였다.","If I had not done works among them that no one else ever did, they would not have sin; but as it is, they have seen and hated both me and my Father.","If I had not done among them the works which none other man did, they had not had sin: but now have they both seen and hated both me and my Father.","If I had not done among them what no one else did, they would not be guilty of sin. But now they have seen these miracles, and yet they have hated both me and my Father.","Si opera non fecissem in eis, quae nemo alius fecit, peccatum non haberent; nunc autem et viderunt et oderunt et me et Patrem meum.","לולא עשיתי בתוכם את המעשים אשר איש זולתי לא עשה לא היה בהם חטא ועתה ראו וישנאו גם אתי גם את אבי׃"],["50","15","25","이는 그들의 율법에 ‘그들은 까닭 없이 저를 미워하였습니다.’라고 기록된 말이 이루어지려고 그리된 것이다.","이리하여 그들의 율법서에 '1)그들은 까닭없이 나를 미워하였다.'고 기록되어 있는 말씀이 이루어졌다.\"시편 69:4(35:19 참조).","그러나 이는 그들의 율법에 ㄱ)기록된 바 그들이 이유 없이 나를 미워하였다 한 말을 응하게 하려 함이라","그러나 이는 저희 율법에 ㄱ)기록된바 저희가 연고 없이 나를 미워하였다한 말을 응하게 하려 함이니라 시 35:19, 69:4","이것은 ㄱ) \"그들이 까닭없이 나를 미워하였다\"고 예언된 말씀이 이루어진 것이다. (ㄱ. 시69:4)","But in order that the word written in their law might be fulfilled, ‘They hated me without cause.’","But this cometh to pass, that the word might be fulfilled that is written in their law, They hated me without a cause.","But this is to fulfill what is written in their Law: 'They hated me without reason.'","Sed ut impleatur sermo, qui in lege eorum scriptus est: “Odio me habuerunt gratis “.","אך למלאת דבר הכתוב בתורתם שנאת חנם שנאוני׃"],["50","15","26","내가 아버지에게서 너희에게로 보낼 보호자, 곧 아버지에게서 나오시는 진리의 영이 오시면, 그분께서 나를 증언하실 것이다.","\"내가 아버지께 청하여 너희에게 보낼 협조자 곧 아버지께로부터 나오시는 진리의 성령이 오시면 그분이 나를 증언할 것이다.","내가 아버지께로부터 너희에게 보낼 보혜사 곧 아버지께로부터 나오시는 진리의 성령이 오실 때에 그가 나를 증언하실 것이요","내가 아버지께로서 너희에게 보낼 보혜사 곧 아버지께로서 나오시는 진리의 성령이 오실 때에 그가 나를 증거하실 것이요","그러나 나는 돕는 자, 곧 진리의 원천이신 성령을 너희에게 보내겠다. 그분은 아버지께로부터 너희에게 오셔서 나에 관하여 모든 것을 알려 주실 것이다.","“When the Advocate comes whom I will send you from the Father, the Spirit of truth that proceeds from the Father, he will testify to me.","But when the Comforter is come, whom I will send unto you from the Father, even the Spirit of truth, which proceedeth from the Father, he shall testify of me:","\"When the Counselor comes, whom I will send to you from the Father, the Spirit of truth who goes out from the Father, he will testify about me.","Cum autem venerit Paraclitus, quem ego mittam vobis a Patre, Spiritum veritatis, qui a Patre procedit, ille testimonium perhibebit de me;","ובבוא הפרקליט אשר אשלחנו לכם מאת אבי רוח האמת היוצא מאת אבי הוא יעיד עלי׃"],["50","15","27","그리고 너희도 처음부터 나와 함께 있었으므로 나를 증언할 것이다.”","그리고 너희도 처음부터 나와 함께 있었기 때문에 나의 증인이 될 것이다.\"","너희도 처음부터 나와 함께 있었으므로 증언하느니라","너희도 처음부터 나와 함께 있었으므로 증거하느니라","그리고 너희도 처음부터 나와 함께 있었으니 나를 모든 사람들에게 증거하게 될 것이다.","And you also testify, because you have been with me from the beginning.","And ye also shall bear witness, because ye have been with me from the beginning.","And you also must testify, for you have been with me from the beginning.","sed et vos testimonium perhibetis, quia ab initio mecum estis.","וגם אתם תעידו כי מראש הייתם עמדי׃"],["50","16","1","“내가 너희에게 이 말을 한 이유는 너희가 떨어져 나가지 않게 하려는 것이다.","\"내가 너희에게 이 말을 한 것은 너희의 믿음이 흔들리지 않도록 하려는 것이다.","내가 이것을 너희에게 이름은 너희로 실족하지 않게 하려 함이니","내가 이것을 너희에게 이름은 너희로 실족지 않게 하려 함이니","내가 이런 일을 너희에게 일러두는 것은 너희의 믿음이 흔들리지 않게 하려는 것이다.","“I have told you this so that you may not fall away.","These things have I spoken unto you, that ye should not be offended.","\"All this I have told you so that you will not go astray.","Haec locutus sum vobis, ut non scandalizemini.","את אלה דברתי אליכם למען לא תכשלו׃"],["50","16","2","사람들이 너희를 회당에서 내쫓을 것이다. 게다가 너희를 죽이는 자마다 하느님께 봉사한다고 생각할 때가 온다.","사람들은 너희를 회당에서 쫓아낼 것이다. 그리고 너희를 죽이는 사람들이 그런 짓을 하고도 그것이 오히려 하느님을 섬기는 일이라고 생각할 때가 올 것이다.","사람들이 너희를 출교할 뿐 아니라 때가 이르면 무릇 너희를 죽이는 자가 생각하기를 이것이 하나님을 섬기는 일이라 하리라","사람들이 너희를 출회할 뿐아니라 때가 이르면 무릇 너희를 죽이는 자가 생각하기를 이것이 하나님을 섬기는 예라하리라","너희는 회당에서 쫓겨날 것이다. 사람들은 너희를 죽이는 것이 하나님을 섬기는 일이라고 생각할 때가 올 것이다.","They will expel you from the synagogues; in fact, the hour is coming when everyone who kills you will think he is offering worship to God.","They shall put you out of the synagogues: yea, the time cometh, that whosoever killeth you will think that he doeth God service.","They will put you out of the synagogue; in fact, a time is coming when anyone who kills you will think he is offering a service to God.","Absque synagogis facient vos; sed venit hora, ut omnis, qui interficit vos, arbitretur obsequium se praestare Deo.","הנה ינדו אתכם ואף באה השעה אשר כל הרג אתכם ידמה להקריב עבודה לאלהים׃"],["50","16","3","그들은 아버지도 나도 알지 못하기 때문에 그러한 짓을 할 것이다.","그들은 아버지도 나도 모르기 때문에 그런 짓들을 하게 되는 것이다.","그들이 이런 일을 할 것은 아버지와 나를 알지 못함이라","저희가 이런 일을 할 것은 아버지와 나를 알지 못함이라","그들은 아버지나 나를 알지 못하기 때문에 그런 일을 저지르는 것이다.","They will do this because they have not known either the Father or me.","And these things will they do unto you, because they have not known the Father, nor me.","They will do such things because they have not known the Father or me.","Et haec facient, quia non noverunt Patrem neque me.","וכזאת יעשו לכם יען גם את אבי וגם אתי לא ידעו׃"],["50","16","4","내가 너희에게 이 말을 한 이유는, 그들의 때가 오면 내가 너희에게 한 말을 기억하게 하려는 것이다.” “내가 처음부터 이 말을 너희에게 하지 않은 것은 내가 너희와 함께 있었기 때문이다.","그러한 때가 오면 내가 한 말을 기억하라고 너희에게 이렇게 미리 말해 두는 것이다.\"","오직 너희에게 이 말을 한 것은 너희로 그 때를 당하면 내가 너희에게 말한 이것을 기억나게 하려 함이요 처음부터 이 말을 하지 아니한 것은 내가 너희와 함께 있었음이라","오직 너희에게 이 말을 이른 것은 너희로 그 때를 당하면 내가 너희에게 이 말 한 것을 기억나게 하려 함이요 처음부터 이 말을 하지 아니한 것은 내가 너희와 함께 있었음이니라","그렇다. 지금 내가 이렇게 너희에게 말해 두는 것은 그런 일이 닥쳐올 때를 대비하여 너희에게 경고해 두려는 것이다. 내가 더 일찍 이런 말을 하지 않았던 것은 내가 지금까지는 너희와 함께 있었기 때문이다.","I have told you this so that when their hour comes you may remember that I told you. “I did not tell you this from the beginning, because I was with you.","But these things have I told you, that when the time shall come, ye may remember that I told you of them. And these things I said not unto you at the beginning, because I was with you.","I have told you this, so that when the time comes you will remember that I warned you. I did not tell you this at first because I was with you.","Sed haec locutus sum vobis, ut, cum venerit hora eorum, reminiscamini eorum, quia ego dixi vobis. Haec autem vobis ab initio non dixi, quia vobiscum eram.","אבל הגדתי לכם את אלה למען אשר בבא השעה תזכרום כי אנכי אמרתי אליכם וכאלה לא אמרתי אליכם מראש כי הייתי עמכם׃"],["50","16","5","이제 나는 나를 보내신 분께 간다. 그런데도 ‘어디로 가십니까?’ 하고 묻는 사람이 너희 가운데 아무도 없다.","나는 지금 나를 보내신 분에게 돌아간다. 그런데도 너희는 어디로 가느냐고 묻기는커녕","지금 내가 나를 보내신 이에게로 가는데 너희 중에서 나더러 어디로 가는지 묻는 자가 없고","지금 내가 나를 보내신 이에게로 가는데 너희 중에서 나더러 어디로 가느냐 묻는 자가 없고","나는 지금 나를 보내신 분에게로 간다. 그런데도 너희 가운데 아무도 내가 어떤 목적으로 가는지 관심을 가지는 사람도 없고 그 이유를 묻는 사람도 없다.","But now I am going to the one who sent me, and not one of you asks me, ‘Where are you going?’","But now I go my way to him that sent me; and none of you asketh me, Whither goest thou?","\"Now I am going to him who sent me, yet none of you asks me, 'Where are you going?'","At nunc vado ad eum, qui me misit, et nemo ex vobis interrogat me: “Quo vadis? “.","ועתה הלך אנכי אל שלחי ולא ישאלני איש מכם אנה תלך׃"],["50","16","6","오히려 내가 이 말을 하였기 때문에 너희 마음에 근심이 가득 찼다.","오히려 내가 한 말 때문에 모두 슬픔에 잠겨 있다.","도리어 내가 이 말을 하므로 너희 마음에 근심이 가득하였도다","도리어 내가 이 말을 하므로 너희 마음에 근심이 가득하였도다","너희는 오직 슬픔으로만 차 있다.","But because I told you this, grief has filled your hearts.","But because I have said these things unto you, sorrow hath filled your heart.","Because I have said these things, you are filled with grief.","Sed quia haec locutus sum vobis, tristitia implevit cor vestrum.","אך על דברי את אלה אליכם מלא לבבכם עצבת׃"],["50","16","7","그러나 너희에게 진실을 말하는데, 내가 떠나는 것이 너희에게 이롭다. 내가 떠나지 않으면 보호자께서 너희에게 오지 않으신다. 그러나 내가 가면 그분을 너희에게 보내겠다.","그러나 사실은 내가 떠나가는 것이 너희에게는 더 유익하다. 내가 떠나가지 않으면 그 협조자가 너희에게 오시지 않을 것이다. 그러나 내가 가면 그분을 보내겠다.","그러나 내가 너희에게 실상을 말하노니 내가 떠나가는 것이 너희에게 유익이라 내가 떠나가지 아니하면 보혜사가 너희에게로 오시지 아니할 것이요 가면 내가 그를 너희에게로 보내리니","그러하나 내가 너희에게 실상을 말하노니 내가 떠나가는 것이 너희에게 유익이라 내가 떠나가지 아니하면 보혜사가 너희에게로 오시지 아니할 것이요 가면 내가 그를 너희에게로 보내리니","그러나 사실은 내가 떠나가는 것이 너희에게 더 유익하다. 만일 내가 가지 않으면 돕는 자께서 오실 수 없다. 내가 가야 그분이 오신다. 내가 가서 그분을 보낼 것이기 때문이다.","But I tell you the truth, it is better for you that I go. For if I do not go, the Advocate will not come to you. But if I go, I will send him to you.","Nevertheless I tell you the truth; It is expedient for you that I go away: for if I go not away, the Comforter will not come unto you; but if I depart, I will send him unto you.","But I tell you the truth: It is for your good that I am going away. Unless I go away, the Counselor will not come to you; but if I go, I will send him to you.","Sed ego veritatem dico vobis: Expedit vobis, ut ego vadam. Si enim non abiero, Paraclitus non veniet ad vos; si autem abiero, mittam eum ad vos.","אולם האמת אגיד לכם כי לכתי אך טוב לכם כי אם לא אלך לא יבא אליכם הפרקליט ואם אלך אשלחהו אליכם׃"],["50","16","8","보호자께서 오시면 죄와 의로움과 심판에 관한 세상의 그릇된 생각을 밝히실 것이다.","그분이 오시면 죄와 정의와 심판에 관한 세상의 그릇된 생각을 꾸짖어 바로잡아 주실 것이다.","그가 와서 죄에 대하여, 의에 대하여, 심판에 대하여 세상을 책망하시리라","그가 와서 죄에 대하여, 의에 대하여, 심판에 대하여 세상을 책망하시리라","그분이 오시면 이 세상의 죄와 하나님의 정의와 심판에 대해서 잘못 생각하고 있는 점을 깨닫게 하실 것이다.","And when he comes he will convict the world in regard to sin and righteousness and condemnation:","And when he is come, he will reprove the world of sin, and of righteousness, and of judgment:","When he comes, he will convict the world of guilt in regard to sin and righteousness and judgment:","Et cum venerit ille, arguet mundum de peccato et de iustitia et de iudicio:","והיה בבאו יוכיח את העולם על דבר החטא והצדק והמשפט׃"],["50","16","9","그들이 죄에 관하여 잘못 생각하는 것은 나를 믿지 않기 때문이고,","그분은 나를 믿지 않은 것이 바로 죄라고 지적하실 것이며","죄에 대하여라 함은 그들이 나를 믿지 아니함이요","죄에 대하여라 함은 저희가 나를 믿지 아니함이요","세상의 죄란 곧 나를 믿지 않는 것이고","sin, because they do not believe in me;","Of sin, because they believe not on me;","in regard to sin, because men do not believe in me;","de peccato quidem, quia non credunt in me;","על החטא כי לא האמינו בי׃"],["50","16","10","그들이 의로움에 관하여 잘못 생각하는 것은 내가 아버지께 가고 너희가 더 이상 나를 보지 못할 것이기 때문이며,","내가 아버지께 돌아가고 너희가 나를 보지 못하게 된다는 것이 하느님의 정의를 나타내시는 것이라고 가르치실 것이고","의에 대하여라 함은 내가 아버지께로 가니 너희가 다시 나를 보지 못함이요","의에 대하여라 함은 내가 아버지께로 가니 너희가 다시 나를 보지 못함이요","너희가 의롭다는 인정을 받아야 할 필요가 있는 것은 내가 아버지께로 돌아가 너희가 더 이상 나를 보지 못하게 되기 때문이고","righteousness, because I am going to the Father and you will no longer see me;","Of righteousness, because I go to my Father, and ye see me no more;","in regard to righteousness, because I am going to the Father, where you can see me no longer;","de iustitia vero, quia ad Patrem vado, et iam non videtis me;","ועל הצדק כי אלך אל אבי ולא תוסיפו לראות אתי׃"],["50","16","11","그들이 심판에 관하여 잘못 생각하는 것은 이 세상의 우두머리가 이미 심판을 받았기 때문이다.","이 세상의 권력자가 이미 심판을 받았다는 사실로써 정말 심판을 받을 자가 누구인지를 보여주실 것이다.\"","심판에 대하여라 함은 이 세상 임금이 심판을 받았음이라","심판에 대하여라 함은 이 세상 임금이 심판을 받았음이니라","심판에서 구출을 받아야 한다는 것은 이 세상의 통치자가 이미 심판을 받았으니 너희도 심판받지 않도록 경계할 것을 이르는 말이다.","condemnation, because the ruler of this world has been condemned.","Of judgment, because the prince of this world is judged.","and in regard to judgment, because the prince of this world now stands condemned.","de iudicio autem, quia princeps mundi huius iudicatus est.","ועל המשפט כי נדון שר העולם הזה׃"],["50","16","12","내가 너희에게 할 말이 아직도 많지만 너희가 지금은 그것을 감당하지 못한다.","\"아직도 나는 할 말이 많지만 지금은 너희가 그 말을 알아들을 수 없을 것이다.","내가 아직도 너희에게 이를 것이 많으나 지금은 너희가 감당하지 못하리라","내가 아직도 너희에게 이를 것이 많으나 지금은 너희가 감당치 못하리라","내가 아직도 너희에게 하고 싶은 말이 많으나 지금은 너희가 그것을 다 이해할 수가 없다.","“I have much more to tell you, but you cannot bear it now.","I have yet many things to say unto you, but ye cannot bear them now.","\"I have much more to say to you, more than you can now bear.","Adhuc multa habeo vobis dicere, sed non potestis portare modo.","עוד רבות לי להגיד לכם אך לא תוכלון שאת עתה׃"],["50","16","13","그러나 그분 곧 진리의 영께서 오시면 너희를 모든 진리 안으로 이끌어 주실 것이다. 그분께서는 스스로 이야기하지 않으시고 들으시는 것만 이야기하시며, 또 앞으로 올 일들을 너희에게 알려 주실 것이다.","그러나 진리의 성령이 오시면 너희를 이끌어 진리를 온전히 깨닫게 하여주실 것이다. 그분은 자기 생각대로 말씀하시지 않고 들은 대로 일러주실 것이며 앞으로 다가올 일들도 알려주실 것이다.","그러나 진리의 성령이 오시면 그가 너희를 모든 진리 가운데로 인도하시리니 그가 스스로 말하지 않고 오직 들은 것을 말하며 장래 일을 너희에게 알리시리라","그러하나 진리의 성령이 오시면 그가 너희를 모든 진리 가운데로 인도하시리니 그가 자의로 말하지 않고 오직 듣는 것을 말하시며 장래 일을 너희에게 알리시리라","그러나 돕는 자 곧 진리의 성령이 오시면 너희를 모든 진리 가운데로 인도하실 것이다. 그분은 자신의 생각대로 말씀하시지 않고 들은 것만 너희에게 전해 주실 것이며 미래에 있을 일도 알려 주실 것이다.","But when he comes, the Spirit of truth, he will guide you to all truth. He will not speak on his own, but he will speak what he hears, and will declare to you the things that are coming.","Howbeit when he, the Spirit of truth, is come, he will guide you into all truth: for he shall not speak of himself; but whatsoever he shall hear, that shall he speak: and he will shew you things to come.","But when he, the Spirit of truth, comes, he will guide you into all truth. He will not speak on his own; he will speak only what he hears, and he will tell you what is yet to come.","Cum autem venerit ille, Spiritus veritatis, deducet vos in omnem veritatem; non enim loquetur a semetipso, sed quaecumque audiet, loquetur et, quae ventura sunt, annuntiabit vobis.","ורוח האמת בבאו הוא ידריך אתכם אל כל האמת כי לא ידבר מעצמו כי אם אשר ישמע ידבר והאתיות יגיד לכם׃"],["50","16","14","그분께서 나를 영광스럽게 하실 것이다. 나에게서 받아 너희에게 알려 주실 것이기 때문이다.","또 그분은 나에게서 들은 것을 너희에게 전하여 나를 영광스럽게 하실 것이다.","그가 내 영광을 나타내리니 내 것을 가지고 너희에게 알리시겠음이라","그가 내 영광을 나타내리니 내 것을 가지고 너희에게 알리겠음이니라","그분은 나를 찬양하실 것이며 내것을 받아 너희에게 알려 줌으로써 나를 크게 높이실 것이다.","He will glorify me, because he will take from what is mine and declare it to you.","He shall glorify me: for he shall receive of mine, and shall shew it unto you.","He will bring glory to me by taking from what is mine and making it known to you.","Ille me clarificabit, quia de meo accipiet et annuntiabit vobis.","הוא יפארני כי משלי יקח ויגיד לכם׃"],["50","16","15","아버지께서 가지고 계신 것은 모두 나의 것이다. 그렇기 때문에 성령께서 나에게서 받아 너희에게 알려 주실 것이라고 내가 말하였다.”","아버지께서 가지고 계신 것은 모두 다 나의 것이다. 그래서 성령께서 내게 들은 것을 너희에게 알려주시리라고 내가 말했던 것이다.\"","무릇 아버지께 있는 것은 다 내 것이라 그러므로 내가 말하기를 그가 내 것을 가지고 너희에게 알리시리라 하였노라","무릇 아버지께 있는 것은 다 내 것이라 그러므로 내가 말하기를 그가 내 것을 가지고 너희에게 알리리라 하였노라","아버지의 모든 것이 다 내 것이다. 이런 까닭에 돕는 자이신 성령께서 내게서 받은 것을 너희에게 알려 주실 것이라고 내가 말한 것이다.","Everything that the Father has is mine; for this reason I told you that he will take from what is mine and declare it to you.","All things that the Father hath are mine: therefore said I, that he shall take of mine, and shall shew it unto you.","All that belongs to the Father is mine. That is why I said the Spirit will take from what is mine and make it known to you.","Omnia, quaecumque habet Pater, mea sunt; propterea dixi quia de meo accipit et annuntiabit vobis.","כל אשר לאבי לי הוא על כן אמרתי כי משלי יקח ויגיד לכם׃"],["50","16","16","“조금 있으면 너희는 나를 더 이상 보지 못할 것이다. 그러나 다시 조금 더 있으면 나를 보게 될 것이다.”","\"조금 있으면 너희는 나를 보지 못하게 될 것이다. 그러나 얼마 안 가서 나를 다시 보게 될 것이다.\"","조금 있으면 너희가 나를 보지 못하겠고 또 조금 있으면 나를 보리라 하시니","조금 있으면 너희가 나를 보지 못하겠고 또 조금 있으면 나를 보리라 하신대","잠시 후에 나는 떠나간다. 그러면 너희는 더 이상 나를 보지 못하게 될 것이다. 그러나 또 잠시 후에 다시 나를 보게 될 것이다.\"","“A little while and you will no longer see me, and again a little while later and you will see me.”","A little while, and ye shall not see me: and again, a little while, and ye shall see me, because I go to the Father.","\"In a little while you will see me no more, and then after a little while you will see me.\"","Modicum, et iam non videtis me; et iterum modicum, et videbitis me “.","הן מעט ולא תראוני ועוד מעט ותחזוני כי אני הלך אל אבי׃"],["50","16","17","그러자 제자들 가운데 몇 사람이 서로 말하였다. “‘조금 있으면 너희는 나를 보지 못할 것이다. 그러나 다시 조금 더 있으면 나를 보게 될 것이다.’, 또 ‘내가 아버지께 가기 때문이다.’ 하고 우리에게 말씀하시는데, 그것이 무슨 뜻일까?”","그러자 몇몇 제자들이 \"조금 있으면 나를 보지 못하게 되겠고 또 얼마 안 가서 다시 보게 되리라든지, 나는 아버지께로 간다든지 하는 말씀은 도대체 무슨 뜻일까?\" 하고 수군거렸다.","제자 중에서 서로 말하되 우리에게 말씀하신 바 조금 있으면 나를 보지 못하겠고 또 조금 있으면 나를 보리라 하시며 또 내가 아버지께로 감이라 하신 것이 무슨 말씀이냐 하고","제자 중에서 서로 말하되 우리에게 말씀하신바 조금 있으면 나를 보지 못하겠고 또 조금 있으면 나를 보리라 하시며 또 내가 아버지께로 감이라 하신 것이 무슨 말씀이뇨 하고","제자들 몇 명이 서로 말하였다. \"주께서 하시는 말씀을 하나도 알아들지 못하겠군. \"잠시 후\"라니 그것이 도대체 무슨 뜻일까?\"","So some of his disciples said to one another, “What does this mean that he is saying to us, ‘A little while and you will not see me, and again a little while and you will see me,’ and ‘Because I am going to the Father’?”","Then said some of his disciples among themselves, What is this that he saith unto us, A little while, and ye shall not see me: and again, a little while, and ye shall see me: and, Because I go to the Father?","Some of his disciples said to one another, \"What does he mean by saying, 'In a little while you will see me no more, and then after a little while you will see me,' and 'Because I am going to the Father'?\"","Dixerunt ergo ex discipulis eius ad invicem: “Quid est hoc, quod dicit nobis: “Modicum, et non videtis me; et iterum modicum, et videbitis me “ et: “Vado ad Patrem “? “.","ומקצת תלמידיו נדברו איש אל אחיו לאמר מה זה אמר אלינו הן מעט ולא תראוני ועוד מעט ותחזוני ואמרו אני הלך אל אבי׃"],["50","16","18","그들은 또 “‘조금 있으면’이라고 말씀하시는데, 그것이 무슨 뜻일까? 무슨 이야기를 하시는지 알 수가 없군.” 하고 말하였다.","그러면서 그들은 \"'얼마 안 가서'라는 말씀이 무슨 뜻인가? 무슨 말씀인지 도무지 알 수가 없군!\" 하고 말하였다.","또 말하되 조금 있으면이라 하신 말씀이 무슨 말씀이냐 무엇을 말씀하시는지 알지 못하노라 하거늘","또 말하되 조금 있으면이라한 말씀이 무슨 말씀이뇨 무엇을 말씀하시는지 알지 못하노라 하거늘","(17절에 포함되어 있음)","So they said, “What is this ‘little while’ [of which he speaks]? We do not know what he means.”","They said therefore, What is this that he saith, A little while? we cannot tell what he saith.","They kept asking, \"What does he mean by 'a little while'? We don't understand what he is saying.\"","Dicebant ergo: “Quid est hoc, quod dicit: “Modicum “? Nescimus quid loquitur “.","ויאמרו מה זה אשר אמר מעט לא ידענו מה דבר׃"],["50","16","19","예수님께서는 제자들이 묻고 싶어 하는 것을 아시고 그들에게 이르셨다. “‘조금 있으면 너희는 나를 보지 못할 것이다. 그러나 다시 조금 더 있으면 나를 보게 될 것이다.’ 하고 내가 말한 것을 가지고 서로 묻고 있느냐?","예수께서는 제자들이 묻고 싶어하는 낌새를 알아채시고 이렇게 말씀하셨다. \"조금 있으면 너희는 나를 보지 못하게 되겠고 얼마 안 가서 다시 만나게 되리라고 한 내 말을 가지고 서로들 논의하고 있는 것이냐?","예수께서 그 묻고자 함을 아시고 이르시되 내 말이 조금 있으면 나를 보지 못하겠고 또 조금 있으면 나를 보리라 하므로 서로 문의하느냐","예수께서 그 묻고자 함을 아시고 가라사대 내 말이 조금 있으면 나를 보지 못하겠고 또 조금 있으면 나를 보리라 하므로 서로 문의하느냐","예수께서는 제자들이 묻고 싶어하는 기미를 알고 말씀하셨다. \"너희는 내가 말한 뜻을 묻고 있느냐?","Jesus knew that they wanted to ask him, so he said to them, “Are you discussing with one another what I said, ‘A little while and you will not see me, and again a little while and you will see me’?","Now Jesus knew that they were desirous to ask him, and said unto them, Do ye enquire among yourselves of that I said, A little while, and ye shall not see me: and again, a little while, and ye shall see me?","Jesus saw that they wanted to ask him about this, so he said to them, \"Are you asking one another what I meant when I said, 'In a little while you will see me no more, and then after a little while you will see me'?","Cognovit Iesus quia volebant eum interrogare et dixit eis: “De hoc quaeritis inter vos, quia dixi: “Modicum, et non videtis me; et iterum modicum, et videbitis me “?","וידע ישוע כי עם לבבם לשאל אתו ויאמר אליהם העל זאת אתם דרשים ביניכם כי אמרתי הן מעט ולא תראוני ועוד מעט ותחזוני׃"],["50","16","20","내가 진실로 진실로 너희에게 말한다. 너희는 울며 애통해하겠지만 세상은 기뻐할 것이다. 너희가 근심하겠지만, 그러나 너희의 근심은 기쁨으로 바뀔 것이다.","정말 잘 들어두어라. 너희는 울며 슬퍼하겠지만 세상은 기뻐할 것이다. 너희는 근심에 잠길지라도 그 근심은 기쁨으로 바뀔 것이다.","내가 진실로 진실로 너희에게 이르노니 너희는 곡하고 애통하겠으나 세상은 기뻐하리라 너희는 근심하겠으나 너희 근심이 도리어 기쁨이 되리라","내가 진실로 진실로 너희에게 이르노니 너희는 곡하고 애통하리니 세상이 기뻐하리라 너희는 근심하겠으나 너희 근심이 도리어 기쁨이 되리라","내가 진정으로 말한다. 내게 어떤 일이 일어나면 세상은 크게 기뻐 날뛰고 너희는 슬피 울 것이다. 그러나 너희의 눈물은 너희가 나를 다시 보는 순간에 큰 기쁨으로 변할 것이다.","Amen, amen, I say to you, you will weep and mourn, while the world rejoices; you will grieve, but your grief will become joy.","Verily, verily, I say unto you, That ye shall weep and lament, but the world shall rejoice: and ye shall be sorrowful, but your sorrow shall be turned into joy.","I tell you the truth, you will weep and mourn while the world rejoices. You will grieve, but your grief will turn to joy.","Amen, amen dico vobis quia plorabitis et flebitis vos, mundus autem gaudebit; vos contristabimini, sed tristitia vestra vertetur in gaudium.","אמן אמן אני אמר לכם כי אתם תבכו ותילילו והעולם ישמח הן אתם תעצבו אכן עצבכם יהפך לששון׃"],["50","16","21","해산할 때에 여자는 근심에 싸인다. 진통의 시간이 왔기 때문이다. 그러나 아이를 낳으면, 사람 하나가 이 세상에 태어났다는 기쁨으로 그 고통을 잊어버린다.","여자가 해산할 즈음에는 걱정이 태산 같다. 진통을 겪어야 할 때가 왔기 때문이다. 그러나 아이를 낳으면 사람 하나가 이 세상에 태어났다는 기쁨에 그 진통을 잊어버리게 된다.","여자가 해산하게 되면 그 때가 이르렀으므로 근심하나 아기를 낳으면 세상에 사람 난 기쁨으로 말미암아 그 고통을 다시 기억하지 아니하느니라","여자가 해산하게 되면 그 때가 이르렀으므로 근심하나 아이를 낳으면 세상에 사람 난 기쁨을 인하여 그 고통을 다시 기억지 아니하느니라","그것은 여자가 아기를 낳았을 때의 기쁨과도 같다. 여자가 아기를 낳으면 불안은 기쁨으로 바꾸고 고통은 잊어버린다.","When a woman is in labor, she is in anguish because her hour has arrived; but when she has given birth to a child, she no longer remembers the pain because of her joy that a child has been born into the world.","A woman when she is in travail hath sorrow, because her hour is come: but as soon as she is delivered of the child, she remembereth no more the anguish, for joy that a man is born into the world.","A woman giving birth to a child has pain because her time has come; but when her baby is born she forgets the anguish because of her joy that a child is born into the world.","Mulier, cum parit, tristitiam habet, quia venit hora eius; cum autem pepererit puerum, iam non meminit pressurae propter gaudium, quia natus est homo in mundum.","האשה בלדתה עצב לה כי באה עתה ואחרי ילדה את הילד לא תזכר עוד את עצבונה משמחתה כי אדם נולד לעולם׃"],["50","16","22","이처럼 너희도 지금은 근심에 싸여 있다. 그러나 내가 너희를 다시 보게 되면 너희 마음이 기뻐할 것이고, 그 기쁨을 아무도 너희에게서 빼앗지 못할 것이다.","이와 같이 지금은 너희도 근심에 싸여 있지만 내가 다시 너희와 만나게 될 때에는 너희의 마음은 기쁨에 넘칠 것이며 그 기쁨은 아무도 빼앗아가지 못할 것이다.","지금은 너희가 근심하나 내가 다시 너희를 보리니 너희 마음이 기쁠 것이요 너희 기쁨을 빼앗을 자가 없으리라","지금은 너희가 근심하나 내가 다시 너희를 보리니 너희 마음이 기쁠 것이요 너희 기쁨을 빼앗을 자가 없느니라","지금은 슬퍼하지만 내가 너희를 다시 볼 때에 너희는 기쁨에 넘치고 아무도 그 기쁨을 너희에게서 빼앗지 못할 것이다.","So you also are now in anguish. But I will see you again, and your hearts will rejoice, and no one will take your joy away from you.","And ye now therefore have sorrow: but I will see you again, and your heart shall rejoice, and your joy no man taketh from you.","So with you: Now is your time of grief, but I will see you again and you will rejoice, and no one will take away your joy.","Et vos igitur nunc quidem tristitiam habetis; iterum autem videbo vos, et gaudebit cor vestrum, et gaudium vestrum nemo tollit a vobis.","וגם אתם כעת תתעצבו אך אשוב אראה אתכם ושש לבכם ואין לקח שמחתכם מכם׃"],["50","16","23","그날에는 너희가 나에게 아무것도 묻지 않을 것이다. 내가 진실로 진실로 너희에게 말한다. 너희가 내 이름으로 아버지께 청하는 것은 무엇이든지 그분께서 너희에게 주실 것이다.","그 날이 오면 너희가 나에게 물을 것이 하나도 없을 것이다. 정말 잘 들어두어라. 너희가 내 이름으로 아버지께 구하는 것이면 아버지께서 무엇이든지 주실 것이다.","그 날에는 너희가 아무 것도 내게 묻지 아니하리라 내가 진실로 진실로 너희에게 이르노니 너희가 무엇이든지 아버지께 구하는 것을 내 이름으로 주시리라","그 날에는 너희가 아무 것도 내게 1)묻지 아니하리라 내가 진실로 진실로 너희에게 이르노니 너희가 무엇이든지 아버지께 구하는 것을 내 이름으로 주시리라 혹 구하지 아니하리라","그때에 너희는 아무 것도 내게 물을 필요가 없다. 너희가 직접 내 이름으로 아버지께 구하면 아버지께서는 너희의 구하는 것을 다 이루어 주실 것이다.","On that day you will not question me about anything. Amen, amen, I say to you, whatever you ask the Father in my name he will give you.","And in that day ye shall ask me nothing. Verily, verily, I say unto you, Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my name, he will give it you.","In that day you will no longer ask me anything. I tell you the truth, my Father will give you whatever you ask in my name.","Et in illo die me non rogabitis quidquam. Amen, amen dico vobis: Si quid petieritis Patrem in nomine meo, dabit vobis.","וביום ההוא לא תשאלוני דבר אמן אמן אני אמר לכם כי כל אשר תשאלו מאת אבי בשמי יתננו לכם׃"],["50","16","24","지금까지 너희는 내 이름으로 아무것도 청하지 않았다. 청하여라. 받을 것이다. 그리하여 너희 기쁨이 충만해질 것이다.”","지금까지 너희는 내 이름으로 아무것도 구해 본 적이 없다. 구하여라. 받을 것이다. 너희는 기쁨에 넘칠 것이다.\"","지금까지는 너희가 내 이름으로 아무 것도 구하지 아니하였으나 구하라 그리하면 받으리니 너희 기쁨이 충만하리라","지금까지는 너희가 내 이름으로 아무 것도 구하지 아니하였으나 구하라 그리하면 받으리니 너희 기쁨이 충만하리라","지금까지는 너희가 그렇게 하지 않았다. 그러나 이제는 그렇게 하라. 내 이름으로 구하라. 그러면 너희는 받을 것이다. 그리고 너희의 잔은 기쁨으로 넘칠 것이다.","Until now you have not asked anything in my name; ask and you will receive, so that your joy may be complete.","Hitherto have ye asked nothing in my name: ask, and ye shall receive, that your joy may be full.","Until now you have not asked for anything in my name. Ask and you will receive, and your joy will be complete.","Usque modo non petistis quidquam in nomine meo. Petite et accipietis, ut gaudium vestrum sit plenum.","עד עתה לא שאלתם דבר בשמי שאלו ותקחו למען תמלא שמחתכם׃"],["50","16","25","“나는 지금까지 너희에게 이런 것들을 비유로 이야기하였다. 그러나 더 이상 너희에게 비유로 이야기하지 않고 아버지에 관하여 드러내 놓고 너희에게 알려 줄 때가 온다.","\"내가 지금까지는 이 모든 것을 비유로 들려주었지만 이제 아버지에 관하여 비유를 쓰지 않고 명백히 일러줄 때가 올 것이다.","이것을 비유로 너희에게 일렀거니와 때가 이르면 다시는 비유로 너희에게 이르지 않고 아버지에 대한 것을 밝히 이르리라","이것을 비사로 너희에게 일렀거니와 때가 이르면 다시 비사로 너희에게 이르지 않고 아버지에 대한 것을 밝히 이르리라","나는 이 사실을 매우 조심스럽게 말하였다. 그러나 아버지에 관하여 명백히 일러줄 때가 올 것이다.","“I have told you this in figures of speech. The hour is coming when I will no longer speak to you in figures but I will tell you clearly about the Father.","These things have I spoken unto you in proverbs: but the time cometh, when I shall no more speak unto you in proverbs, but I shall shew you plainly of the Father.","\"Though I have been speaking figuratively, a time is coming when I will no longer use this kind of language but will tell you plainly about my Father.","Haec in proverbiis locutus sum vobis; venit hora, cum iam non in proverbiis loquar vobis, sed palam de Patre annuntiabo vobis.","את אלה דברתי אליכם במשלים אכן שעה באה ולא אדבר עוד אליכם במשלים כי אם ברור אמלל לכם על אבי׃"],["50","16","26","그날에 너희는 내 이름으로 청할 것이다. 내가 너희를 위하여 아버지께 청하겠다는 말이 아니다.","그 날이 오면 너희는 내 이름으로 아버지께 구할 것이다. 따라서 내가 너희를 위하여 따로 아버지께 구하지는 않겠다는 말이다.","그 날에 너희가 내 이름으로 구할 것이요 내가 너희를 위하여 아버지께 구하겠다 하는 말이 아니니","그 날에 너희가 내 이름으로 구할 것이요 내가 너희를 위하여 아버지께 구하겠다 하는 말이 아니니","그때에 너희는 내 이름으로 아버지께 구할 것이다. 그렇게 되면 내가 너희의 요구를 들어 달라고 아버지께 대신 구할 필요가 없게 된다.","On that day you will ask in my name, and I do not tell you that I will ask the Father for you.","At that day ye shall ask in my name: and I say not unto you, that I will pray the Father for you:","In that day you will ask in my name. I am not saying that I will ask the Father on your behalf.","Illo die in nomine meo petetis, et non dico vobis quia ego rogabo Patrem de vobis;","ביום ההוא תשאלו בשמי ואינני אמר לכם כי אני אעתיר לאבי בעדכם׃"],["50","16","27","바로 아버지께서 너희를 사랑하신다. 너희가 나를 사랑하고 또 내가 하느님에게서 나왔다는 것을 믿었기 때문이다.","너희는 이미 나를 사랑하고 또 내가 아버지께로부터 왔다는 것을 믿고 있다. 그래서 아버지께서는 친히 너희를 사랑하시는 것이다.","이는 너희가 나를 사랑하고 또 내가 하나님께로부터 온 줄 믿었으므로 아버지께서 친히 너희를 사랑하심이라","이는 너희가 나를 사랑하고 또 나를 하나님께로서 온줄 믿은 고로 아버지께서 친히 너희를 사랑하심이니라","너희가 나를 사랑하고 또 내가 아버지의 보내심을 받고 세상에 왔다는 사실을 믿는 것을 보시고 아버지께서 극진한 사랑을 베푸실 것이기 때문이다.","For the Father himself loves you, because you have loved me and have come to believe that I came from God.","For the Father himself loveth you, because ye have loved me, and have believed that I came out from God.","No, the Father himself loves you because you have loved me and have believed that I came from God.","ipse enim Pater amat vos, quia vos me amastis et credidistis quia ego a Deo exivi.","כי אבי גם הוא אהב אתכם עקב אשר אהבתוני והאמנתם כי מאת אלהים יצאתי׃"],["50","16","28","나는 아버지에게서 나와 세상에 왔다가, 다시 세상을 떠나 아버지께 간다.”","나는 아버지께로부터 나와서 세상에 왔다가 이제 세상을 떠나 다시 아버지께 돌아간다.\"","내가 아버지에게서 나와 세상에 왔고 다시 세상을 떠나 아버지께로 가노라 하시니","내가 아버지께로 나와서 세상에 왔고 다시 세상을 떠나 아버지께로 가노라 하시니","그렇다. 나는 아버지께로부터 와서 세상에 들어왔고 이제는 세상을 떠나 다시 아버지께로 돌아간다.\"","I came from the Father and have come into the world. Now I am leaving the world and going back to the Father.”","I came forth from the Father, and am come into the world: again, I leave the world, and go to the Father.","I came from the Father and entered the world; now I am leaving the world and going back to the Father.\"","Exivi a Patre et veni in mundum; iterum relinquo mundum et vado ad Patrem “.","מאת האב יצאתי ואבא לעולם אשובה אעזב את העולם ואלך אל אבי׃"],["50","16","29","그러자 제자들이 말하였다. “이제는 드러내 놓고 이야기하시고 비유는 말씀하지 않으시는군요.","그제야 제자들이 \"지금은 주님께서 조금도 비유를 쓰지 않으시고 정말 명백하게 말씀하시니","제자들이 말하되 지금은 밝히 말씀하시고 아무 비유로도 하지 아니하시니","제자들이 말하되 지금은 밝히 말씀하시고 아무 비사도 하지 아니하시니","제자들이 말하였다. \"마침내 주께서 명백하게 말씀하시고 수수께끼처럼 남겨 두지 않으시니","His disciples said, “Now you are talking plainly, and not in any figure of speech.","His disciples said unto him, Lo, now speakest thou plainly, and speakest no proverb.","Then Jesus' disciples said, \"Now you are speaking clearly and without figures of speech.","Dicunt discipuli eius: “Ecce nunc palam loqueris, et proverbium nullum dicis.","ויאמרו אליו תלמידיו הנה כעת ברור תמלל ולא תמשל משל׃"],["50","16","30","저희는 스승님께서 모든 것을 아시고, 또 누가 스승님께 물을 필요도 없다는 것을 이제 알았습니다. 이로써 저희는 스승님께서 하느님에게서 나오셨다는 것을 믿습니다.”","따로 여쭈어볼 필요도 없게 되었습니다. 이제 우리는 주님께서 모든 것을 다 알고 계신다는 것을 깨달았습니다. 그래서 우리는 주님께서 하느님께로부터 오신 분이심을 믿습니다.\" 하고 말하였다.","우리가 지금에야 주께서 모든 것을 아시고 또 사람의 물음을 기다리시지 않는 줄 아나이다 이로써 하나님께로부터 나오심을 우리가 믿사옵나이다","우리가 지금에야 주께서 모든 것을 아시고 또 사람의 물음을 기다리시지 않는줄 아나이다 이로써 하나님께로서 나오심을 우리가 믿삽나이다","이제 저희는 주께서 모든 것을 알고 계시고 어느 누구도 주께 더 여쭈어 볼 필요가 없다는 것을 알았습니다. 저희는 주님이 하나님께로부터 오셨다는 것을 믿습니다.\"","Now we realize that you know everything and that you do not need to have anyone question you. Because of this we believe that you came from God.”","Now are we sure that thou knowest all things, and needest not that any man should ask thee: by this we believe that thou camest forth from God.","Now we can see that you know all things and that you do not even need to have anyone ask you questions. This makes us believe that you came from God.\"","Nunc scimus quia scis omnia, et non opus est tibi, ut quis te interroget; in hoc credimus quia a Deo existi “.","עתה ידענו כי כל ידעת ולא תצטרך כי ישאלך איש בזאת נאמין כי מאת אלהים יצאת׃"],["50","16","31","예수님께서 그들에게 대답하셨다. “이제는 너희가 믿느냐?","그러자 예수께서는 \"너희가 이제야 믿느냐?","예수께서 대답하시되 이제는 너희가 믿느냐","예수께서 대답하시되 이제는 너희가 믿느냐","그러자 예수께서 말씀하셨다. \"이제 너희도 이 사실을 믿느냐?","Jesus answered them, “Do you believe now?","Jesus answered them, Do ye now believe?","\"You believe at last!\" Jesus answered.","Respondit eis Iesus: “Modo creditis?","ויען אתם ישוע עתה תאמינו׃"],["50","16","32","그러나 너희가 나를 혼자 버려두고 저마다 제 갈 곳으로 흩어질 때가 온다. 아니, 이미 왔다. 그러나 나는 혼자가 아니다. 아버지께서 나와 함께 계시다.","그러나 이제 너희가 나를 혼자 버려두고 제각기 자기 갈 곳으로 흩어져 갈 때가 올 것이다. 아니 그 때는 이미 왔다. 하지만 아버지께서 나와 함께 계시니 나는 혼자 있는 것이 아니다.","보라 너희가 다 각각 제 곳으로 흩어지고 나를 혼자 둘 때가 오나니 벌써 왔도다 그러나 내가 혼자 있는 것이 아니라 아버지께서 나와 함께 계시느니라","보라 너희가 다 각각 제 곳으로 흩어지고 나를 혼자 둘 때가 오나니 벌써 왔도다 그러나 내가 혼자 있는 것이 아니라 아버지께서 나와 함께 계시느니라","그러나 때가 오면 너희는 다 흩어져서 나를 혼자 두고 각기 제집으로 돌아갈 것이다. 사실 이미 그때가 다가왔다. 그러나 나는 혼자 있는 것이 아니다. 아버지께서 나와 함께 계시기 때문이다.","Behold, the hour is coming and has arrived when each of you will be scattered to his own home and you will leave me alone. But I am not alone, because the Father is with me.","Behold, the hour cometh, yea, is now come, that ye shall be scattered, every man to his own, and shall leave me alone: and yet I am not alone, because the Father is with me.","\"But a time is coming, and has come, when you will be scattered, each to his own home. You will leave me all alone. Yet I am not alone, for my Father is with me.","Ecce venit hora et iam venit, ut dispergamini unusquisque in propria et me solum relinquatis; et non sum solus, quia Pater mecum est.","הנה שעה באה ועתה זה הגיעה ונפצותם איש איש לביתו ואתי תעזבו לבדי ואינני לבדי כי אבי עמדי׃"],["50","16","33","내가 너희에게 이 말을 한 이유는, 너희가 내 안에서 평화를 얻게 하려는 것이다. 너희는 세상에서 고난을 겪을 것이다. 그러나 용기를 내어라. 내가 세상을 이겼다.”","나는 너희가 내게서 평화를 얻게 하려고 이 말을 한 것이다. 너희는 세상에서 고난을 당하겠지만 용기를 내어라. 내가 세상을 이겼다.\" 하고 말씀하셨다.","이것을 너희에게 이르는 것은 너희로 내 안에서 평안을 누리게 하려 함이라 세상에서는 너희가 환난을 당하나 담대하라 내가 세상을 이기었노라","이것을 너희에게 이름은 너희로 내 안에서 평안을 누리게 하려함이라 세상에서는 너희가 환난을 당하나 담대하라 내가 세상을 이기었노라 하시니라","내가 이 모든 것을 너희에게 일러두는 것은 너희가 내 안에서 평안을 누리게 하기 위해서다. 이 세상에서 너희는 많은 시련과 슬픔을 겪을 것이다. 그러나 용기를 내어라. 내가 세상을 이겼다.\"","I have told you this so that you might have peace in me. In the world you will have trouble, but take courage, I have conquered the world.”","These things I have spoken unto you, that in me ye might have peace. In the world ye shall have tribulation: but be of good cheer; I have overcome the world.","\"I have told you these things, so that in me you may have peace. In this world you will have trouble. But take heart! I have overcome the world.\"","Haec locutus sum vobis, ut in me pacem habeatis; in mundo pressuram habetis, sed confidite, ego vici mundum “.","את אלה דברתי אליכם למען בי יהיה לכם שלום בעולם יהיה לכם עני אך יאמץ לבבכם אני נצחתי את העולם׃"],["50","17","1","예수님께서는 이렇게 이르시고 나서 하늘을 향하여 눈을 들어 말씀하셨다. “아버지, 때가 왔습니다. 아들이 아버지를 영광스럽게 하도록 아버지의 아들을 영광스럽게 해 주십시오.","이 말씀을 마치시고 예수께서는 하늘을 우러러보시며 이렇게 말씀하셨다. \"아버지, 때가 왔습니다. 아들의 영광을 드러내주시어 아들이 아버지의 영광을 드러내게 하여주십시오.","예수께서 이 말씀을 하시고 눈을 들어 하늘을 우러러 이르시되 아버지여 때가 이르렀사오니 아들을 영화롭게 하사 아들로 아버지를 영화롭게 하게 하옵소서","예수께서 이 말씀을 하시고 눈을 들어 하늘을 우러러 가라사대 아버지여 때가 이르렀사오니 아들을 영화롭게 하사 아들로 아버지를 영화롭게 하게 하옵소서","이 말씀을 모두 마치신 후에 예수께서는 하늘을 우러러보며 말씀하셨다. \"아버지, 때가 왔습니다. 아들의 영광을 드러내 주셔서 아들이 아버지께 그 영광을 되돌리게 해주소서.","When Jesus had said this, he raised his eyes to heaven and said, “Father, the hour has come. Give glory to your son, so that your son may glorify you,","These words spake Jesus, and lifted up his eyes to heaven, and said, Father, the hour is come; glorify thy Son, that thy Son also may glorify thee:","After Jesus said this, he looked toward heaven and prayed: \"Father, the time has come. Glorify your Son, that your Son may glorify you.","Haec locutus est Iesus; et, sublevatis oculis suis in cae lum, dixit: “Pater, venit hora: clarifica Filium tuum, ut Filius clarificet te,","את אלה דבר ישוע וישא עיניו השמימה ויאמר אבי הנה באה השעה פאר את בנך למען גם בנך יפארך׃"],["50","17","2","아버지께서는 아들이 아버지께서 주신 모든 이에게 영원한 생명을 주도록 아들에게 모든 사람에 대한 권한을 주셨습니다.","아버지께서는 아들에게 모든 사람을 다스릴 권한을 주셨고 따라서 아들은 아버지께서 맡겨주신 모든 사람에게 영원한 생명을 주게 되었습니다.","아버지께서 아들에게 주신 모든 사람에게 영생을 주게 하시려고 만민을 다스리는 권세를 아들에게 주셨음이로소이다","아버지께서 아들에게 주신 모든 자에게 영생을 주게 하시려고 만민을 다스리는 권세를 아들에게 주셨음이로소이다","아버지께서는 아들에게 땅 위에 있는 모든 사람들을 다스릴 권한을 주셨습니다. 그래서 이 아들은 아버지께서 맡겨 주신 모든 사람에게 영원한 생명을 줄 수 있게 되었습니다.","just as you gave him authority over all people, so that he may give eternal life to all you gave him.","As thou hast given him power over all flesh, that he should give eternal life to as many as thou hast given him.","For you granted him authority over all people that he might give eternal life to all those you have given him.","sicut dedisti ei potestatem omnis carnis, ut omne, quod dedisti ei, det eis vitam aeternam.","כאשר נתת לו השלטן על כל בשר למען יתן חיי עולמים לכל אשר נתת לו׃"],["50","17","3","영원한 생명이란 홀로 참하느님이신 아버지를 알고 아버지께서 보내신 예수 그리스도를 아는 것입니다.","영원한 생명은 곧 참되시고 오직 한 분이신 하느님 아버지를 알고 또 아버지께서 보내신 예수 그리스도를 아는 것입니다.","영생은 곧 유일하신 참 하나님과 그가 보내신 자 예수 그리스도를 아는 것이니이다","영생은 곧 유일하신 참 하나님과 그의 보내신 자 예수 그리스도를 아는 것이니이다","영원한 생명에 이르는 길은 오직 한 분이신 하나님 아버지를 알고 아버지께서 땅위에 보내신 예수 그리스도를 아는 것입니다.","Now this is eternal life, that they should know you, the only true God, and the one whom you sent, Jesus Christ.","And this is life eternal, that they might know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou hast sent.","Now this is eternal life: that they may know you, the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom you have sent.","Haec est autem vita aeterna, ut cognoscant te solum verum Deum et, quem misisti, Iesum Christum.","ואלה הם חיי העולמים לדעת אתך אשר אתה לבדך אל אמת ואת ישוע המשיח אשר שלחת׃"],["50","17","4","아버지께서 저에게 하라고 맡기신 일을 완수하여, 저는 땅에서 아버지를 영광스럽게 하였습니다.","나는 아버지께서 나에게 맡겨주신 일을 다 하여 세상에서 아버지의 영광을 드러냈습니다.","아버지께서 내게 하라고 주신 일을 내가 이루어 아버지를 이 세상에서 영화롭게 하였사오니","아버지께서 내게 하라고 주신 일을 내가 이루어 아버지를 이 세상에서 영화롭게 하였사오니","나는 아버지께서 맡겨주신 그 모든 일을 이룸으로써 이 땅 위에서 아버지께 영광이 돌아가게 하였습니다.","I glorified you on earth by accomplishing the work that you gave me to do.","I have glorified thee on the earth: I have finished the work which thou gavest me to do.","I have brought you glory on earth by completing the work you gave me to do.","Ego te clarificavi super terram; opus consummavi, quod dedisti mihi, ut faciam;","אני פארתיך בארץ כליתי פעלך אשר צויתני לעשות׃"],["50","17","5","아버지, 세상이 생기기 전에 제가 아버지 앞에서 누리던 그 영광으로, 이제 다시 아버지 앞에서 저를 영광스럽게 해 주십시오.”","아버지, 이제는 나의 영광을 드러내주십시오. 세상이 있기 전에 아버지 곁에서 내가 누리던 그 영광을 아버지와 같이 누리게 하여주십시오.\"","아버지여 창세 전에 내가 아버지와 함께 가졌던 영화로써 지금도 아버지와 함께 나를 영화롭게 하옵소서","아버지여 창세 전에 내가 아버지와 함께 가졌던 영화로써 지금도 아버지와 함께 나를 영화롭게 하옵소서","아버지, 이제는 세상이 시작되기 전에 내가 아버지와 함께 누리던 그 영광을 아버지 앞에서 다시 누릴 수 있게 내 영광을 드러내소서.","Now glorify me, Father, with you, with the glory that I had with you before the world began.","And now, O Father, glorify thou me with thine own self with the glory which I had with thee before the world was.","And now, Father, glorify me in your presence with the glory I had with you before the world began.","et nunc clarifica me tu, Pater, apud temetipsum claritate, quam habebam, priusquam mundus esset, apud te.","ועתה פארני אתה אבי עמך בכבוד אשר היה לי עמך טרם היות העולם׃"],["50","17","6","“아버지께서 세상에서 뽑으시어 저에게 주신 이 사람들에게 저는 아버지의 이름을 드러냈습니다. 이들은 아버지의 사람들이었는데 아버지께서 저에게 주셨습니다. 그래서 이들은 아버지의 말씀을 지켰습니다.","\"나는 아버지께서 세상 사람들 가운데서 뽑아 내게 맡겨주신 이 사람들에게 아버지를 분명히 알려주었습니다. 이 사람들은 본래 아버지의 사람들이었지만 내게 맡겨주셨습니다. 이 사람들은 과연 아버지의 말씀을 잘 지키었습니다.","세상 중에서 내게 주신 사람들에게 내가 아버지의 이름을 나타내었나이다 그들은 아버지의 것이었는데 내게 주셨으며 그들은 아버지의 말씀을 지키었나이다","세상 중에서 내게 주신 사람들에게 내가 아버지의 이름을 나타내었나이다 저희는 아버지의 것이었는데 내게 주셨으며 저희는 아버지의 말씀을 지키었나이다","나는 아버지께서 내게 주신 이 세상의 선택된 사람들에게 아버지에 관한 모든 것을 알려 주었습니다. 사실, 이들은 항상 아버지의 사람들이었지만 내게 주셨고 또 이들은 아버지의 말씀을 잘 지켰습니다.","“I revealed your name to those whom you gave me out of the world. They belonged to you, and you gave them to me, and they have kept your word.","I have manifested thy name unto the men which thou gavest me out of the world: thine they were, and thou gavest them me; and they have kept thy word.","\"I have revealed you to those whom you gave me out of the world. They were yours; you gave them to me and they have obeyed your word.","Manifestavi nomen tuum hominibus, quos dedisti mihi de mundo. Tui erant, et mihi eos dedisti, et sermonem tuum servaverunt.","את שמך הודעתי לבני האדם אשר נתתם לי מתוך העולם לך היו ולי נתת אתם ואת דברך נצרו׃"],["50","17","7","이제 이들은 아버지께서 저에게 주신 모든 것이 아버지에게서 왔다는 것을 알고 있습니다.","지금 이 사람들은 나에게 주신 모든 것이 아버지께로부터 왔다는 것을 알고 있습니다.","지금 그들은 아버지께서 내게 주신 것이 다 아버지로부터 온 것인 줄 알았나이다","지금 저희는 아버지께서 내게 주신 것이 다 아버지께로서 온 것인줄 알았나이다","이제 이들은 내가 가진 모든 것이 아버지께서 주신 것임을 알고 있습니다.","Now they know that everything you gave me is from you,","Now they have known that all things whatsoever thou hast given me are of thee.","Now they know that everything you have given me comes from you.","Nunc cognoverunt quia omnia, quae dedisti mihi, abs te sunt,","ועתה ידעו כי כל אשר נתת לי מעמך הוא׃"],["50","17","8","아버지께서 저에게 주신 말씀을 제가 이들에게 주고, 이들은 또 그것을 받아들였기 때문입니다. 그리하여 이들은 제가 아버지에게서 나왔다는 것을 참으로 알고, 아버지께서 저를 보내셨다는 것을 믿게 되었습니다.","나는 나에게 주신 말씀을 이 사람들에게 전하였습니다. 이 사람들은 그 말씀을 받아들였고 내가 아버지께로부터 온 것을 참으로 깨달았으며 아버지께서 나를 보내신 것을 믿었습니다.","나는 아버지께서 내게 주신 말씀들을 그들에게 주었사오며 그들은 이것을 받고 내가 아버지께로부터 나온 줄을 참으로 아오며 아버지께서 나를 보내신 줄도 믿었사옵나이다","나는 아버지께서 내게 주신 말씀들을 저희에게 주었사오며 저희는 이것을 받고 내가 아버지께로부터 나온 줄을 참으로 아오며 아버지께서 나를 보내신 줄도 믿었사옵나이다","나는 아버지께서 내게 주신 말씀을 이들에게 전하였습니다. 이들은 그 말씀을 받아들여 내가 아버지께로부터 이 땅에 내려왔으며 아버지께서 나를 보내셨다는 것을 믿게 되었습니다.","because the words you gave to me I have given to them, and they accepted them and truly understood that I came from you, and they have believed that you sent me.","For I have given unto them the words which thou gavest me; and they have received them, and have known surely that I came out from thee, and they have believed that thou didst send me.","For I gave them the words you gave me and they accepted them. They knew with certainty that I came from you, and they believed that you sent me.","quia verba, quae dedisti mihi, dedi eis; et ipsi acceperunt et cognoverunt vere quia a te exivi et crediderunt quia tu me misisti.","כי הדברים אשר נתת לי נתתי להם והם קבלום ויכירו באמת כי מעמך יצאתי ויאמינו כי אתה שלחתני׃"],["50","17","9","저는 이들을 위하여 빕니다. 세상을 위해서가 아니라 아버지께서 저에게 주신 이들을 위하여 빕니다. 이들은 아버지의 사람들이기 때문입니다.","나는 이 사람들을 위하여 간구합니다. 세상을 위하여 간구하는 것이 아니라 아버지께서 내게 맡기신 이 사람들을 위하여 간구합니다. 이 사람들은 아버지의 사람들입니다.","내가 그들을 위하여 비옵나니 내가 비옵는 것은 세상을 위함이 아니요 내게 주신 자들을 위함이니이다 그들은 아버지의 것이로소이다","내가 저희를 위하여 비옵나니 내가 비옵는 것은 세상을 위함이 아니요 내게 주신 자들을 위함이니이다 저희는 아버지의 것이로소이다","나는 이 세상을 위해서가 아니라 아버지께서 내게 주신 이 사람들을 위해서 간구합니다. 이들은 아버지의 사람들입니다.","I pray for them. I do not pray for the world but for the ones you have given me, because they are yours,","I pray for them: I pray not for the world, but for them which thou hast given me; for they are thine.","I pray for them. I am not praying for the world, but for those you have given me, for they are yours.","Ego pro eis rogo; non pro mundo rogo, sed pro his, quos dedisti mihi, quia tui sunt;","אני בעדם אעתיר לך לא בעד העולם אעתיר כי אם בעד אלה אשר נתת לי כי לך המה׃"],["50","17","10","저의 것은 다 아버지의 것이고 아버지의 것은 제 것입니다. 이 사람들을 통하여 제가 영광스럽게 되었습니다.","나의 것은 다 아버지의 것이며 아버지의 것은 다 나의 것입니다. 그래서 이 사람들로 말미암아 내 영광이 나타났습니다.","내 것은 다 아버지의 것이요 아버지의 것은 내 것이온데 내가 그들로 말미암아 영광을 받았나이다","내 것은 다 아버지의 것이요 아버지의 것은 내 것이온데 내가 저희로 말미암아 영광을 받았나이다","이들 모두가 내 사람이 됐으니 아버지의 사람들입니다. 아버지께서 가지신 모든 것을 아낌없이 주시는 이들을 내게 돌려주셨으므로 이들은 내 영광입니다.","and everything of mine is yours and everything of yours is mine, and I have been glorified in them.","And all mine are thine, and thine are mine; and I am glorified in them.","All I have is yours, and all you have is mine. And glory has come to me through them.","et mea omnia tua sunt, et tua mea; et clarificatus sum in eis.","וכל אשר לי לך הוא ושלך שלי ונתפארתי בהם׃"],["50","17","11","저는 더 이상 세상에 있지 않지만 이들은 세상에 있습니다. 저는 아버지께 갑니다. 거룩하신 아버지, 아버지께서 저에게 주신 이름으로 이들을 지키시어, 이들도 우리처럼 하나가 되게 해 주십시오.","나는 이제 세상을 떠나 아버지께 돌아가지만 이 사람들은 세상에 남아 있을 것입니다. 거룩하신 아버지, 나에게 주신 아버지의 이름으로 이 사람들을 지켜주십시오. 그리고 아버지와 내가 하나인 것처럼 이 사람들도 하나가 되게 하여주십시오.","나는 세상에 더 있지 아니하오나 그들은 세상에 있사옵고 나는 아버지께로 가옵나니 거룩하신 아버지여 내게 주신 아버지의 이름으로 그들을 보전하사 우리와 같이 그들도 하나가 되게 하옵소서","나는 세상에 더 있지 아니하오나 저희는 세상에 있사옵고 나는 아버지께로 가옵나니 거룩하신 아버지여 내게 주신 아버지의 이름으로 저희를 보전하사 우리와 같이 저희도 하나가 되게 하옵소서","이제 나는 세상을 떠나 이들을 뒤에 두고 아버지께로 갑니다. 거룩하신 아버지, 아버지께서 친히 이들을 돌보아주소서. 아버지께서 내게 주신 모든 사람들을 돌보셔서 아버지와 내가 하나인 것같이 이들도 하나가 되게 하시고 잃어버리지 않게 하소서.","And now I will no longer be in the world, but they are in the world, while I am coming to you. Holy Father, keep them in your name that you have given me, so that they may be one just as we are.","And now I am no more in the world, but these are in the world, and I come to thee. Holy Father, keep through thine own name those whom thou hast given me, that they may be one, as we are.","I will remain in the world no longer, but they are still in the world, and I am coming to you. Holy Father, protect them by the power of your name--the name you gave me--so that they may be one as we are one.","Et iam non sum in mundo, et hi in mundo sunt, et ego ad te venio. Pater sancte, serva eos in nomine tuo, quod dedisti mihi, ut sint unum sicut nos.","ואני אינני עוד בעולם והם בעולם המה ואני בא אליך אבי הקדוש נצר בשמך את אשר נתתם לי למען יהיו אחד כמנו׃"],["50","17","12","저는 이들과 함께 있는 동안, 아버지께서 저에게 주신 이름으로 이들을 지켰습니다. 제가 그렇게 이들을 보호하여, 성경 말씀이 이루어지려고 멸망하도록 정해진 자 말고는 아무도 멸망하지 않았습니다.","내가 이 사람들과 함께 있을 때에는 나에게 주신 아버지의 이름으로 내가 이 사람들을 지켰습니다. 그 동안에 오직 멸망할 운명에 놓인 자를 제외하고는 하나도 잃지 않았습니다. 하나를 잃은 것은 성경 말씀이 이루어지기 위한 것이었습니다.","내가 그들과 함께 있을 때에 내게 주신 아버지의 이름으로 그들을 보전하고 지키었나이다 그 중의 하나도 멸망하지 않고 다만 멸망의 자식뿐이오니 이는 성경을 응하게 함이니이다","내가 저희와 함께 있을 때에 내게 주신 아버지의 이름으로 저희를 보전하와 지키었나이다 그 중에 하나도 멸망치 않고 오직 멸망의 자식 뿐이오니 이는 성경을 응하게 함이니이다","내가 세상에 있는 동안 나는 아버지께서 내게 주신 아버지의 이 모든 식구들을 안전하게 보호하였습니다. 나는 이들을 지켜서 성경의 예언대로 멸망의 자식 외에는 한 사람도 멸망하지 않게 하였습니다.","When I was with them I protected them in your name that you gave me, and I guarded them, and none of them was lost except the son of destruction, in order that the scripture might be fulfilled.","While I was with them in the world, I kept them in thy name: those that thou gavest me I have kept, and none of them is lost, but the son of perdition; that the scripture might be fulfilled.","While I was with them, I protected them and kept them safe by that name you gave me. None has been lost except the one doomed to destruction so that Scripture would be fulfilled.","Cum essem cum eis, ego servabam eos in nomine tuo, quod dedisti mihi, et custodivi, et nemo ex his periit, nisi filius perditionis, ut Scriptura impleatur.","בהיותי עמהם בעולם אני נצרתי אתם בשמך את אשר נתתם לי שמרתי ולא אבד מהם איש זולתי בן האבדון למלאת דבר הכתוב׃"],["50","17","13","이제 저는 아버지께 갑니다. 제가 세상에 있으면서 이런 말씀을 드리는 이유는, 이들이 속으로 저의 기쁨을 충만히 누리게 하려는 것입니다.","지금 나는 아버지께로 갑니다. 아직 세상에 있으면서 이 말씀을 드리는 것은 이 사람들이 내 기쁨을 마음껏 누리게 하려는 것입니다.","지금 내가 아버지께로 가오니 내가 세상에서 이 말을 하옵는 것은 그들로 내 기쁨을 그들 안에 충만히 가지게 하려 함이니이다","지금 내가 아버지께로 가오니 내가 세상에서 이 말을 하옵는 것은 저희로 내 기쁨을 저희 안에 충만히 가지게하려 함이니이다","이제 나는 아버지께로 갑니다. 나는 이들에게 기쁨이 충만하게 하려고 이들과 같이 있는 동안 많은 것을 일러주었습니다.","But now I am coming to you. I speak this in the world so that they may share my joy completely.","And now come I to thee; and these things I speak in the world, that they might have my joy fulfilled in themselves.","\"I am coming to you now, but I say these things while I am still in the world, so that they may have the full measure of my joy within them.","Nunc autem ad te venio et haec loquor in mundo, ut habeant gaudium meum impletum in semetipsis.","ועתה הנני בא אליך ואלה אני מדבר בעולם למען תמלא להם שמחתי בקרבם׃"],["50","17","14","저는 이들에게 아버지의 말씀을 주었는데, 세상은 이들을 미워하였습니다. 제가 세상에 속하지 않은 것처럼 이들도 세상에 속하지 않기 때문입니다.","나는 이 사람들에게 아버지의 말씀을 전해 주었는데 세상은 이 사람들을 미워했습니다. 그것은 내가 이 세상에 속해 있지 않은 것처럼 이 사람들도 이 세상에 속해 있지 않기 때문입니다.","내가 아버지의 말씀을 그들에게 주었사오매 세상이 그들을 미워하였사오니 이는 내가 세상에 속하지 아니함 같이 그들도 세상에 속하지 아니함으로 인함이니이다","내가 아버지의 말씀을 저희에게 주었사오매 세상이 저희를 미워하였사오니 이는 내가 세상에 속하지 아니함 같이 저희도 세상에 속하지 아니함을 인함이니이다","나는 이들에게 아버지의 말씀을 주었는데 세상은 이들을 미워하였습니다. 마치 내가 세상과 맞지 않은 것과 같이 이들도 세상과 맞지 않았기 때문입니다.","I gave them your word, and the world hated them, because they do not belong to the world any more than I belong to the world.","I have given them thy word; and the world hath hated them, because they are not of the world, even as I am not of the world.","I have given them your word and the world has hated them, for they are not of the world any more than I am of the world.","Ego dedi eis sermonem tuum, et mundus odio eos habuit, quia non sunt de mundo, sicut ego non sum de mundo.","אני נתתי להם את דברך והעולם שנא אתם יען כי לא מן העולם המה כאשר גם אנכי לא מן העולם אני׃"],["50","17","15","이들을 세상에서 데려가시라고 비는 것이 아니라, 이들을 악에서 지켜 주십사고 빕니다.","내가 아버지께 원하는 것은 그들을 이 세상에서 데려가시는 것이 아니라 악마에게서 지켜주시는 일입니다.","내가 비옵는 것은 그들을 세상에서 데려가시기를 위함이 아니요 다만 악에 빠지지 않게 보전하시기를 위함이니이다","내가 비옵는 것은 저희를 세상에서 데려가시기를 위함이 아니요 오직 악에 빠지지 않게 보전하시기를 위함이니이다","나는 아버지께 이들을 세상밖으로 데려가시기를 구하지 않고 사단의 세력에서 지켜 주시기를 구합니다.","I do not ask that you take them out of the world but that you keep them from the evil one.","I pray not that thou shouldest take them out of the world, but that thou shouldest keep them from the evil.","My prayer is not that you take them out of the world but that you protect them from the evil one.","Non rogo, ut tollas eos de mundo, sed ut serves eos ex Malo.","ולא אעתיר לך אשר תקחם מן העולם רק שתצרם מן הרע׃"],["50","17","16","제가 세상에 속하지 않은 것처럼 이들도 세상에 속하지 않습니다.","내가 이 세상에 속하지 않은 것처럼 이 사람들도 이 세상에 속한 사람들이 아닙니다.","내가 세상에 속하지 아니함 같이 그들도 세상에 속하지 아니하였사옵나이다","내가 세상에 속하지 아니함 같이 저희도 세상에 속하지 아니하였삽나이다","내가 세상에 속하지 않은 것같이 이들도 더 이상 세상에 속한 사람들이 아닙니다.","They do not belong to the world any more than I belong to the world.","They are not of the world, even as I am not of the world.","They are not of the world, even as I am not of it.","De mundo non sunt, sicut ego non sum de mundo.","מן העולם אינמו כאשר גם אנכי אינני מן העולם׃"],["50","17","17","이들을 진리로 거룩하게 해 주십시오. 아버지의 말씀이 진리입니다.","이 사람들이 진리를 위하여 몸을 바치는 사람들이 되게 하여주십시오. 아버지의 말씀이 곧 진리입니다.","그들을 진리로 거룩하게 하옵소서 아버지의 말씀은 진리니이다","저희를 진리로 거룩하게 하옵소서 아버지의 말씀은 진리니이다","아버지의 진리의 말씀으로 이들을 가르치셔서 이들을 순결하고 거룩하게 하소서.","Consecrate them in the truth. Your word is truth.","Sanctify them through thy truth: thy word is truth.","Sanctify them by the truth; your word is truth.","Sanctifica eos in veritate; sermo tuus veritas est.","קדש אתם באמתך דברך אמת הוא׃"],["50","17","18","아버지께서 저를 세상에 보내신 것처럼 저도 이들을 세상에 보냈습니다.","아버지께서 나를 세상에 보내신 것같이 나도 이 사람들을 세상에 보냈습니다.","아버지께서 나를 세상에 보내신 것 같이 나도 그들을 세상에 보내었고","아버지께서 나를 세상에 보내신 것 같이 나도 저희를 세상에 보내었고","아버지께서 나를 세상에 보내신 것처럼 나도 이들을 세상에 보냈습니다.","As you sent me into the world, so I sent them into the world.","As thou hast sent me into the world, even so have I also sent them into the world.","As you sent me into the world, I have sent them into the world.","Sicut me misisti in mundum, et ego misi eos in mundum;","כאשר אתה שלחת אתי אל העולם כן גם אני שלחתי אתם אל העולם׃"],["50","17","19","그리고 저는 이들을 위하여 저 자신을 거룩하게 합니다. 이들도 진리로 거룩해지게 하려는 것입니다.”","내가 이 사람들을 위하여 이 몸을 아버지께 바치는 것은 이 사람들도 참으로 아버지께 자기 몸을 바치게 하려는 것입니다.\"","또 그들을 위하여 내가 나를 거룩하게 하오니 이는 그들도 진리로 거룩함을 얻게 하려 함이니이다","또 저희를 위하여 내가 나를 거룩하게 하오니 이는 저희도 진리로 거룩함을 얻게 하려 함이니이다","내가 이들을 위하여 내 자신을 바치는 것은 이들도 진리를 위해 자신을 바칠 수 있도록 하려는 것입니다.","And I consecrate myself for them, so that they also may be consecrated in truth.","And for their sakes I sanctify myself, that they also might be sanctified through the truth.","For them I sanctify myself, that they too may be truly sanctified.","et pro eis ego sanctifico meipsum, ut sint et ipsi sanctificati in veritate.","והתקדשתי בעדם למען יהיו גם הם מקדשים באמת׃"],["50","17","20","“저는 이들만이 아니라 이들의 말을 듣고 저를 믿는 이들을 위해서도 빕니다.","\"나는 이 사람들만을 위하여 간구하는 것이 아니라 이 사람들의 말을 듣고 나를 믿는 사람들을 위하여 간구합니다.","내가 비옵는 것은 이 사람들만 위함이 아니요 또 그들의 말로 말미암아 나를 믿는 사람들도 위함이니","내가 비옵는 것은 이 사람들만 위함이 아니요 또 저희 말을 인하여 나를 믿는 사람들도 위함이니","나는 이 사람들뿐만 아니라 장차 이들의 증거를 듣고 내게 와서 나를 믿을 사람들을 위해서도 기도드립니다.","“I pray not only for them, but also for those who will believe in me through their word,","Neither pray I for these alone, but for them also which shall believe on me through their word;","\"My prayer is not for them alone. I pray also for those who will believe in me through their message,","Non pro his autem rogo tantum, sed et pro eis, qui credituri sunt per verbum eorum in me,","אולם לא לבד בעד אלה אנכי מעתיר לך כי אם גם בעד המאמינים בי על פי דברם׃"],["50","17","21","그들이 모두 하나가 되게 해 주십시오. 아버지, 아버지께서 제 안에 계시고 제가 아버지 안에 있듯이, 그들도 우리 안에 있게 해 주십시오. 그리하여 아버지께서 저를 보내셨다는 것을 세상이 믿게 하십시오.","아버지, 이 사람들이 모두 하나가 되게 하여주십시오. 아버지께서 내 안에 계시고 내가 아버지 안에 있는 것과 같이 이 사람들도 우리들 안에 있게 하여주십시오. 그러면 아버지께서 나를 보내셨다는 것을 세상이 믿게 될 것입니다.","아버지여, 아버지께서 내 안에, 내가 아버지 안에 있는 것 같이 그들도 다 하나가 되어 우리 안에 있게 하사 세상으로 아버지께서 나를 보내신 것을 믿게 하옵소서","아버지께서 내 안에, 내가 아버지 안에 있는것 같이 저희도 다 하나가 되어 우리 안에 있게 하사 세상으로 아버지께서 나를 보내신 것을 믿게 하옵소서","그 모든 사람들을 위한 나의 기도는 마치 아버지와 내가 하나인 것같이 이들도 하나가 되고, 아버지께서 내 안에 계시고 내가 아버지 안에 있는 것같이 이들도 우리 안에 있어 아버지께서 나를 보내셨다는 것을 세상이 믿도록 하려는 것입니다.","so that they may all be one, as you, Father, are in me and I in you, that they also may be in us, that the world may believe that you sent me.","That they all may be one; as thou, Father, art in me, and I in thee, that they also may be one in us: that the world may believe that thou hast sent me.","that all of them may be one, Father, just as you are in me and I am in you. May they also be in us so that the world may believe that you have sent me.","ut omnes unum sint, sicut tu, Pater, in me et ego in te, ut et ipsi in nobis unum sint; ut mundus credat quia tu me misisti.","למען יהיו כלם אחד כאשר אתה אבי בי אתה ואני בך והיו גם המה בנו כאשר למען יאמין העולם כי אתה שלחתני׃"],["50","17","22","아버지께서 저에게 주신 영광을 저도 그들에게 주었습니다. 우리가 하나인 것처럼 그들도 하나가 되게 하려는 것입니다.","아버지께서 내게 주신 영광을 나도 그들에게 주었습니다. 그것은 아버지와 내가 하나인 것처럼 이 사람들도 하나가 되게 하려는 것입니다.","내게 주신 영광을 내가 그들에게 주었사오니 이는 우리가 하나가 된 것 같이 그들도 하나가 되게 하려 함이니이다","내게 주신 영광을 내가 저희에게 주었사오니 이는 우리가 하나가 된것 같이 저희도 하나가 되게 하려 함이니이다","나는 아버지께서 내게 주신 영광을 이들에게 주었습니다. 그것은 아버지와 내가 본래 하나이듯이 이들도 하나가 되게 하려는 것입니다.","And I have given them the glory you gave me, so that they may be one, as we are one,","And the glory which thou gavest me I have given them; that they may be one, even as we are one:","I have given them the glory that you gave me, that they may be one as we are one:","Et ego claritatem, quam dedisti mihi, dedi illis, ut sint unum, sicut nos unum sumus;","ואני נתתי להם את הכבוד אשר נתת לי למען יהיו אחד כאשר אנחנו אחד נחנו׃"],["50","17","23","저는 그들 안에 있고 아버지께서는 제 안에 계십니다. 이는 그들이 완전히 하나가 되게 하려는 것입니다. 그리고 아버지께서 저를 보내시고, 또 저를 사랑하셨듯이 그들도 사랑하셨다는 것을 세상이 알게 하려는 것입니다.","내가 이 사람들 안에 있고 아버지께서 내 안에 계신 것은 이 사람들을 완전히 하나가 되게 하려는 것입니다. 이것은 세상으로 하여금 아버지께서 나를 보내셨다는 것을 알게 하려는 것이며 또 아버지께서 나를 사랑하신 것처럼 이 사람들도 사랑하셨다는 것을 알게 하려는 것입니다.","곧 내가 그들 안에 있고 아버지께서 내 안에 계시어 그들로 온전함을 이루어 하나가 되게 하려 함은 아버지께서 나를 보내신 것과 또 나를 사랑하심 같이 그들도 사랑하신 것을 세상으로 알게 하려 함이로소이다","곧 내가 저희 안에, 아버지께서 내 안에 계셔 저희로 온전함을 이루어 하나가 되게 하려 함은 아버지께서 나를 보내신 것과 또 나를 사랑하심 같이 저희도 사랑하신 것을 세상으로 알게 하려 함이로소이다","내가 이들 안에 있고 아버지께서 내 안에 계신 것은 모두가 완전히 하나가 되어서 아버지께서 나를 보내셨고 또 아버지께서 나를 사랑하신 것만큼 이들도 사랑하신다는 것을 세상이 깨닫도록 하려는 것입니다.","I in them and you in me, that they may be brought to perfection as one, that the world may know that you sent me, and that you loved them even as you loved me.","I in them, and thou in me, that they may be made perfect in one; and that the world may know that thou hast sent me, and hast loved them, as thou hast loved me.","I in them and you in me. May they be brought to complete unity to let the world know that you sent me and have loved them even as you have loved me.","ego in eis, et tu in me, ut sint consummati in unum; ut cognoscat mundus, quia tu me misisti et dilexisti eos, sicut me dilexisti.","אני בהם ואתה בי למען יהיו משלמים לאחד ולמען ידע העולם כי אתה שלחתני ואהבת אתם כאשר אהבתני׃"],["50","17","24","아버지, 아버지께서 저에게 주신 이들도 제가 있는 곳에 저와 함께 있게 되기를 바랍니다. 세상 창조 이전부터 아버지께서 저를 사랑하시어 저에게 주신 영광을 그들도 보게 되기를 바랍니다.","아버지, 아버지께서 나에게 맡기신 사람들을 내가 있는 곳에 함께 있게 하여주시고 아버지께서 천지 창조 이전부터 나를 사랑하셔서 나에게 주신 그 영광을 그들도 볼 수 있게 하여주십시오.","아버지여 내게 주신 자도 나 있는 곳에 나와 함께 있어 아버지께서 창세 전부터 나를 사랑하시므로 내게 주신 나의 영광을 그들로 보게 하시기를 원하옵나이다","아버지여 내게 주신 자도 나 있는 곳에 나와 함께 있어 아버지께서 창세 전부터 나를 사랑하시므로 내게 주신 나의 영광을 저희로 보게 하시기를 원하옵나이다","아버지, 아버지께서 내게 주신 이들을 나와 함께 있게 해주소서. 그리하여 나를 사랑하셔서 이 세상이 있기 전부터 내게 주신 그 영광을 이들과 함께 볼 수 있도록 해주소서.","Father, they are your gift to me. I wish that where I am they also may be with me, that they may see my glory that you gave me, because you loved me before the foundation of the world.","Father, I will that they also, whom thou hast given me, be with me where I am; that they may behold my glory, which thou hast given me: for thou lovedst me before the foundation of the world.","\"Father, I want those you have given me to be with me where I am, and to see my glory, the glory you have given me because you loved me before the creation of the world.","Pater, quod dedisti mihi, volo, ut ubi ego sum, et illi sint mecum, ut videant claritatem meam, quam dedisti mihi, quia dilexisti me ante constitutionem mundi.","אבי חפצתי כי גם הם אשר נתתם לי יהיו עמי באשר אהיה אני למען יחזו את כבודי אשר נתת לי כי אהבתני לפני מוסדות עולם׃"],["50","17","25","의로우신 아버지, 세상은 아버지를 알지 못하였지만 저는 아버지를 알고 있었습니다. 그들도 아버지께서 저를 보내셨다는 것을 알게 되었습니다.","의로우신 아버지, 세상은 아버지를 모르지만 나는 아버지를 알고 있습니다. 그리고 이 사람들도 아버지께서 나를 보내셨다는 것을 깨달았습니다.","의로우신 아버지여 세상이 아버지를 알지 못하여도 나는 아버지를 알았사옵고 그들도 아버지께서 나를 보내신 줄 알았사옵나이다","의로우신 아버지여 세상이 아버지를 알지 못하여도 나는 아버지를 알았삽고 저희도 아버지께서 나를 보내신줄 알았삽나이다","오, 의로우신 아버지, 세상은 아버지를 알지 못하나 나는 아버지를 압니다. 그리고 이 제자들도 아버지께서 나를 보내셨다는 것을 알고 있습니다.","Righteous Father, the world also does not know you, but I know you, and they know that you sent me.","O righteous Father, the world hath not known thee: but I have known thee, and these have known that thou hast sent me.","\"Righteous Father, though the world does not know you, I know you, and they know that you have sent me.","Pater iuste, et mundus te non cognovit; ego autem te cognovi, et hi cognoverunt quia tu me misisti;","אבי הצדיק הן העולם לא ידעך ואני ידעתיך ואלה הכירו כי אתה שלחתני׃"],["50","17","26","저는 그들에게 아버지의 이름을 알려 주었고 앞으로도 알려 주겠습니다. 아버지께서 저를 사랑하신 그 사랑이 그들 안에 있고 저도 그들 안에 있게 하려는 것입니다.”","나는 이 사람들에게 아버지를 알게 하였으며 앞으로도 그렇게 하겠습니다. 그것은 아버지께서 나를 사랑하신 그 사랑이 그들 안에 있고 나도 그들 안에 있게 하려는 것입니다.\"","내가 아버지의 이름을 그들에게 알게 하였고 또 알게 하리니 이는 나를 사랑하신 사랑이 그들 안에 있고 나도 그들 안에 있게 하려 함이니이다","내가 아버지의 이름을 저희에게 알게 하였고 또 알게 하리니 이는 나를 사랑하신 사랑이 저희 안에 있고 나도 저희 안에 있게 하려 함이니이다","나는 이미 이들에게 아버지를 알려 주었고 앞으로 더 깊이 알려줄 것입니다. 그리하여 나를 사랑하신 아버지의 그 크신 사랑이 이들 안에 있고 나도 이들 안에 있도록 하겠습니다\"","I made known to them your name and I will make it known, that the love with which you loved me may be in them and I in them.”","And I have declared unto them thy name, and will declare it: that the love wherewith thou hast loved me may be in them, and I in them.","I have made you known to them, and will continue to make you known in order that the love you have for me may be in them and that I myself may be in them.\"","et notum feci eis nomen tuum et notum faciam, ut dilectio, qua dilexisti me, in ipsis sit, et ego in ipsis “.","ואני הודעתים את שמך ואוסיף להודיעם למען תהיה בם האהבה אשר אהבתני ואני אהיה בהם׃"],["50","18","1","예수님께서는 이렇게 말씀하신 뒤에 제자들과 함께 키드론 골짜기 건너편으로 가셨다. 거기에 정원이 하나 있었는데 제자들과 함께 그곳에 들어가셨다.","이 기도를 마치신 뒤에 예수께서는 제자들을 데리시고 키드론 골짜기 건너편으로 가셔서 거기에 있는 동산에 들어가셨다.","예수께서 이 말씀을 하시고 제자들과 함께 기드론 시내 건너편으로 나가시니 그 곳에 동산이 있는데 제자들과 함께 들어가시니라","예수께서 이 말씀을 하시고 제자들과 함께 기드론 시내 저편으로 나가시니 거기 동산이 있는데 제자들과 함께 들어가시다","예수께서는 기도를 끝내시자 제자들과 함께 기드론 골짜기를 지나 올리브나무가 있는 동산으로 올라가셨다.","When he had said this, Jesus went out with his disciples across the Kidron valley to where there was a garden, into which he and his disciples entered.","When Jesus had spoken these words, he went forth with his disciples over the brook Cedron, where was a garden, into the which he entered, and his disciples.","When he had finished praying, Jesus left with his disciples and crossed the Kidron Valley. On the other side there was an olive grove, and he and his disciples went into it.","Haec cum dixisset Iesus, egressus est cum discipulis suis trans torrentem Cedron, ubi erat hortus, in quem introivit ipse et discipuli eius.","ויהי ככלות ישוע לדבר את הדברים האלה ויצא החוצה עם תלמידיו מעבר לנחל קדרון ושם גן ויבא בו הוא ותלמידיו׃"],["50","18","2","예수님께서 제자들과 함께 여러 번 거기에 모이셨기 때문에, 그분을 팔아넘길 유다도 그곳을 알고 있었다.","예수와 제자들이 가끔 거기에 모이곤 했었기 때문에 예수를 잡아줄 유다도 그 곳을 잘 알고 있었다.","그 곳은 가끔 예수께서 제자들과 모이시는 곳이므로 예수를 파는 유다도 그 곳을 알더라","거기는 예수께서 제자들과 가끔 모이시는 곳이므로 예수를 파는 유다도 그곳을 알더라","예수께서는 전에도 제자들과 함께 여러번 그곳에 가신 일이 있어서 예수를 배반할 유다도 그 장소를 알고 있었다.","Judas his betrayer also knew the place, because Jesus had often met there with his disciples.","And Judas also, which betrayed him, knew the place: for Jesus ofttimes resorted thither with his disciples.","Now Judas, who betrayed him, knew the place, because Jesus had often met there with his disciples.","Sciebat autem et Iudas, qui tradebat eum, locum, quia frequenter Iesus convenerat illuc cum discipulis suis.","וגם יהודה מוסרו ידע את המקום כי פעמים רבות נועד שמה ישוע עם תלמידיו׃"],["50","18","3","그래서 유다는 군대와 함께, 수석 사제들과 바리사이들이 보낸 성전 경비병들을 데리고 그리로 갔다. 그들은 등불과 횃불과 무기를 들고 있었다.","그래서 유다는 대사제들과 바리사이파 사람들이 보낸 경비병들과 함께 한 떼의 군인들을 데리고 그리로 갔다. 그들은 무장을 갖추고 등불과 횃불을 들고 있었다.","유다가 군대와 대제사장들과 바리새인들에게서 얻은 아랫사람들을 데리고 등과 횃불과 무기를 가지고 그리로 오는지라","유다가 군대와 및 대제사장들과 바리새인들에게서 얻은 하속들을 데리고 등과 홰와 병기를 가지고 그리로 오는지라","그래서 유다는 대제사장들과 바리새파 사람들이 딸려 보낸 한 떼의 군인들과 경비병들을 이끌고 감람산에 도착하였다. 그들은 횃불과 등과 무기를 들고 있었다.","So Judas got a band of soldiers and guards from the chief priests and the Pharisees and went there with lanterns, torches, and weapons.","Judas then, having received a band of men and officers from the chief priests and Pharisees, cometh thither with lanterns and torches and weapons.","So Judas came to the grove, guiding a detachment of soldiers and some officials from the chief priests and Pharisees. They were carrying torches, lanterns and weapons.","Iudas ergo, cum accepisset cohortem et a pontificibus et pharisaeis ministros, venit illuc cum lanternis et facibus et armis.","ויקח יהודה את הגדוד ומשרתים מאת הכהנים הגדולים והפרושים ויבא שמה בנרות ובלפידים ובכלי נשק׃"],["50","18","4","예수님께서는 당신께 닥쳐오는 모든 일을 아시고 앞으로 나서시며 그들에게, “누구를 찾느냐?” 하고 물으셨다.","예수께서는 신상에 닥쳐올 일을 모두 아시고 앞으로 나서시며 \"너희는 누구를 찾느냐?\" 하고 물으셨다.","예수께서 그 당할 일을 다 아시고 나아가 이르시되 너희가 누구를 찾느냐","예수께서 그 당할 일을 다 아시고 나아가 가라사대 너희가 누구를 찾느냐","예수께서는 닥쳐올 일을 다 아시고 앞으로 걸어 나가서 \"너희는 누구를 찾고 있느냐?\" 하고 물으셨다. \"나사렛 예수요\" 하고 그들이 대답하자 \"내가 바로 그 사람이다\" 하고 예수께서 말씀하였다. 그때 예수를 팔아 넘기려는 유다도 그들과 함께 서 있었다.","Jesus, knowing everything that was going to happen to him, went out and said to them, “Whom are you looking for?”","Jesus therefore, knowing all things that should come upon him, went forth, and said unto them, Whom seek ye?","Jesus, knowing all that was going to happen to him, went out and asked them, \"Who is it you want?\"","Iesus itaque sciens omnia, quae ventura erant super eum, processit et dicit eis: “Quem quaeritis? “.","וישוע ידע את כל אשר יבא עליו ויצא ויאמר אליהם את מי תבקשו׃"],["50","18","5","그들이 “나자렛 사람 예수요.” 하고 대답하자, 예수님께서 그들에게 “나다.” 하고 말씀하셨다. 예수님을 팔아넘길 유다도 그들과 함께 서 있었다.","그들이 \"나자렛 사람 예수를 찾소.\" 하자 \"내가 그 사람이다.\" 하고 말씀하셨다. 예수를 잡아줄 유다도 그들과 함께 서 있었다.","대답하되 나사렛 예수라 하거늘 이르시되 내가 그니라 하시니라 그를 파는 유다도 그들과 함께 섰더라","대답하되 나사렛 예수라 하거늘 가라사대 내로라 하시니라 그를 파는 유다도 저희와 함께 섰더라","(4절에 포함되어 있음)","They answered him, “Jesus the Nazorean.” He said to them, “I AM.” Judas his betrayer was also with them.","They answered him, Jesus of Nazareth. Jesus saith unto them, I am he. And Judas also, which betrayed him, stood with them.","\"Jesus of Nazareth,\" they replied. \"I am he,\" Jesus said. (And Judas the traitor was standing there with them.)","Responderunt ei: “Iesum Nazarenum “. Dicit eis: “Ego sum! “. Stabat autem et Iudas, qui tradebat eum, cum ipsis.","ויענו ויאמרו את ישוע הנצרי ויאמר אליהם ישוע אני הוא וגם יהודה מוסרו עמד אצלם׃"],["50","18","6","예수님께서 “나다.” 하실 때, 그들은 뒷걸음치다가 땅에 넘어졌다.","예수께서 \"내가 그 사람이다.\" 하고 말씀하셨을 때 그들은 뒷걸음치다가 땅에 넘어졌다.","예수께서 그들에게 내가 그니라 하실 때에 그들이 물러가서 땅에 엎드러지는지라","예수께서 저희에게 내로라 하실 때에 저희가 물러가서 땅에 엎드러지는지라","그들은 예수께서 이 말씀을 하셨을 때에 놀라서 뒤로 물러서다가 땅에 넘어졌다.","When he said to them, “I AM,” they turned away and fell to the ground.","As soon then as he had said unto them, I am he, they went backward, and fell to the ground.","When Jesus said, \"I am he,\" they drew back and fell to the ground.","Ut ergo dixit eis: “Ego sum! “, abierunt retrorsum et ceciderunt in terram.","ויהי בדבר ישוע אליהם אני הוא ויסגו אחור ויפלו ארצה׃"],["50","18","7","예수님께서 다시 그들에게 “누구를 찾느냐?” 하고 물으시니, 그들이 “나자렛 사람 예수요.” 하고 대답하였다.","예수께서 다시 \"너희는 누구를 찾느냐?\" 하고 물으시자 그들은 \"나자렛 사람 예수를 찾소.\" 하고 대답하였다.","이에 다시 누구를 찾느냐고 물으신대 그들이 말하되 나사렛 예수라 하거늘","이에 다시 누구를 찾느냐고 물으신대 저희가 말하되 나사렛 예수라 하거늘","예수께서 한번 더 \"누구를 찾고 있느냐?\" 하고 물으시자 그들은 \"나사렛 예수요\" 하고 대답하였다.","So he again asked them, “Whom are you looking for?” They said, “Jesus the Nazorean.”","Then asked he them again, Whom seek ye? And they said, Jesus of Nazareth.","Again he asked them, \"Who is it you want?\" And they said, \"Jesus of Nazareth.\"","Iterum ergo eos interrogavit: “Quem quaeritis? “. Illi autem dixerunt: “Iesum Nazarenum “.","ויסף וישאל אתם את מי תבקשו ויאמרו את ישוע הנצרי׃"],["50","18","8","예수님께서 말씀하셨다. “‘나다.’ 하지 않았느냐? 너희가 나를 찾는다면 이 사람들은 가게 내버려 두어라.”","\"내가 그 사람이라고 하지 않았느냐? 너희가 나를 찾고 있다면 이 사람들은 가게 내버려두어라\" 하고 예수께서 말씀하셨다.","예수께서 대답하시되 너희에게 내가 그니라 하였으니 나를 찾거든 이 사람들이 가는 것은 용납하라 하시니","예수께서 대답하시되 너희에게 내로라 하였으니 나를 찾거든 이 사람들의 가는 것을 용납하라 하시니","예수께서 말씀하셨다. \"내가 그 사람이라고 하지 않았느냐? 너희가 찾는 사람이 바로 나라면 이 사람들은 가게 하라.\"","Jesus answered, “I told you that I AM. So if you are looking for me, let these men go.”","Jesus answered, I have told you that I am he: if therefore ye seek me, let these go their way:","\"I told you that I am he,\" Jesus answered. \"If you are looking for me, then let these men go.\"","Respondit Iesus: “Dixi vobis: Ego sum! Si ergo me quaeritis, sinite hos abire “,","ויען ישוע הלא אמרתי לכם אני הוא לכן אם אתי תבקשו הניחו לאלה וילכו׃"],["50","18","9","이는 “아버지께서 저에게 주신 사람들 가운데 하나도 잃지 않았습니다.” 하고 당신께서 전에 하신 말씀이 이루어지게 하려는 것이었다.","예수께서는 \"나에게 맡겨주신 사람을 하나도 잃지 않았습니다.\" 하신 말씀을 이루려고 그렇게 말씀하셨던 것이다.","이는 아버지께서 내게 주신 자 중에서 하나도 잃지 아니하였사옵나이다 하신 말씀을 응하게 하려 함이러라","이는 아버지께서 내게 주신 자 중에서 하나도 잃지 아니하였삽나이다 하신 말씀을 응하게 하려 함이러라","예수께서 이렇게 말씀하신 것은 \"아버지께서 내게 주신 사람들을 단 한 사람도 잃지 않았습니다\"라는 말씀을 이루려 하신 것이다.","This was to fulfill what he had said, “I have not lost any of those you gave me.”","That the saying might be fulfilled, which he spake, Of them which thou gavest me have I lost none.","This happened so that the words he had spoken would be fulfilled: \"I have not lost one of those you gave me.\"","ut impleretur sermo, quem dixit: “Quos dedisti mihi, non perdidi ex ipsis quemquam “.","למלאת הדבר אשר אמר מאלה אשר נתת לי לא אבד לי אף אחד׃"],["50","18","10","그때에 시몬 베드로가 가지고 있던 칼을 뽑아, 대사제의 종을 내리쳐 오른쪽 귀를 잘라 버렸다. 그 종의 이름은 말코스였다.","이 때에 시몬 베드로가 차고 있던 칼을 뽑아 대사제의 종을 내리쳐 오른쪽 귀를 잘라버렸다. 그 종의 이름은 말코스였다.","이에 시몬 베드로가 칼을 가졌는데 그것을 빼어 대제사장의 종을 쳐서 오른편 귀를 베어버리니 그 종의 이름은 말고라","이에 시몬 베드로가 검을 가졌는데 이것을 빼어 대제사장의 종을 쳐서 오른편 귀를 베어버리니 그 종의 이름은 말고라","그때 시몬 베드로가 칼을 빼어 대제사장의 종 말고의 오른쪽 귀를 내리쳤다.","Then Simon Peter, who had a sword, drew it, struck the high priest’s slave, and cut off his right ear. The slave’s name was Malchus.","Then Simon Peter having a sword drew it, and smote the high priest's servant, and cut off his right ear. The servant's name was Malchus.","Then Simon Peter, who had a sword, drew it and struck the high priest's servant, cutting off his right ear. (The servant's name was Malchus.)","Simon ergo Petrus, habens gladium, eduxit eum et percussit pontificis servum et abscidit eius auriculam dextram. Erat autem nomen servo Malchus.","ולשמעון פטרוס חרב וישלפה ויך את עבד הכהן הגדול ויקצץ את אזנו הימנית ושם העבד מלכוס׃"],["50","18","11","그러자 예수님께서 베드로에게 이르셨다. “그 칼을 칼집에 꽂아라. 아버지께서 나에게 주신 이 잔을 내가 마셔야 하지 않겠느냐?”","이것을 보신 예수께서 베드로에게 \"그 칼을 칼집에 도로 꽂아라. 아버지께서 나에게 주신 이 고난의 잔을 내가 마셔야 하지 않겠느냐?\" 하고 말씀하셨다.","예수께서 베드로더러 이르시되 칼을 칼집에 꽂으라 아버지께서 주신 잔을 내가 마시지 아니하겠느냐 하시니라","예수께서 베드로더러 이르시되 검을 집에 꽂으라 아버지께서 주신 잔을 내가 마시지 아니하겠느냐 하시니라","그러자 예수께서 베드로에게 말씀하셨다. \"네 칼을 칼집에 꽂으라, 아버지께서 내게 주신 이 잔을 어찌 마시지 않을 수 있겠느냐?\"","Jesus said to Peter, “Put your sword into its scabbard. Shall I not drink the cup that the Father gave me?”","Then said Jesus unto Peter, Put up thy sword into the sheath: the cup which my Father hath given me, shall I not drink it?","Jesus commanded Peter, \"Put your sword away! Shall I not drink the cup the Father has given me?\"","Dixit ergo Iesus Petro: “Mitte gladium in vaginam; calicem, quem dedit mihi Pater, non bibam illum? “.","ויאמר ישוע אל פטרוס השב חרבך אל נדנה הכי לא אשתה את הכוס אשר נתן לי אבי׃"],["50","18","12","군대와 그 대장과 유다인들의 성전 경비병들은 예수님을 붙잡아 결박하고,","그 때에 군인들과 그 사령관과 유다인의 경비병들이 예수를 붙잡아 결박하여","이에 군대와 천부장과 유대인의 아랫사람들이 예수를 잡아 결박하여","이에 군대와 천부장과 유대인의 하속들이 예수를 잡아 결박하여","유대인 경비병과 군인들은 그들의 상관과 함께 예수를 결박하여","So the band of soldiers, the tribune, and the Jewish guards seized Jesus, bound him,","Then the band and the captain and officers of the Jews took Jesus, and bound him,","Then the detachment of soldiers with its commander and the Jewish officials arrested Jesus. They bound him","Cohors ergo et tribunus et ministri Iudaeorum comprehenderunt Iesum et ligaverunt eum","אז תפשו הגדוד ושר האלף ומשרתי היהודים את ישוע ויאסרהו׃"],["50","18","13","먼저 한나스에게 데려갔다. 한나스는 그해의 대사제 카야파의 장인이었다.","먼저 안나스에게 끌고 갔다. 안나스는 그 해의 대사제 가야파의 장인이었다.","먼저 안나스에게로 끌고 가니 안나스는 그 해의 대제사장인 가야바의 장인이라","먼저 안나스에게로 끌고 가니 안나스는 그 해의 대제사장인 가야바의 장인이라","우선 안나스에게로 끌고 갔다. 안나스는 그해의 대제사장인 가야바의 장인이었고","and brought him to Annas first. He was the father-in-law of Caiaphas, who was high priest that year.","And led him away to Annas first; for he was father in law to Caiaphas, which was the high priest that same year.","and brought him first to Annas, who was the father-in-law of Caiaphas, the high priest that year.","et adduxerunt ad Annam primum; erat enim socer Caiphae, qui erat pontifex anni illius.","ויוליכהו בראשונה אל חנן והוא חתן קיפא אשר שמש בכהנה גדולה בשנה ההיא׃"],["50","18","14","카야파는 백성을 위하여 한 사람이 죽는 것이 낫다고 유다인들에게 충고한 자다.","가야파는 일찍이 유다인들에게 \"한 사람이 온 백성을 대신해서 죽는 편이 더 낫다.\" 하는 의견을 냈던 자이다.","가야바는 유대인들에게 한 사람이 백성을 위하여 죽는 것이 유익하다고 권고하던 자러라","가야바는 유대인들에게 한 사람이 백성을 위하여 죽는 것이 유익하다 권고하던 자러라","가야바는 다른 유대인 지도자들에게 \"한 사람이 모든 사람을 위해 죽는 것이 더 낫다\"고 말한 사람이었다.","It was Caiaphas who had counseled the Jews that it was better that one man should die rather than the people.","Now Caiaphas was he, which gave counsel to the Jews, that it was expedient that one man should die for the people.","Caiaphas was the one who had advised the Jews that it would be good if one man died for the people.","Erat autem Caiphas, qui consilium dederat Iudaeis: “Expedit unum hominem mori pro populo “.","הוא קיפא אשר יעץ את היהודים כי טוב אשר איש אחד יאבד בעד כל העם׃"],["50","18","15","시몬 베드로와 또 다른 제자 하나가 예수님을 따라갔다. 그 제자는 대사제와 아는 사이여서, 예수님과 함께 대사제의 저택 안뜰에 들어갔다.","시몬 베드로와 또 다른 제자 한 사람이 예수를 따라갔다. 그 제자는 대사제와 잘 아는 사이여서 예수를 따라 대사제의 집 안뜰까지 들어갔으나","시몬 베드로와 또 다른 제자 한 사람이 예수를 따르니 이 제자는 대제사장과 아는 사람이라 예수와 함께 대제사장의 집 뜰에 들어가고","시몬 베드로와 또 다른 제자 하나가 예수를 따르니 이 제자는 대제사장과 아는 사람이라 예수와 함께 대제사장의 집 뜰에 들어가고","대제사장과 잘 아는 사이인 제자 하나가 그들을 따라가자 시몬 베드로도 따라 나섰다. 그 제자는 대제사장과 잘 아는 터였으므로 예수를 따라 안뜰까지 들어갔지만","Simon Peter and another disciple followed Jesus. Now the other disciple was known to the high priest, and he entered the courtyard of the high priest with Jesus.","And Simon Peter followed Jesus, and so did another disciple: that disciple was known unto the high priest, and went in with Jesus into the palace of the high priest.","Simon Peter and another disciple were following Jesus. Because this disciple was known to the high priest, he went with Jesus into the high priest's courtyard,","Sequebatur autem Iesum Simon Petrus et alius discipulus. Discipulus autem ille erat notus pontifici et introivit cum Iesu in atrium pontificis;","ושמעון פטרוס ותלמיד אחר הלכו אחרי ישוע והתלמיד ההוא היה נודע לכהן הגדול ויבא עם ישוע לחצר הכהן הגדול׃"],["50","18","16","베드로는 대문 밖에 서 있었는데, 대사제와 아는 사이인 그 다른 제자가 나와서 문지기 하녀에게 말하여 베드로를 데리고 들어갔다.","베드로는 대문 밖에 서 있었다. 대사제를 잘 아는 그 제자는 다시 나와서 문지기 하녀에게 말하여 베드로를 데리고 들어갔다.","베드로는 문 밖에 서 있는지라 대제사장을 아는 그 다른 제자가 나가서 문 지키는 여자에게 말하여 베드로를 데리고 들어오니","베드로는 문 밖에 섰는지라 대제사장과 아는 그 다른 제자가 나가서 문 지키는 여자에게 말하여 베드로를 데리고 들어왔더니","베드로는 대문 밖에 서 있어야 하였다. 그러자 그 제자가 문지기 소녀에게 일러 베드로를 안으로 들여보내게 하였다.","But Peter stood at the gate outside. So the other disciple, the acquaintance of the high priest, went out and spoke to the gatekeeper and brought Peter in.","But Peter stood at the door without. Then went out that other disciple, which was known unto the high priest, and spake unto her that kept the door, and brought in Peter.","but Peter had to wait outside at the door. The other disciple, who was known to the high priest, came back, spoke to the girl on duty there and brought Peter in.","Petrus autem stabat ad ostium foris. Exivit ergo discipulus alius, qui erat notus pontifici, et dixit ostiariae et introduxit Petrum.","ופטרוס עמד מחוץ לפתח ויצא התלמיד האחר המידע לכהן הגדול וידבר אל השערת ויבא את פטרוס פנימה׃"],["50","18","17","그때에 그 문지기 하녀가 “당신도 저 사람의 제자 가운데 하나가 아닌가요?” 하자, 베드로가 “나는 아니오.” 하고 말하였다.","그 젊은 문지기 하녀가 베드로를 보더니 \"당신도 저 사람의 제자가 아닙니까?\" 하고 물었다. 베드로는 \"아니오.\" 하고 부인하였다.","문 지키는 여종이 베드로에게 말하되 너도 이 사람의 제자 중 하나가 아니냐 하니 그가 말하되 나는 아니라 하고","문 지키는 여종이 베드로에게 말하되 너도 이 사람의 제자 중 하나가 아니냐 하니 그가 말하되 나는 아니라 하고","그 소녀가 베드로를 보고 말하였다. \"당신도 예수의 제자가 아닙니까?\" 그러자 베드로는 \"아니다. 나는 아니야\" 하고 부인하였다.","Then the maid who was the gatekeeper said to Peter, “You are not one of this man’s disciples, are you?” He said, “I am not.”","Then saith the damsel that kept the door unto Peter, Art not thou also one of this man's disciples? He saith, I am not.","\"You are not one of his disciples, are you?\" the girl at the door asked Peter. He replied, \"I am not.\"","Dicit ergo Petro ancilla ostiaria: “Numquid et tu ex discipulis es hominis istius? “. Dicit ille: “Non sum! “.","ותאמר האמה השערת אל פטרוס הלא גם אתה מתלמידי האיש הזה ויאמר אינני׃"],["50","18","18","날이 추워 종들과 성전 경비병들이 숯불을 피워 놓고 서서 불을 쬐고 있었는데, 베드로도 그들과 함께 서서 불을 쬐었다.","날이 추워서 하인들과 경비병들은 숯불을 피워놓고 불을 쬐고 있었는데 베드로도 그들 틈에 서서 불을 쬐고 있었다.","그 때가 추운 고로 종과 아랫사람들이 불을 피우고 서서 쬐니 베드로도 함께 서서 쬐더라","그 때가 추운고로 종과 하속들이 숯불을 피우고 서서 쬐니 베드로도 함께 서서 쬐더라","날이 추웠으므로 경비병들과 시종들은 불을 피워 놓고 그 주위에 둘러서 있었다. 베드로도 그들과 함께 서서 불을 쬐었다.","Now the slaves and the guards were standing around a charcoal fire that they had made, because it was cold, and were warming themselves. Peter was also standing there keeping warm.","And the servants and officers stood there, who had made a fire of coals; for it was cold: and they warmed themselves: and Peter stood with them, and warmed himself.","It was cold, and the servants and officials stood around a fire they had made to keep warm. Peter also was standing with them, warming himself.","Stabant autem servi et ministri, qui prunas fecerant, quia frigus erat, et calefaciebant se; erat autem cum eis et Petrus stans et calefaciens se.","והעבדים והמשרתים בערו אש גחלים כי עת קר היתה ויעמדו שם ויתחממו וגם פטרוס עמד עמם ומתחמם׃"],["50","18","19","대사제는 예수님께 그분의 제자들과 가르침에 관하여 물었다.","대사제 안나스는 예수를 심문하며 그의 제자들과 그의 가르침에 관하여 물었다.","대제사장이 예수에게 그의 제자들과 그의 교훈에 대하여 물으니","대제사장이 예수에게 그의 제자들과 그의 교훈에 대하여 물으니","안에서는 대제사장이 예수를 심문하기 시작하였다. 그는 예수를 따르는 사람들과 그들에게 가르쳐 오신 내용에 대해서 물었다.","The high priest questioned Jesus about his disciples and about his doctrine.","The high priest then asked Jesus of his disciples, and of his doctrine.","Meanwhile, the high priest questioned Jesus about his disciples and his teaching.","Pontifex ergo interrogavit Iesum de discipulis suis et de doctrina eius.","וישאל הכהן הגדול את ישוע על תלמידיו ועל לקחו׃"],["50","18","20","예수님께서 그에게 대답하셨다. “나는 세상 사람들에게 드러내 놓고 이야기하였다. 나는 언제나 모든 유다인이 모이는 회당과 성전에서 가르쳤다. 은밀히 이야기한 것은 하나도 없다.","예수께서는 이렇게 대답하셨다. \"나는 세상 사람들에게 버젓이 말해 왔다. 나는 언제나 모든 유다인들이 모이는 회당과 성전에서 가르쳤다. 내가 숨어서 말한 것이라고는 하나도 없다.","예수께서 대답하시되 내가 드러내 놓고 세상에 말하였노라 모든 유대인들이 모이는 회당과 성전에서 항상 가르쳤고 은밀하게는 아무 것도 말하지 아니하였거늘","예수께서 대답하시되 내가 드러내어 놓고 세상에 말하였노라 모든 유대인들의 모이는 회당과 성전에서 항상 가르쳤고 은밀히는 아무 것도 말하지 아니하였거늘","예수께서 대답하셨다. \"나는 공개적으로 회당과 성전에서 가르쳐 왔기 때문에 내가 무엇을 가르쳤는지는 널리 알려져 있다. 유대인 지도자들도 들어서 알고 있다. 나는 비밀로 가르친 일은 한 번도 없다.","Jesus answered him, “I have spoken publicly to the world. I have always taught in a synagogue or in the temple area where all the Jews gather, and in secret I have said nothing.","Jesus answered him, I spake openly to the world; I ever taught in the synagogue, and in the temple, whither the Jews always resort; and in secret have I said nothing.","\"I have spoken openly to the world,\" Jesus replied. \"I always taught in synagogues or at the temple, where all the Jews come together. I said nothing in secret.","Respondit ei Iesus: “Ego palam locutus sum mundo; ego semper docui in synagoga et in templo, quo omnes Iudaei conveniunt, et in occulto locutus sum nihil.","ויען אתו ישוע אנכי בגלוי דברתי אל העולם ותמיד למדתי בבית הכנסת ובבית המקדש אשר כל היהודים נקהלים שמה ולא דברתי דבר בסתר׃"],["50","18","21","그런데 왜 나에게 묻느냐? 내가 무슨 말을 하였는지 들은 이들에게 물어보아라. 내가 말한 것을 그들이 알고 있다.”","그런데 왜 나에게 묻느냐? 내가 무슨 말을 했는지 들은 사람들에게 물어보아라. 내가 한 말은 그들이 잘 알고 있다.\"","어찌하여 내게 묻느냐 내가 무슨 말을 하였는지 들은 자들에게 물어 보라 그들이 내가 하던 말을 아느니라","어찌하여 내게 묻느냐 내가 무슨 말을 하였는지 들은 자들에게 물어 보라 저희가 나의 하던 말을 아느니라","그래도 알고 싶거든 내게서 들은 사람들에게 물어 보라. 이 자리에 있는 너희 가운데도 들은 사람들이 있다. 내가 무슨 말을 했는지 그들이 알고 있을 것이다.\"","Why ask me? Ask those who heard me what I said to them. They know what I said.”","Why askest thou me? ask them which heard me, what I have said unto them: behold, they know what I said.","Why question me? Ask those who heard me. Surely they know what I said.\"","Quid me interrogas? Interroga eos, qui audierunt quid locutus sum ipsis; ecce hi sciunt, quae dixerim ego “.","ומה תשאל אתי שאל נא את השמעים מה שדברתי אליהם הנם יודעים את אשר אמרתי׃"],["50","18","22","예수님께서 이렇게 말씀하시자, 곁에 서 있던 성전 경비병 하나가 예수님의 뺨을 치며, 대사제께 그따위로 대답하느냐? 하였다.","예수께서 이렇게 말씀하셨을 때 곁에 서 있던 경비병 한 사람이 \"대사제님께 그게 무슨 대답이냐?\" 하며 예수의 뺨을 때렸다.","이 말씀을 하시매 곁에 섰던 아랫사람 하나가 손으로 예수를 쳐 이르되 네가 대제사장에게 이같이 대답하느냐 하니","이 말씀을 하시매 곁에 섰는 하속 하나가 손으로 예수를 쳐 가로되 네가 대제사장에게 이 같이 대답하느냐 하니","그때 경비병 하나가 예수의 뺨을 치면서 \"대제사장에게 그따위 대답이 무엇이냐?\" 하고 소리 질렀다.","When he had said this, one of the temple guards standing there struck Jesus and said, “Is this the way you answer the high priest?”","And when he had thus spoken, one of the officers which stood by struck Jesus with the palm of his hand, saying, Answerest thou the high priest so?","When Jesus said this, one of the officials nearby struck him in the face. \"Is this the way you answer the high priest?\" he demanded.","Haec autem cum dixisset, unus assistens ministrorum dedit alapam Iesu dicens: “Sic respondes pontifici? “.","ויהי כדברו הדברים האלה ויך אחד המשרתים העמד שמה את ישוע על הלחי ויאמר הכזאת תענה את הכהן הגדול׃"],["50","18","23","예수님께서 그에게 대답하셨다. “내가 잘못 이야기하였다면 그 잘못의 증거를 대 보아라. 그러나 내가 옳게 이야기하였다면 왜 나를 치느냐?”","예수께서는 그 사람에게 \"내가 한 말에 잘못이 있다면 어디 대보아라. 그러나 잘못이 없다면 어찌하여 나를 때리느냐?\" 하셨다.","예수께서 대답하시되 내가 말을 잘못하였으면 그 잘못한 것을 증언하라 바른 말을 하였으면 네가 어찌하여 나를 치느냐 하시더라","예수께서 대답하시되 내가 말을 잘못하였으면 그 잘못한 것을 증거하라 잘하였으면 네가 어찌하여 나를 치느냐 하시더라","예수께서 대답하셨다. \"내 말이 거짓말이라면 증거를 대보라. 사실대로 말하는 사람을 이렇게 함부로 칠 수 있느냐?\"","Jesus answered him, “If I have spoken wrongly, testify to the wrong; but if I have spoken rightly, why do you strike me?”","Jesus answered him, If I have spoken evil, bear witness of the evil: but if well, why smitest thou me?","\"If I said something wrong,\" Jesus replied, \"testify as to what is wrong. But if I spoke the truth, why did you strike me?\"","Respondit ei Iesus: “Si male locutus sum, testimonium perhibe de malo; si autem bene, quid me caedis? “.","ויען אותו ישוע אם רעה דברתי תנה עד כי רעה היא ואם טוב מדוע תסטרני׃"],["50","18","24","한나스는 예수님을 결박한 채로 카야파 대사제에게 보냈다.","안나스는 예수를 묶은 채 대사제 가야파에게 보냈다.","안나스가 예수를 결박한 그대로 대제사장 가야바에게 보내니라","안나스가 예수를 결박한 그대로 대제사장 가야바에게 보내니라","그러자 안나스는 예수를 결박한 그대로 대제사장 가야바에게로 보냈다.","Then Annas sent him bound to Caiaphas the high priest.","Now Annas had sent him bound unto Caiaphas the high priest.","Then Annas sent him, still bound, to Caiaphas the high priest.","Misit ergo eum Annas ligatum ad Caipham pontificem.","וישלחהו חנן אסור בזקים אל קיפא הכהן הגדול׃"],["50","18","25","시몬 베드로는 서서 불을 쬐고 있었다. 사람들이 그에게 “당신도 저 사람의 제자 가운데 하나가 아니오?” 하고 물었다. 베드로는 “나는 아니오.” 하며 부인하였다.","시몬 베드로는 여전히 거기 서서 불을 쬐고 있었다. 그것을 보고 사람들이 \"당신도 저 사람의 제자가 아니오?\" 하고 물었다. 그러나 베드로는 아니라고 부인하였다.","시몬 베드로가 서서 불을 쬐더니 사람들이 묻되 너도 그 제자 중 하나가 아니냐 베드로가 부인하여 이르되 나는 아니라 하니","시몬 베드로가 서서 불을 쬐더니 사람들이 묻되 너도 그 제자 중 하나가 아니냐 베드로가 부인하여 가로되 나는 아니라 하니","시몬 베드로가 불 곁에 서 있는 것을 본 어떤 사람이 물었다. \"당신도 저 사람의 제자가 아닌가요?\" \"나는 아니오\" 하고 베드로가 대답하자","Now Simon Peter was standing there keeping warm. And they said to him, “You are not one of his disciples, are you?” He denied it and said, “I am not.”","And Simon Peter stood and warmed himself. They said therefore unto him, Art not thou also one of his disciples? He denied it, and said, I am not.","As Simon Peter stood warming himself, he was asked, \"You are not one of his disciples, are you?\" He denied it, saying, \"I am not.\"","Erat autem Simon Petrus stans et calefaciens se. Dixerunt ergo ei: “Numquid et tu ex discipulis eius es? “. Negavit ille et dixit: “Non sum! “.","ושמעון פטרוס עמד ומתחמם ויאמרו אליו הלא גם אתה מתלמידיו ויכחש ויאמר אינני׃"],["50","18","26","대사제의 종 가운데 하나로서, 베드로가 귀를 잘라 버린 자의 친척이 말하였다. “당신이 정원에서 저 사람과 함께 있는 것을 내가 보지 않았소?”","그 때 대사제의 종으로서 베드로한테 귀를 잘린 사람의 친척 되는 사람이 나서면서 \"당신이 동산에서 그와 함께 있는 것을 내가 보았는데 그러시오?\" 하고 몰아세웠다.","대제사장의 종 하나는 베드로에게 귀를 잘린 사람의 친척이라 이르되 네가 그 사람과 함께 동산에 있는 것을 내가 보지 아니하였느냐","대제사장의 종 하나는 베드로에게 귀를 베어 버리운 사람의 일가라 가로되 네가 그 사람과 함께 동산에 있던 것을 내가 보지 아니하였느냐","대제사장의 시종이며 베드로에게 귀를 잘린 사람의 친척 되는 이가 나서서 몰아세웠다. \"당신이 감람산에서 예수와 같이 있는 것을 내 눈으로 보았는데도 그러시오.\"","One of the slaves of the high priest, a relative of the one whose ear Peter had cut off, said, “Didn’t I see you in the garden with him?”","One of the servants of the high priest, being his kinsman whose ear Peter cut off, saith, Did not I see thee in the garden with him?","One of the high priest's servants, a relative of the man whose ear Peter had cut off, challenged him, \"Didn't I see you with him in the olive grove?\"","Dicit unus ex servis pontificis, cognatus eius, cuius abscidit Petrus auriculam: “Nonne ego te vidi in horto cum illo? “.","ויאמר איש מעבדי הכהן הגדול והוא מודע לאשר קצץ פטרוס את אזנו הלא ראיתיך עמו בתוך הגן׃"],["50","18","27","베드로가 다시 아니라고 부인하자 곧 닭이 울었다.","베드로가 또 아니라고 부인하자 곧 닭이 울었다.","이에 베드로가 또 부인하니 곧 닭이 울더라","이에 베드로가 또 부인하니 곧 닭이 울더라","그러나 베드로는 또다시 아니라고 부인하였다. 그러자 곧 닭이 울었다.","Again Peter denied it. And immediately the cock crowed.","Peter then denied again: and immediately the cock crew.","Again Peter denied it, and at that moment a rooster began to crow.","Iterum ergo negavit Petrus; et statim gallus cantavit.","ויסף פטרוס לכחש ופתאם קרא התרנגול׃"],["50","18","28","사람들이 예수님을 카야파의 저택에서 총독 관저로 끌고 갔다. 때는 이른 아침이었다. 그들은 몸이 더러워져서 파스카 음식을 먹지 못할까 두려워, 총독 관저 안으로 들어가지 않았다.","사람들이 예수를 가야파의 집에서 총독 관저로 끌고 갔다. 그 때는 이른 아침이었는데 그들은 부정을 타서 과월절 음식을 먹지 못하게 될까봐 총독 관저에는 들어가지 않았다.","그들이 예수를 가야바에게서 관정으로 끌고 가니 새벽이라 그들은 더럽힘을 받지 아니하고 유월절 잔치를 먹고자 하여 관정에 들어가지 아니하더라","저희가 예수를 가야바에게서 관정으로 끌고 가니 새벽이라 저희는 더럽힘을 받지 아니하고 유월절 잔치를 먹고자 하여 관정에 들어가지 아니하더라","가야바 앞에서 심문이 끝났을 때는 다음 날 이른 아침이었다. 그 다음에 예수께서는 로마 총독 관저로 끌려가셨다. 그러나 유대인들은 관저 안으로 들어가 직접 예수를 고소하지는 않았다. 그렇게 하면 불결해져서 유월절 양을 먹을 수 없다고 생각하였기 때문이다.","Then they brought Jesus from Caiaphas to the praetorium. It was morning. And they themselves did not enter the praetorium, in order not to be defiled so that they could eat the Passover.","Then led they Jesus from Caiaphas unto the hall of judgment: and it was early; and they themselves went not into the judgment hall, lest they should be defiled; but that they might eat the passover.","Then the Jews led Jesus from Caiaphas to the palace of the Roman governor. By now it was early morning, and to avoid ceremonial uncleanness the Jews did not enter the palace; they wanted to be able to eat the Passover.","Adducunt ergo Iesum a Caipha in praetorium. Erat autem mane. Et ipsi non introierunt in praetorium, ut non contaminarentur, sed manducarent Pascha.","ויוליכו את ישוע מבית קיפא אל בית המשפט ויהי בבקר השכם והמה לא נכנסו אל בית המשפט למען אשר לא יטמאו כי אם יאכלו את הפסח׃"],["50","18","29","그래서 빌라도가 그들이 있는 곳으로 나와, “무슨 일로 저 사람을 고소하는 것이오?” 하고 물었다.","결국 빌라도가 밖으로 나와 그들에게 \"너희는 이 사람을 무슨 죄로 고발하느냐?\" 하고 물었다.","그러므로 빌라도가 밖으로 나가서 그들에게 말하되 너희가 무슨 일로 이 사람을 고발하느냐","그러므로 빌라도가 밖으로 저희에게 나가서 말하되 너희가 무슨 일로 이 사람을 고소하느냐","그래서 총독 빌라도가 유대인들이 있는 곳에 나와서 물었다. \"당신들은 이 사람을 왜 고발하였소? 이 사람이 무슨 고소 당할 만한 일을 하였소?\"","So Pilate came out to them and said, “What charge do you bring [against] this man?”","Pilate then went out unto them, and said, What accusation bring ye against this man?","So Pilate came out to them and asked, \"What charges are you bringing against this man?\"","Exivit ergo Pilatus ad eos foras et dicit: “Quam accusationem affertis adversus hominem hunc? “.","ויצא פילטוס אליהם ויאמר על מה תאשימו את האיש הזה׃"],["50","18","30","그들이 빌라도에게, “저자가 범죄자가 아니라면 우리가 총독께 넘기지 않았을 것이오.” 하고 대답하였다.","그들은 빌라도에게 \"이 사람이 죄인이 아니라면 우리가 왜 여기까지 끌고 왔겠습니까?\" 하고 대답하였다.","대답하여 이르되 이 사람이 행악자가 아니었더라면 우리가 당신에게 넘기지 아니하였겠나이다","대답하여 가로되 이 사람이 행악자가 아니었더면 우리가 당신에게 넘기지 아니하였겠나이다","유대인들이 의기양양해서 대답하였다. \"그가 죄인이 아니라면 우리가 왜 그를 체포하였겠습니까?\"","They answered and said to him, “If he were not a criminal, we would not have handed him over to you.”","They answered and said unto him, If he were not a malefactor, we would not have delivered him up unto thee.","\"If he were not a criminal,\" they replied, \"we would not have handed him over to you.\"","Responderunt et dixerunt ei: “Si non esset hic malefactor, non tibi tradidissemus eum “.","ויענו ויאמרו אליו לולא היה זה עשה רע כי עתה לא הסגרנהו אליך׃"],["50","18","31","빌라도가 그들에게 “여러분이 데리고 가서 여러분의 법대로 재판하시오.” 하자, 유다인들이 “우리는 누구를 죽일 권한이 없소.” 하고 말하였다.","그러자 빌라도는 \"너희가 데리고 가서 너희의 법대로 처리하여라.\" 하고 말하였다. 유다인들은 \"우리에게는 사람을 사형에 처할 권한이 없습니다.\" 하고 대답하였다.","빌라도가 이르되 너희가 그를 데려다가 너희 법대로 재판하라 유대인들이 이르되 우리에게는 사람을 죽이는 권한이 없나이다 하니","빌라도가 가로되 너희가 저를 데려다가 너희 법대로 재판하라 유대인들이 가로되 우리에게는 사람을 죽이는 권이 없나이다 하니","\"그렇다면 그를 데리고 가서 당신네 법대로 당신들이 재판하시오\" 빌라도의 이 말에 그들이 대답하였다. \"하지만 우리에게는 누구를 사형시킬 권한이 없습니다.\"","At this, Pilate said to them, “Take him yourselves, and judge him according to your law.” The Jews answered him, “We do not have the right to execute anyone,”","Then said Pilate unto them, Take ye him, and judge him according to your law. The Jews therefore said unto him, It is not lawful for us to put any man to death:","Pilate said, \"Take him yourselves and judge him by your own law.\" \"But we have no right to execute anyone,\" the Jews objected.","Dixit ergo eis Pilatus: “Accipite eum vos et secundum legem vestram iudicate eum! “. Dixerunt ei Iudaei: “Nobis non licet interficere quemquam “,","ויאמר אליהם פילטוס קחהו אתם עמכם ועשו משפטו כתורתכם ויאמרו אליו היהודים אין לנו רשיון להמית איש׃"],["50","18","32","이는 예수님께서 당신이 어떻게 죽임을 당할 것인지 가리키며 하신 말씀이 이루어지려고 그리된 것이다.","이렇게 해서 예수께서 당신이 어떻게 돌아가실 것인가를 암시하여 하신 말씀이 이루어지게 되었다.","이는 예수께서 자기가 어떠한 죽음으로 죽을 것을 가리켜 하신 말씀을 응하게 하려 함이러라","이는 예수께서 자기가 어떠한 죽음으로 죽을 것을 가리켜 하신 말씀을 응하게 하려 함이러라","이로써 예수께서 자신이 어떻게 돌아가실 것인가에 대해 하신 말씀이 이루어지게 되었다.","in order that the word of Jesus might be fulfilled that he said indicating the kind of death he would die.","That the saying of Jesus might be fulfilled, which he spake, signifying what death he should die.","This happened so that the words Jesus had spoken indicating the kind of death he was going to die would be fulfilled.","ut sermo Iesu impleretur, quem dixit, significans qua esset morte moriturus.","למלאת דבר ישוע אשר דבר לרמז אי זה מות עתיד הוא למות׃"],["50","18","33","그리하여 빌라도가 다시 총독 관저 안으로 들어가 예수님을 불러, “당신이 유다인들의 임금이오?” 하고 물었다.","빌라도는 다시 관저 안으로 들어가서 예수를 불러놓고 \"네가 유다인의 왕인가?\" 하고 물었다.","이에 빌라도가 다시 관정에 들어가 예수를 불러 이르되 네가 유대인의 왕이냐","이에 빌라도가 다시 관정에 들어가 예수를 불러 가로되 네가 유대인의 왕이냐","빌라도는 관저 안으로 되돌아가 예수를 자기 앞에 불러다 놓고 \"당신이 유대인의 왕인가?\" 하고 물었다.","So Pilate went back into the praetorium and summoned Jesus and said to him, “Are you the King of the Jews?”","Then Pilate entered into the judgment hall again, and called Jesus, and said unto him, Art thou the King of the Jews?","Pilate then went back inside the palace, summoned Jesus and asked him, \"Are you the king of the Jews?\"","Introivit ergo iterum in praetorium Pilatus et vocavit Iesum et dixit ei: “Tu es rex Iudaeorum? “.","וישב פילטוס אל בית המשפט ויקרא אל ישוע ויאמר אליו האתה הוא מלך היהודים׃"],["50","18","34","예수님께서는 “그것은 네 생각으로 하는 말이냐? 아니면 다른 사람들이 나에 관하여 너에게 말해 준 것이냐?” 하고 되물으셨다.","예수께서는 \"그것은 네 말이냐? 아니면 나에 관해서 다른 사람이 들려준 말을 듣고 하는 말이냐?\" 하고 반문하셨다.","예수께서 대답하시되 이는 네가 스스로 하는 말이냐 다른 사람들이 나에 대하여 네게 한 말이냐","예수께서 대답하시되 이는 네가 스스로 하는 말이뇨 다른 사람들이 나를 대하여 네게 한 말이뇨","예수께서 되물으셨다. \"지금 그 말이 네 생각에서 나온 것이냐? 아니면 다른 사람들의 말이냐?\"","Jesus answered, “Do you say this on your own or have others told you about me?”","Jesus answered him, Sayest thou this thing of thyself, or did others tell it thee of me?","\"Is that your own idea,\" Jesus asked, \"or did others talk to you about me?\"","Respondit Iesus: “A temetipso tu hoc dicis, an alii tibi dixerunt de me? “.","ויען אתו ישוע המלבך תדבר זאת או אחרים הגידו לך עלי׃"],["50","18","35","“나야 유다인이 아니잖소? 당신의 동족과 수석 사제들이 당신을 나에게 넘긴 것이오. 당신은 무슨 일을 저질렀소?” 하고 빌라도가 다시 물었다.","빌라도는 \"내가 유다인인 줄로 아느냐? 너를 내게 넘겨준 자들은 너희 동족과 대사제들인데 도대체 너는 무슨 일을 했느냐?\" 하고 물었다.","빌라도가 대답하되 내가 유대인이냐 네 나라 사람과 대제사장들이 너를 내게 넘겼으니 네가 무엇을 하였느냐","빌라도가 대답하되 내가 유대인이냐 네 나라 사람과 대제사장들이 너를 내게 넘겼으니 네가 무엇을 하였느냐","빌라도가 말하였다. \"내가 유대인인 줄 아는가? 당신의 동족과 대제사장들이 당신을 내게 넘긴 것이다. 도대체 당신은 무슨 일을 했는가?\"","Pilate answered, “I am not a Jew, am I? Your own nation and the chief priests handed you over to me. What have you done?”","Pilate answered, Am I a Jew? Thine own nation and the chief priests have delivered thee unto me: what hast thou done?","\"Am I a Jew?\" Pilate replied. \"It was your people and your chief priests who handed you over to me. What is it you have done?\"","Respondit Pilatus: “Numquid ego Iudaeus sum? Gens tua et pontifices tradiderunt te mihi; quid fecisti? “.","ויען פילטוס האף אנכי יהודי הלא עמך וראשי הכהנים הסגירוך אלי מה עשית׃"],["50","18","36","예수님께서 대답하셨다. “내 나라는 이 세상에 속하지 않는다. 내 나라가 이 세상에 속한다면, 내 신하들이 싸워 내가 유다인들에게 넘어가지 않게 하였을 것이다. 그러나 내 나라는 여기에 속하지 않는다.”","예수께서는 이렇게 대답하셨다. \"내 왕국은 이 세상 것이 아니다. 만일 내 왕국이 이 세상 것이라면 내 부하들이 싸워서 나를 유다인들의 손에 넘어가지 않게 했을 것이다. 내 왕국은 결코 이 세상 것이 아니다.\"","예수께서 대답하시되 내 나라는 이 세상에 속한 것이 아니니라 만일 내 나라가 이 세상에 속한 것이었더라면 내 종들이 싸워 나로 유대인들에게 넘겨지지 않게 하였으리라 이제 내 나라는 여기에 속한 것이 아니니라","예수께서 대답하시되 내 나라는 이 세상에 속한 것이 아니라 만일 내 나라가 이 세상에 속한 것이었더면 내 종들이 싸워 나로 유대인들에게 넘기우지 않게 하였으리라 이제 내 나라는 여기에 속한 것이 아니니라","그러자 예수께서 대답하셨다. \"나는 이 세상의 임금이 아니다. 만일 그랬더라면 내가 유대인 지도자들에게 붙잡혔을 때 나를 따르는 사람들이 그들에게 대항하였을 것이다. 내 왕국은 이 세상에 속한 것이 아니다.\"","Jesus answered, “My kingdom does not belong to this world. If my kingdom did belong to this world, my attendants [would] be fighting to keep me from being handed over to the Jews. But as it is, my kingdom is not here.”","Jesus answered, My kingdom is not of this world: if my kingdom were of this world, then would my servants fight, that I should not be delivered to the Jews: but now is my kingdom not from hence.","Jesus said, \"My kingdom is not of this world. If it were, my servants would fight to prevent my arrest by the Jews. But now my kingdom is from another place.\"","Respondit Iesus: “Regnum meum non est de mundo hoc; si ex hoc mundo esset regnum meum, ministri mei decertarent, ut non traderer Iudaeis; nunc autem meum regnum non est hinc “.","ויען ישוע מלכותי איננה מן העולם הזה אם היתה מלכותי מן העולם הזה כי אז נלחמו לי משרתי לבלתי המסר ביד היהודים ועתה מלכותי איננה מפה׃"],["50","18","37","빌라도가 “아무튼 당신이 임금이라는 말 아니오?” 하고 묻자, 예수님께서 그에게 대답하셨다. “내가 임금이라고 네가 말하고 있다. 나는 진리를 증언하려고 태어났으며, 진리를 증언하려고 세상에 왔다. 진리에 속한 사람은 누구나 내 목소리를 듣는다.”","\"아무튼 네가 왕이냐?\" 하고 빌라도가 묻자 예수께서는 \"내가 왕이라고 네가 말했다. 나는 오직 진리를 증언하려고 났으며 그 때문에 세상에 왔다. 진리 편에 선 사람은 내 말을 귀담아듣는다.\" 하고 대답하셨다.","빌라도가 이르되 그러면 네가 왕이 아니냐 예수께서 대답하시되 네 말과 같이 내가 왕이니라 내가 이를 위하여 태어났으며 이를 위하여 세상에 왔나니 곧 진리에 대하여 증언하려 함이로라 무릇 진리에 속한 자는 내 음성을 듣느니라 하신대","빌라도가 가로되 그러면 네가 왕이 아니냐 예수께서 대답하시되 네 말과 같이 내가 왕이니라 내가 이를 위하여 났으며 이를 위하여 세상에 왔나니 곧 진리에 대하여 증거하려 함이로라 무릇 진리에 속한 자는 내 소리를 듣느니라 하신대","빌라도가 물었다. \"그러면 당신이 왕인가?\" 예수께서 말씀하셨다. \"그렇다. 나는 네 말대로 왕이다. 나는 세상에 진리를 가지고 왔다. 진리를 사랑하는 사람은 모두 내 제자들이다.\"","So Pilate said to him, “Then you are a king?” Jesus answered, “You say I am a king. For this I was born and for this I came into the world, to testify to the truth. Everyone who belongs to the truth listens to my voice.”","Pilate therefore said unto him, Art thou a king then? Jesus answered, Thou sayest that I am a king. To this end was I born, and for this cause came I into the world, that I should bear witness unto the truth. Every one that is of the truth heareth my voice.","\"You are a king, then!\" said Pilate. Jesus answered, \"You are right in saying I am a king. In fact, for this reason I was born, and for this I came into the world, to testify to the truth. Everyone on the side of truth listens to me.\"","Dixit itaque ei Pilatus: “Ergo rex es tu? “. Respondit Iesus: “Tu dicis quia rex sum. Ego in hoc natus sum et ad hoc veni in mundum, ut testimonium perhibeam veritati; omnis, qui est ex veritate, audit meam vocem “.","ויאמר אליו פילטוס אם כן אפוא מלך אתה ויען ישוע אתה אמרת כי מלך אנכי לזה נולדתי ולזה באתי בעולם להעיד לאמת כל אשר הוא מן האמת ישמע בקולי׃"],["50","18","38","빌라도가 예수님께 말하였다. “진리가 무엇이오?” 빌라도는 이 말을 하고 다시 유다인들이 있는 곳으로 나가 그들에게 말하였다. “나는 저 사람에게서 아무런 죄목도 찾지 못하겠소.","빌라도는 예수께 \"진리가 무엇인가?\" 하고 물었다.","빌라도가 이르되 진리가 무엇이냐 하더라","빌라도가 가로되 진리가 무엇이냐 하더라","그러자 빌라도는 \"진리가 무엇인가?\" 하고 물었다.  빌라도는 다시 유대인들에게로 나가서 말하였다. \"그는 죄목을 씌울 만한 어떤 죄도 저지르지 않았소.","Pilate said to him, “What is truth?” When he had said this, he again went out to the Jews and said to them, “I find no guilt in him.","Pilate saith unto him, What is truth? And when he had said this, he went out again unto the Jews, and saith unto them, I find in him no fault at all.","\"What is truth?\" Pilate asked. With this he went out again to the Jews and said, \"I find no basis for a charge against him.","Dicit ei Pilatus: “Quid est veritas? “. Et cum hoc dixisset, iterum exivit ad Iudaeos et dicit eis: “Ego nullam invenio in eo causam.","ויאמר אליו פילטוס מה היא האמת ואחרי דברו זאת יצא שנית אל היהודים ויאמר אליהם אני לא מצאתי בו כל עון׃"],["50","18","39","그런데 여러분에게는 내가 파스카 축제 때에 죄수 하나를 풀어 주는 관습이 있소. 내가 유다인들의 임금을 풀어 주기를 원하오?”","과월절이 되면 나는 너희의 관례에 따라 죄인 하나를 놓아주곤 했는데 이번에는 이 유다인의 왕을 놓아주는 것이 어떻겠느냐?\" 하고 물었다.","유월절이면 내가 너희에게 한 사람을 놓아 주는 전례가 있으니 그러면 너희는 내가 유대인의 왕을 너희에게 놓아 주기를 원하느냐 하니","유월절이면 내가 너희에게 한 사람을 놓아 주는 전례가 있으니 그러면 너희는 내가 유대인의 왕을 너희에게 놓아 주기를 원하느냐 하니","그러니 해마다 유월절에 감옥에 있는 죄수 하나를 당신들의 요청에 따라 놓아 주는 관례대로 나는 \"유대인의 왕\"을 놓아 줄 생각인데 어떠시오?\"","But you have a custom that I release one prisoner to you at Passover. Do you want me to release to you the King of the Jews?”","But ye have a custom, that I should release unto you one at the passover: will ye therefore that I release unto you the King of the Jews?","But it is your custom for me to release to you one prisoner at the time of the Passover. Do you want me to release 'the king of the Jews'?\"","Est autem consuetudo vobis, ut unum dimittam vobis in Pascha; vultis ergo dimittam vobis regem Iudaeorum? “.","הן מנהג הוא בכם כי אשלח לכם איש אחד חפשי בפסח היש את נפשכם כי אשלח לכם את מלך היהודים׃"],["50","18","40","그러자 그들이 다시 “그 사람이 아니라 바라빠를 풀어 주시오.” 하고 외쳤다. 바라빠는 강도였다.","그러자 그들은 악을 쓰며 \"그자는 안 됩니다. 바라빠를 놓아주시오.\" 하고 소리질렀다. 바라빠는 강도였다.","그들이 또 소리 질러 이르되 이 사람이 아니라 바라바라 하니 바라바는 강도였더라","저희가 또 소리질러 가로되 이 사람이 아니라 바라바라 하니 바라바는 강도러라","그러나 그들은 소리를 지르며 \"안 됩니다. 그 사람은 안됩니다. 바라바를 놓아주시오\" 하고 외쳤다. 바라바는 강도였다.","They cried out again, “Not this one but Barabbas!” Now Barabbas was a revolutionary.","Then cried they all again, saying, Not this man, but Barabbas. Now Barabbas was a robber.","They shouted back, \"No, not him! Give us Barabbas!\" Now Barabbas had taken part in a rebellion.","Clamaverunt ergo rursum dicentes: “Non hunc sed Barabbam! “. Erat autem Barabbas latro.","ויוסיפו ויצעקו לאמר לא את האיש הזה אלא את בר אבא ובר אבא היה מרצח׃"],["50","19","1","그리하여 빌라도는 예수님을 데려다가 군사들에게 채찍질을 하게 하였다.","빌라도는 안으로 들어가서 부하들을 시켜 예수를 데려다가 매질하게 하였다.","이에 빌라도가 예수를 데려다가 채찍질하더라","이에 빌라도가 예수를 데려다가 채찍질하더라","빌라도는 예수의 웃옷을 벗기고 채찍으로 등을 내리칠 것을 명령하였다.","Then Pilate took Jesus and had him scourged.","Then Pilate therefore took Jesus, and scourged him.","Then Pilate took Jesus and had him flogged.","Tunc ergo apprehendit Pi latus Iesum et flagellavit.","אז לקח פילטוס את ישוע וייסרהו בשוטים׃"],["50","19","2","군사들은 또 가시나무로 관을 엮어 예수님 머리에 씌우고 자주색 옷을 입히고 나서,","병사들은 가시나무로 왕관을 엮어 예수의 머리에 씌우고 자홍색 용포를 입혔다.","군인들이 가시나무로 관을 엮어 그의 머리에 씌우고 자색 옷을 입히고","군병들이 가시로 면류관을 엮어 그의 머리에 씌우고 자색 옷을 입히고","군인들은 가시나무로 왕관을 만들어 예수의 머리에 씌우고 왕이 입는 자색 용포를 입힌 다음","And the soldiers wove a crown out of thorns and placed it on his head, and clothed him in a purple cloak,","And the soldiers platted a crown of thorns, and put it on his head, and they put on him a purple robe,","The soldiers twisted together a crown of thorns and put it on his head. They clothed him in a purple robe","Et milites, plectentes coronam de spinis, imposuerunt capiti eius et veste purpurea circumdederunt eum;","וישרגו אנשי הצבא עטרת קצים וישימו אתו על ראשו ויעטהו לבוש ארגמן׃"],["50","19","3","그분께 다가가 “유다인들의 임금님, 만세!” 하며 그분의 뺨을 쳐 댔다.","그리고 예수 앞에 다가서서 \"유다인의 왕 만세!\" 하고 소리치면서 그의 뺨을 때렸다.","앞에 가서 이르되 유대인의 왕이여 평안할지어다 하며 손으로 때리더라","앞에 와서 가로되 유대인의 왕이여 평안할찌어다 하며 손바닥으로 때리더라","\"유대인의 왕 만세!\"하고 조롱하면서 손바닥으로 예수의 얼굴을 때렸다.","and they came to him and said, “Hail, King of the Jews!” And they struck him repeatedly.","And said, Hail, King of the Jews! and they smote him with their hands.","and went up to him again and again, saying, \"Hail, king of the Jews!\" And they struck him in the face.","et veniebant ad eum et dicebant: “Ave, rex Iudaeorum! “, et dabant ei alapas.","ויאמרו שלום לך מלך היהודים ויכהו על הלחי׃"],["50","19","4","빌라도가 다시 나와 그들에게 말하였다. “보시오, 내가 저 사람을 여러분 앞으로 데리고 나오겠소. 내가 저 사람에게서 아무런 죄목도 찾지 못하였다는 것을 여러분도 알라는 것이오.”","빌라도는 다시 밖으로 나와서 유다인들에게 이렇게 말했다. \"그를 너희 앞에 끌어내 오겠다. 내가 그에게서 아무런 혐의도 찾아내지 못했다는 것을 너희도 이제 보면 알 것이다.\"","빌라도가 다시 밖에 나가 말하되 보라 이 사람을 데리고 너희에게 나오나니 이는 내가 그에게서 아무 죄도 찾지 못한 것을 너희로 알게 하려 함이로라 하더라","빌라도가 다시 밖에 나가 말하되 보라 이 사람을 데리고 너희에게 나오나니 이는 내가 그에게서 아무 죄도 찾지 못한 것을 너희로 알게 하려 함이로라 하더라","빌라도는 다시 밖으로 나가서 유대인들에게 말하였다. \"내가 이제 그를 당신들 앞에 끌어내 오겠소. 하지만 나는 그에게서 아무 죄도 찾지 못하였다는 것을 분명히 밝혀두는 바요.\"","Once more Pilate went out and said to them, “Look, I am bringing him out to you, so that you may know that I find no guilt in him.”","Pilate therefore went forth again, and saith unto them, Behold, I bring him forth to you, that ye may know that I find no fault in him.","Once more Pilate came out and said to the Jews, \"Look, I am bringing him out to you to let you know that I find no basis for a charge against him.\"","Et exiit iterum Pilatus foras et dicit eis: “Ecce adduco vobis eum foras, ut cognoscatis quia in eo invenio causam nullam “.","ויצא פילטוס עוד החוצה ויאמר אליהם הנני מוציא אתו אליכם למען תדעו כי לא מצאתי בו כל עון׃"],["50","19","5","이윽고 예수님께서 가시나무 관을 쓰시고 자주색 옷을 입으신 채 밖으로 나오셨다. 그러자 빌라도가 그들에게 “자, 이 사람이오.” 하고 말하였다.","예수께서는 가시관을 머리에 쓰시고 자홍색 용포를 걸치시고 밖으로 나오셨다. 빌라도는 사람들에게 예수를 가리켜 보이며 \"자, 이 사람이다.\" 하고 말하였다.","이에 예수께서 가시관을 쓰고 자색 옷을 입고 나오시니 빌라도가 그들에게 말하되 보라 이 사람이로다 하매","이에 예수께서 가시 면류관을 쓰고 자색 옷을 입고 나오시니 빌라도가 저희에게 말하되 보라 이 사람이로다 하매","예수께서 가시관을 쓰고 자색 용포를 입은 채 밖으로 끌려 나오시자 빌라도가 말하였다. \"보시오, 이 사람이오!\"","So Jesus came out, wearing the crown of thorns and the purple cloak. And he said to them, “Behold, the man!”","Then came Jesus forth, wearing the crown of thorns, and the purple robe. And Pilate saith unto them, Behold the man!","When Jesus came out wearing the crown of thorns and the purple robe, Pilate said to them, \"Here is the man!\"","Exiit ergo Iesus foras, portans spineam coronam et purpureum vestimentum. Et dicit eis: “Ecce homo! “.","וישוע יצא החוץ ועליו עטרת הקצים ולבוש הארגמן ויאמר אליהם פילטוס הנה האדם׃"],["50","19","6","그때에 수석 사제들과 성전 경비병들은 예수님을 보고, “십자가에 못 박으시오! 십자가에 못 박으시오!” 하고 외쳤다. 빌라도가 그들에게 “여러분이 데려다가 십자가에 못 박으시오. 나는 이 사람에게서 죄목을 찾지 못하겠소.” 하자,","대사제들과 경비병들은 예수를 보자마자 \"십자가에 못박으시오. 십자가에!\" 하며 큰소리로 외쳤다. 그러자 빌라도는 \"그러면 데려다가 너희의 손으로 십자가에 못박아라. 나는 그에게서 아무 죄목도 찾아내지 못하였다.\" 하고 말하였다.","대제사장들과 아랫사람들이 예수를 보고 소리 질러 이르되 십자가에 못 박으소서 십자가에 못 박으소서 하는지라 빌라도가 이르되 너희가 친히 데려다가 십자가에 못 박으라 나는 그에게서 죄를 찾지 못하였노라","대제사장들과 하속들이 예수를 보고 소리질러 가로되 십자가에 못 박게 하소서 십자가에 못 박게 하소서 하는지라 빌라도가 가로되 너희가 친히 데려다가 십자가에 못 박으라 나는 그에게서 죄를 찾지 못하노라","대제사장들과 유대인 관리들은 예수를 보자마자 \"십자가에 못박으시오! 십자가에 못박으시오!\" 하고 소리 질렀다. \"당신들이 십자가에 다시오. 나는 그에게서 아무 죄도 찾지 못하였소\" 빌라도가 이렇게 말하자","When the chief priests and the guards saw him they cried out, “Crucify him, crucify him!” Pilate said to them, “Take him yourselves and crucify him. I find no guilt in him.”","When the chief priests therefore and officers saw him, they cried out, saying, Crucify him, crucify him. Pilate saith unto them, Take ye him, and crucify him: for I find no fault in him.","As soon as the chief priests and their officials saw him, they shouted, \"Crucify! Crucify!\" But Pilate answered, \"You take him and crucify him. As for me, I find no basis for a charge against him.\"","Cum ergo vidissent eum pontifices et ministri, clamaverunt dicentes: “Crucifige, crucifige! “. Dicit eis Pilatus: “Accipite eum vos et crucifigite; ego enim non invenio in eo causam “.","ויהי כאשר ראהו הכהנים הגדולים והמשרתים ויצעקו לאמר הצלב הצלב ויאמר אליהם פילטוס קחהו אתם והצליבהו כי אנכי לא מצאתי בו אשמה׃"],["50","19","7","유다인들이 그에게 대답하였다. “우리에게는 율법이 있소. 이 율법에 따르면 그자는 죽어 마땅하오. 자기가 하느님의 아들이라고 자처하였기 때문이오.”","유다인들은 또다시 \"우리에게는 율법이 있습니다. 그 율법대로 하면 그자는 제가 하느님의 아들이라고 했으니 죽어 마땅합니다.\" 하고 대꾸하였다.","유대인들이 대답하되 우리에게 법이 있으니 그 법대로 하면 그가 당연히 죽을 것은 그가 자기를 하나님의 아들이라 함이니이다","유대인들이 대답하되 우리에게 법이 있으니 그 법대로 하면 저가 당연히 죽을 것은 저가 자기를 하나님 아들이라 함이니이다","유대인들은 \"그는 스스로 하나님의 아들이라고 한 자입니다. 우리 율법에 따르면 그런 자아 마땅히 사형에 처해야 합니다\" 하고 외쳐 댔다.","The Jews answered, “We have a law, and according to that law he ought to die, because he made himself the Son of God.”","The Jews answered him, We have a law, and by our law he ought to die, because he made himself the Son of God.","The Jews insisted, \"We have a law, and according to that law he must die, because he claimed to be the Son of God.\"","Responderunt ei Iudaei: “Nos legem habemus, et secundum legem debet mori, quia Filium Dei se fecit “.","ויענו היהודים תורה יש לנו ועל פי תורתנו חיב מות הוא כי עשה עצמו לבן אלהים׃"],["50","19","8","빌라도는 이 말을 듣고 더욱 두려운 생각이 들었다.","빌라도는 이 말을 듣고 더욱 두려운 마음이 들어","빌라도가 이 말을 듣고 더욱 두려워하여","빌라도가 이 말을 듣고 더욱 두려워하여","이 말을 듣고 빌라도는 더욱 두려운 생각이 들어","Now when Pilate heard this statement, he became even more afraid,","When Pilate therefore heard that saying, he was the more afraid;","When Pilate heard this, he was even more afraid,","Cum ergo audisset Pilatus hunc sermonem, magis timuit","ויהי כשמע פילטוס את הדבר הזה ויאסף לרא עוד׃"],["50","19","9","그리하여 다시 총독 관저로 들어가 예수님께, “당신은 어디서 왔소?” 하고 물었다. 그러나 예수님께서는 그에게 아무 대답도 하지 않으셨다.","예수를 데리고 안으로 들어가 \"도대체 너는 어디에서 온 사람이냐?\" 하고 물었다. 예수께서는 아무 대답도 하지 않으셨다.","다시 관정에 들어가서 예수께 말하되 너는 어디로부터냐 하되 예수께서 대답하여 주지 아니하시는지라","다시 관정에 들어가서 예수께 말하되 너는 어디로서냐 하되 예수께서 대답하여 주지 아니하시는지라","예수를 관저 안으로 다시 데리고 들어가서 물었다. \"당신은 어디서 왔는가?\" 그러나 예수께서는 아무 대답을 하시지 않았다.","and went back into the praetorium and said to Jesus, “Where are you from?” Jesus did not answer him.","And went again into the judgment hall, and saith unto Jesus, Whence art thou? But Jesus gave him no answer.","and he went back inside the palace. \"Where do you come from?\" he asked Jesus, but Jesus gave him no answer.","et ingressus est praetorium iterum et dicit ad Iesum: “Unde es tu? “. Iesus autem responsum non dedit ei.","וישב ויבא אל בית המשפט ויאמר אל ישוע מאין אתה ולא השיבו ישוע דבר׃"],["50","19","10","그러자 빌라도가 예수님께 말하였다. “나에게 말을 하지 않을 작정이오? 나는 당신을 풀어 줄 권한도 있고 당신을 십자가에 못 박을 권한도 있다는 것을 모르시오?”","\"나에게도 말을 하지 않을 작정이냐? 나에게는 너를 놓아줄 수도 있고 십자가형에 처할 수도 있는 권한이 있는 줄을 모르느냐?\" 빌라도의 이 말에","빌라도가 이르되 내게 말하지 아니하느냐 내가 너를 놓을 권한도 있고 십자가에 못 박을 권한도 있는 줄 알지 못하느냐","빌라도가 가로되 내게 말하지 아니하느냐 내가 너를 놓을 권세도 있고 십자가에 못 박을 권세도 있는줄 알지 못하느냐","\"내게 말하지 않을 작정인가? 내게는 너를 놓아줄 권한도, 십자가에 못박을 권한도 있다는 것을 모르는가?\" 하고 빌라도가 말하자","So Pilate said to him, “Do you not speak to me? Do you not know that I have power to release you and I have power to crucify you?”","Then saith Pilate unto him, Speakest thou not unto me? knowest thou not that I have power to crucify thee, and have power to release thee?","\"Do you refuse to speak to me?\" Pilate said. \"Don't you realize I have power either to free you or to crucify you?\"","Dicit ergo ei Pilatus: “Mihi non loqueris? Nescis quia potestatem habeo dimittere te et potestatem habeo crucifigere te? “.","ויאמר אליו פילטוס אלי לא תדבר הלא ידעת כי יש לאל ידי לצלבך ויש לאל ידי לשלחך׃"],["50","19","11","예수님께서 그에게 대답하셨다. “네가 위로부터 받지 않았으면 나에 대해 아무런 권한도 없었을 것이다. 그러므로 나를 너에게 넘긴 자의 죄가 더 크다.”","예수께서는 이렇게 대답하셨다. \"네가 하늘에서 권한을 받지 않았다면 나를 어떻게도 할 수 없을 것이다. 그러므로 나를 너에게 넘겨준 사람의 죄가 더 크다.\"","예수께서 대답하시되 위에서 주지 아니하셨더라면 나를 해할 권한이 없었으리니 그러므로 나를 네게 넘겨 준 자의 죄는 더 크다 하시니라","예수께서 대답하시되 위에서 주지 아니하셨더면 나를 해할 권세가 없었으리니 그러므로 나를 네게 넘겨 준 자의 죄는 더 크니라 하시니","그제서야 예수께서 말씀하셨다. \"네가 하나님께 권한을 받지 않았던들 나를 어떻게 할 수 없었을 것이다. 그러므로 나를 네게 넘겨 준 자들의 죄가 더 크다.\"","Jesus answered [him], “You would have no power over me if it had not been given to you from above. For this reason the one who handed me over to you has the greater sin.”","Jesus answered, Thou couldest have no power at all against me, except it were given thee from above: therefore he that delivered me unto thee hath the greater sin.","Jesus answered, \"You would have no power over me if it were not given to you from above. Therefore the one who handed me over to you is guilty of a greater sin.\"","Respondit Iesus: “Non haberes potestatem adversum me ullam, nisi tibi esset datum desuper; propterea, qui tradidit me tibi, maius peccatum habet “.","ויען ישוע לא היתה לך רשות עלי לולא נתן לך מלמעלה לכן עון המסגיר אתי אליך גדול מעונך׃"],["50","19","12","그때부터 빌라도는 예수님을 풀어 줄 방도를 찾았다. 그러나 유다인들은 “그 사람을 풀어 주면 총독께서는 황제의 친구가 아니오. 누구든지 자기가 임금이라고 자처하는 자는 황제에게 대항하는 것이오.” 하고 외쳤다.","이 말을 들은 빌라도는 예수를 놓아줄 기회를 찾기 시작하였다. 그러나 유다인들은 \"만일 그자를 놓아준다면 총독님은 카이사르의 충신이 아닙니다. 누구든지 자기를 왕이라고 하는 자는 카이사르의 적이 아닙니까?\" 하고 큰소리로 외쳤다.","이러하므로 빌라도가 예수를 놓으려고 힘썼으나 유대인들이 소리 질러 이르되 이 사람을 놓으면 가이사의 충신이 아니니이다 무릇 자기를 왕이라 하는 자는 가이사를 반역하는 것이니이다","이러하므로 빌라도가 예수를 놓으려고 힘썼으나 유대인들이 소리질러 가로되 이 사람을 놓으면 가이사의 충신이 아니니이다 무릇 자기를 왕이라 하는 자는 가이사를 반역하는 것이니이다","빌라도는 가능한 한 예수를 놓아 주고 싶었다. 그러나 유대인 지도자들이 큰소리로 말하였다. \"만일 총독께서 이 자를 놓아 주신다면 각하는 가이사의 충신이 아닙니다. 누구든지 자기를 왕이라고 하는 자는 가이사를 반역하는 자입니다.\"","Consequently, Pilate tried to release him; but the Jews cried out, “If you release him, you are not a Friend of Caesar. Everyone who makes himself a king opposes Caesar.”","And from thenceforth Pilate sought to release him: but the Jews cried out, saying, If thou let this man go, thou art not Caesar's friend: whosoever maketh himself a king speaketh against Caesar.","From then on, Pilate tried to set Jesus free, but the Jews kept shouting, \"If you let this man go, you are no friend of Caesar. Anyone who claims to be a king opposes Caesar.\"","Exinde quaerebat Pilatus dimittere eum; Iudaei autem clamabant dicentes: “Si hunc dimittis, non es amicus Caesaris! Omnis, qui se regem facit, contradicit Caesari “.","אז יבקש פילטוס לשלחו והיהודים צעקו ויאמרו אם תשלח את זה אינך אהב לקיסר כי כל המתנשא להיות מלך מרד הוא בקיסר׃"],["50","19","13","빌라도는 이 말을 듣고 예수님을 밖으로 데리고 나가 리토스트로토스라고 하는 곳에 있는 재판석에 앉았다. 리토스트로토스는 히브리 말로 가빠타라고 한다.","빌라도는 이 말을 듣고 예수를 데리고 나와 리토스트로토스라 하는 자리에 올라가 자기 재판관석에 앉았다. 리토스트로토스라는 말은 히브리 말로 가빠타라고 하는데 '돌 깔아놓은 자리'라는 뜻이다.","빌라도가 이 말을 듣고 예수를 끌고 나가서 돌을 깐 뜰(히브리 말로 가바다)에 있는 재판석에 앉아 있더라","빌라도가 이 말을 듣고 예수를 끌고 나와서 박석(히브리 말로 가바다)이란 곳에서 재판석에 앉았더라","이 말을 듣고 빌라도는 다시 예수를 그들 앞에 데리고 나와 돌을 깔아놓은 광장 위에 있는 재판석에 앉았다.","When Pilate heard these words he brought Jesus out and seated him on the judge’s bench in the place called Stone Pavement, in Hebrew, Gabbatha.","When Pilate therefore heard that saying, he brought Jesus forth, and sat down in the judgment seat in a place that is called the Pavement, but in the Hebrew, Gabbatha.","When Pilate heard this, he brought Jesus out and sat down on the judge's seat at a place known as the Stone Pavement (which in Aramaic is Gabbatha).","Pilatus ergo, cum audisset hos sermones, adduxit foras Iesum et sedit pro tribunali in locum, qui dicitur Lithostrotos, Hebraice autem Gabbatha.","ויהי כשמע פילטוס את הדבר הזה הוציא את ישוע החוצה וישב על כסא המשפט במקום הנקרא בשם רצפה ובלשונם גבתא׃"],["50","19","14","그날은 파스카 축제 준비일이었고 때는 낮 열두 시쯤이었다. 빌라도가 유다인들에게 말하였다. “보시오, 여러분의 임금이오.”","그 날은 과월절 준비일이었고 때는 낮 열두 시쯤이었다. 빌라도는 유다인들을 둘러보며 \"자, 여기 너희의 왕이 있다.\" 하고 말하였다.","이 날은 유월절의 준비일이요 때는 제육시라 빌라도가 유대인들에게 이르되 보라 너희 왕이로다","이 날은 유월절의 예비일이요 때는 제 육시라 빌라도가 유대인들에게 이르되 보라 너희 왕이로다","때는 바로 유월절 전날 낮 열두 시쯤이었다. 빌라도가 유대인들에게 말하였다. \"자. 여기 당신들의 왕이 있소.\"","It was preparation day for Passover, and it was about noon. And he said to the Jews, “Behold, your king!”","And it was the preparation of the passover, and about the sixth hour: and he saith unto the Jews, Behold your King!","It was the day of Preparation of Passover Week, about the sixth hour. \"Here is your king,\" Pilate said to the Jews.","Erat autem Parasceve Paschae, hora erat quasi sexta. Et dicit Iudaeis: “Ecce rex vester! “.","ואז היתה הכנת הפסח והשעה כשעה הששית ויאמר אל היהודים הנה מלככם והם צעקו טול טול צלב אתו׃"],["50","19","15","그러자 그들이 외쳤다. “없애 버리시오. 없애 버리시오. 그를 십자가에 못 박으시오.” 빌라도가 그들에게 “여러분의 임금을 십자가에 못 박으라는 말이오?” 하고 물으니, 수석 사제들이 “우리 임금은 황제뿐이오.” 하고 대답하였다.","그들은 \"죽이시오. 죽이시오. 십자가에 못박아 죽이시오!\" 하고 외쳤다. 빌라도가 \"너희의 왕을 나더러 십자가형에 처하란 말이냐?\" 하고 말하자 대사제들은 \"우리의 왕은 카이사르밖에는 없습니다.\" 하고 대답하였다.","그들이 소리 지르되 없이 하소서 없이 하소서 그를 십자가에 못 박게 하소서 빌라도가 이르되 내가 너희 왕을 십자가에 못 박으랴 대제사장들이 대답하되 가이사 외에는 우리에게 왕이 없나이다 하니","저희가 소리지르되 없이 하소서 없이 하소서 저를 십자가에 못 박게 하소서 빌라도가 가로되 내가 너희 왕을 십자가에 못 박으랴 대제사장들이 대답하되 가이사 외에는 우리에게 왕이 없나이다 하니","그들이 소리쳤다. \"죽이시오. 죽이시오. 십자가에 못박으시오.\" \"뭐라고? 당신들의 왕을 나더러 십자가에 못박으란 말이오?\" 빌라도가 되묻자 \"가이사 외에는 우리에게 왕이 없습니다\" 하고 대제사장들이 소리질렀다.","They cried out, “Take him away, take him away! Crucify him!” Pilate said to them, “Shall I crucify your king?” The chief priests answered, “We have no king but Caesar.”","But they cried out, Away with him, away with him, crucify him. Pilate saith unto them, Shall I crucify your King? The chief priests answered, We have no king but Caesar.","But they shouted, \"Take him away! Take him away! Crucify him!\" \"Shall I crucify your king?\" Pilate asked. \"We have no king but Caesar,\" the chief priests answered.","Clamaverunt ergo illi: “Tolle, tolle, crucifige eum! “. Dicit eis Pilatus: “Regem vestrum crucifigam? “. Responderunt pontifices: “Non habemus regem, nisi Caesarem “.","ויאמר אליהם פילטוס הצלב אצלב את מלככם ויענו ראשי הכהנים אין לנו מלך כי אם הקיסר׃"],["50","19","16","그리하여 빌라도는 예수님을 십자가에 못 박으라고 그들에게 넘겨주었다. 그들은 예수님을 넘겨받았다.","그래서 빌라도는 예수를 십자가에 못박으라고 그들에게 내어주었다.","이에 예수를 십자가에 못 박도록 그들에게 넘겨 주니라","이에 예수를 십자가에 못 박히게 저희에게 넘겨주니라","그러자 빌라도는 예수를 십자가에 못박으라고 그들에게 내어 주었다.","Then he handed him over to them to be crucified. So they took Jesus,","Then delivered he him therefore unto them to be crucified. And they took Jesus, and led him away.","Finally Pilate handed him over to them to be crucified. So the soldiers took charge of Jesus.","Tunc ergo tradidit eis illum, ut crucifigeretur. Susceperunt ergo Iesum.","אז מסרו אליהם להצליבו ויקחו את ישוע ויוליכהו׃"],["50","19","17","예수님께서는 몸소 십자가를 지시고 ‘해골 터’라는 곳으로 나가셨다. 그곳은 히브리 말로 골고타라고 한다.","몸소 십자가를 지시고 성밖을 나가 히브리 말로 골고타라는 곳으로 향하셨다. 골고타라는 말은 해골산이란 뜻이다.","그들이 예수를 맡으매 예수께서 자기의 십자가를 지시고 해골(히브리 말로 골고다)이라 하는 곳에 나가시니","저희가 예수를 맡으매 예수께서 자기의 십자가를 지시고 해골(히브리 말로 골고다)이라 하는 곳에 나오시니","마침내 예수께서는 그들의 손에 넘겨졌다. 그들은 예수에게 십자가를 지워 성밖으로 나가 히브리 말로 골고다라 불리는 곳으로 데리고 갔다. 골고다란 \"해골산\"이라는 뜻이다.","and carrying the cross himself he went out to what is called the Place of the Skull, in Hebrew, Golgotha.","And he bearing his cross went forth into a place called the place of a skull, which is called in the Hebrew Golgotha:","Carrying his own cross, he went out to the place of the Skull (which in Aramaic is called Golgotha).","Et baiulans sibi crucem exivit in eum, qui dicitur Calvariae locum, quod Hebraice dicitur Golgotha,","וישא את צלבו ויצא אל המקום הנקרא מקום הגלגלת ובלשונם גלגלתא׃"],["50","19","18","거기에서 그들은 예수님을 십자가에 못 박았다. 그리고 다른 두 사람도 예수님을 가운데로 하여 이쪽 저쪽에 하나씩 못 박았다.","여기서 그들은 예수를 십자가에 못박았다. 그리고 다른 두 사람도 십자가에 달아 예수를 가운데로 하여 그 양쪽에 하나씩 세워놓았다.","그들이 거기서 예수를 십자가에 못 박을새 다른 두 사람도 그와 함께 좌우편에 못 박으니 예수는 가운데 있더라","저희가 거기서 예수를 십자가에 못 박을쌔 다른 두 사람도 그와 함께 좌우편에 못 박으니 예수는 가운데 있더라","거기서 그들은 예수를 십자가에 못박았다. 예수를 중간에 두고 양편에 다른 죄수 두 명도 함께 십자가에 달아 세워 놓았다.","There they crucified him, and with him two others, one on either side, with Jesus in the middle.","Where they crucified him, and two other with him, on either side one, and Jesus in the midst.","Here they crucified him, and with him two others--one on each side and Jesus in the middle.","ubi eum crucifixerunt et cum eo alios duos hinc et hinc, medium autem Iesum.","ויצלבו אתו שמה ושני אנשים אחרים עמו מזה אחד ומזה אחד וישוע בתוך׃"],["50","19","19","빌라도는 명패를 써서 십자가 위에 달게 하였는데, 거기에는 ‘유다인들의 임금 나자렛 사람 예수’라고 쓰여 있었다.","빌라도가 명패를 써서 십자가 위에 붙였는데 거기에는 \"유다인의 왕 나자렛 예수\" 라고 씌어 있었다.","빌라도가 패를 써서 십자가 위에 붙이니 나사렛 예수 유대인의 왕이라 기록되었더라","빌라도가 패를 써서 십자가 위에 붙이니 나사렛 예수 유대인의 왕이라 기록되었더라","빌라도는 예수의 십자가 위에 \"유대인의 왕 나사렛 예수\"라고 쓴 표지판을 붙였다.","Pilate also had an inscription written and put on the cross. It read, “Jesus the Nazorean, the King of the Jews.”","And Pilate wrote a title, and put it on the cross. And the writing was JESUS OF NAZARETH THE KING OF THE JEWS.","Pilate had a notice prepared and fastened to the cross. It read: JESUS OF NAZARETH, THE KING OF THE JEWS.","Scripsit autem et titulum Pilatus et posuit super crucem; erat autem scriptum: “Iesus Nazarenus Rex Iudaeorum “.","ופילטוס כתב על לוח וישם על הצלב וזה מכתבו ישוע הנצרי מלך היהודים׃"],["50","19","20","예수님께서 십자가에 못 박히신 곳이 도성에서 가까웠기 때문에, 많은 유다인이 그 명패를 읽게 되었다. 그것은 히브리 말, 라틴 말, 그리스 말로 쓰여 있었다.","그 명패는 히브리 말과 라틴 말과 그리스 말로 적혀 있었다. 예수께서 십자가에 달리신 곳이 예루살렘에서 가깝기 때문에 많은 유다인들이 와서 그것을 읽어보았다.","예수께서 못 박히신 곳이 성에서 가까운 고로 많은 유대인이 이 패를 읽는데 히브리와 로마와 헬라 말로 기록되었더라","예수의 못 박히신 곳이 성에서 가까운고로 많은 유대인이 이 패를 읽는데 히브리와 로마와 헬라 말로 기록되었더라","예수께서 십자가에 못박히신 곳은 예루살렘 성내에서 가까운데다 그 표지판은 히브리 말, 라틴 말, 헬라 말로 써놓았기 때문에 많은 사람이 그것을 읽었다.","Now many of the Jews read this inscription, because the place where Jesus was crucified was near the city; and it was written in Hebrew, Latin, and Greek.","This title then read many of the Jews: for the place where Jesus was crucified was nigh to the city: and it was written in Hebrew, and Greek, and Latin.","Many of the Jews read this sign, for the place where Jesus was crucified was near the city, and the sign was written in Aramaic, Latin and Greek.","Hunc ergo titulum multi legerunt Iudaeorum, quia prope civitatem erat locus, ubi crucifixus est Iesus; et erat scriptum Hebraice, Latine, Graece.","ויהודים רבים קראו את המכתב הזה כי המקום אשר נצלב שם ישוע היה קרוב אל העיר והמכתב היה בלשון עבר יון ורומי׃"],["50","19","21","그래서 유다인들의 수석 사제들이 빌라도에게 말하였다. “‘유다인들의 임금’이라고 쓸 것이 아니라, ‘나는 유다인들의 임금이다.’ 하고 저자가 말하였다고 쓰시오.”","유다인들의 대사제들은 빌라도에게 가서 \"'유다인의 왕'이라 쓰지 말고 '자칭 유다인의 왕'이라고 써붙여야 합니다.\" 하고 말하였으나","유대인의 대제사장들이 빌라도에게 이르되 유대인의 왕이라 쓰지 말고 자칭 유대인의 왕이라 쓰라 하니","유대인의 대제사장들이 빌라도에게 이르되 유대인의 왕이라 말고 자칭 유대인의 왕이라 쓰라 하니","대제사장들이 빌라도에게 가서 \"유대인의 왕이라고 쓴 것을 \"자칭 유대인의 왕\"으로 고쳐 주십시오\" 하고 말하였다.","So the chief priests of the Jews said to Pilate, “Do not write ‘The King of the Jews,’ but that he said, ‘I am the King of the Jews.’”","Then said the chief priests of the Jews to Pilate, Write not, The King of the Jews; but that he said, I am King of the Jews.","The chief priests of the Jews protested to Pilate, \"Do not write 'The King of the Jews,' but that this man claimed to be king of the Jews.\"","Dicebant ergo Pilato pontifices Iudaeorum: “Noli scribere: Rex Iudaeorum, sed: Ipse dixit: “Rex sum Iudaeorum “ “.","ויאמרו ראשי כהני היהודים אל פילטוס אל נא תכתב מלך היהודים כי אם אשר אמר אני מלך היהודים׃"],["50","19","22","그러나 빌라도는 “내가 한번 썼으면 그만이오.” 하고 대답하였다.","빌라도는 \"한번 썼으면 그만이다.\" 하고 거절하였다.","빌라도가 대답하되 내가 쓸 것을 썼다 하니라","빌라도가 대답하되 나의 쓸 것을 썼다 하니라","그러나 빌라도는 \"내가 쓸 것을 썼을 뿐이오. 바꿔 쓸 수 없소\" 하고 대답하였다.","Pilate answered, “What I have written, I have written.”","Pilate answered, What I have written I have written.","Pilate answered, \"What I have written, I have written.\"","Respondit Pilatus: “Quod scripsi, scripsi! “.","ויען פילטוס ויאמר את אשר כתבתי כתבתי׃"],["50","19","23","군사들은 예수님을 십자가에 못 박고 나서, 그분의 옷을 가져다가 네 몫으로 나누어 저마다 한몫씩 차지하였다. 속옷도 가져갔는데 그것은 솔기가 없이 위에서부터 통으로 짠 것이었다.","예수를 십자가에 못박아 단 병사들은 예수의 옷가지를 가져다가 네 몫으로 나누어서 한 몫씩 차지하였다. 그러나 속옷은 위에서 아래까지 혼솔 없이 통으로 짠 것이었으므로","군인들이 예수를 십자가에 못 박고 그의 옷을 취하여 네 깃에 나눠 각각 한 깃씩 얻고 속옷도 취하니 이 속옷은 호지 아니하고 위에서부터 통으로 짠 것이라","군병들이 예수를 십자가에 못 박고 그의 옷을 취하여 네 깃에 나눠 각각 한 깃씩 얻고 속옷도 취하니 이 속옷은 호지 아니하고 위에서부터 통으로 짠 것이라","예수를 십자가에 못박은 군인들은 예수의 겉옷을 네 몫으로 나누어 한몫씩 차지한 후 속옷은 이음매가 없는 것이므로 \"속옷은 찢지 말고 누가 차지하게 될 것인지 제비를 뽑자\" 고 말하였다. 이렇게 해서 ㄱ) \"그들은 내 옷자락 나누어 갖고 또 더 나누어 가지려고 제비 뽑았다\" 라고 한 성경의 말씀이 이루어졌다. 이것이 그들이 한 짓이었다. (ㄱ. 시22:18)","When the soldiers had crucified Jesus, they took his clothes and divided them into four shares, a share for each soldier. They also took his tunic, but the tunic was seamless, woven in one piece from the top down.","Then the soldiers, when they had crucified Jesus, took his garments, and made four parts, to every soldier a part; and also his coat: now the coat was without seam, woven from the top throughout.","When the soldiers crucified Jesus, they took his clothes, dividing them into four shares, one for each of them, with the undergarment remaining. This garment was seamless, woven in one piece from top to bottom.","Milites ergo cum crucifixissent Iesum, acceperunt vestimenta eius et fecerunt quattuor partes, unicuique militi partem, et tunicam. Erat autem tunica inconsutilis, desuper contexta per totum.","ויהי כאשר צלבו אנשי הצבא את ישוע ויקחו את בגדיו ויחלקום לארבעה חלקים לאיש איש חלק אחד וגם את כתנתו והכתנת לא היתה תפורה כי אם מעשה ארג מלמעלה ועד קצה׃"],["50","19","24","그래서 그들은 서로, “이것은 찢지 말고 누구 차지가 될지 제비를 뽑자.” 하고 말하였다. “그들이 제 옷을 저희끼리 나누어 가지고 제 속옷을 놓고서는 제비를 뽑았습니다.” 하신 성경 말씀이 이루어지려고 그리된 것이다. 그래서 군사들이 그렇게 하였다.","그들은 의논 끝에 \"이것은 찢지 말고 누구든 제비를 뽑아 차지하기로 하자.\" 하여 그대로 하였다. 이리하여 \"1)그들은 내 겉옷을 나누어가지며 내 속옷을 놓고는 제비를 뽑았다.\" 하신 성서의 말씀이 이루어졌다.시편 22:18.","군인들이 서로 말하되 이것을 찢지 말고 누가 얻나 제비 뽑자 하니 이는 성경에 ㄱ)그들이 내 옷을 나누고 내 옷을 제비 뽑나이다 한 것을 응하게 하려 함이러라 군인들은 이런 일을 하고","군병들이 서로 말하되 이것을 찢지 말고 누가 얻나 제비 뽑자 하니 이는 성경에 ㄱ)저희가 내 옷을 나누고 내 옷을 제비 뽑나이다 한 것을 응하게 하려 함이러라 군병들은 이런 일을 하고 시 22:18","(23절에 포함되어 있음)","So they said to one another, “Let’s not tear it, but cast lots for it to see whose it will be,” in order that the passage of scripture might be fulfilled [that says]: “They divided my garments among them, and for my vesture they cast lots.” This is what the soldiers did.","They said therefore among themselves, Let us not rend it, but cast lots for it, whose it shall be: that the scripture might be fulfilled, which saith, They parted my raiment among them, and for my vesture they did cast lots. These things therefore the soldiers did.","\"Let's not tear it,\" they said to one another. \"Let's decide by lot who will get it.\" This happened that the scripture might be fulfilled which said, \"They divided my garments among them and cast lots for my clothing.\" So this is what the soldiers did.","Dixerunt ergo ad invicem: “Non scindamus eam, sed sortiamur de illa,cuius sit “, ut Scriptura impleatur dicens:  “Partiti sunt vestimenta mea sibi et in vestem meam miserunt sortem “. Et milites quidem haec fecerunt.","ויאמרו איש אל אחיו אל נא נקרעה לקרעים אך נפיל עליה גורל למי תהיה למלאת דבר הכתוב יחלקו בגדי להם ועל לבושי יפילו גורל ויעשו כן אנשי הצבא׃"],["50","19","25","예수님의 십자가 곁에는 그분의 어머니와 이모, 클로파스의 아내 마리아와 마리아 막달레나가 서 있었다.","예수의 십자가 밑에는 그 어머니와 이모와 글레오파의 아내 마리아와 막달라 여자 마리아가 서 있었다.","예수의 십자가 곁에는 그 어머니와 이모와 글로바의 아내 마리아와 막달라 마리아가 섰는지라","예수의 십자가 곁에는 그 모친과 이모와 글로바의 아내 마리아와 막달라 마리아가 섰는지라","예수의 십자가 가까이에는 예수의 어머니 마리아와 이모, 글로바의 아내 마리아와 막달라 마리아가 서 있었다.","Standing by the cross of Jesus were his mother and his mother’s sister, Mary the wife of Clopas, and Mary of Magdala.","Now there stood by the cross of Jesus his mother, and his mother's sister, Mary the wife of Cleophas, and Mary Magdalene.","Near the cross of Jesus stood his mother, his mother's sister, Mary the wife of Clopas, and Mary Magdalene.","Stabant autem iuxta crucem Iesu mater eius et soror matris eius, Maria Cleopae, et Maria Magdalene.","ועל יד צלב ישוע עמדו אמו ואחות אמו מרים אשת קלופס ומרים המגדלית׃"],["50","19","26","예수님께서는 당신의 어머니와 그 곁에 선 사랑하시는 제자를 보시고, 어머니에게 말씀하셨다. “여인이시여, 이 사람이 어머니의 아들입니다.”","예수께서는 당신의 어머니와 그 곁에 서 있는 사랑하시는 제자를 보시고 먼저 어머니에게 \"어머니, 이 사람이 어머니의 아들입니다.\" 하시고","예수께서 자기의 어머니와 사랑하시는 제자가 곁에 서 있는 것을 보시고 자기 어머니께 말씀하시되 여자여 보소서 아들이니이다 하시고","예수께서 그 모친과 사랑하시는 제자가 곁에 섰는 것을 보시고 그 모친께 말씀하시되 여자여 보소서 아들이니이다 하시고","예수께서는 자신의 어머니 곁에 사랑하는 제자가 서 있는 것을 보시자 어머니에게 \"이 사람이 어머니의 아들입니다\" 하고 말씀하셨다.","When Jesus saw his mother and the disciple there whom he loved, he said to his mother, “Woman, behold, your son.”","When Jesus therefore saw his mother, and the disciple standing by, whom he loved, he saith unto his mother, Woman, behold thy son!","When Jesus saw his mother there, and the disciple whom he loved standing nearby, he said to his mother, \"Dear woman, here is your son,\"","Cum vidisset ergo Iesus matrem et discipulum stantem, quem diligebat, dicit matri: “Mulier, ecce filius tuus “.","וירא ישוע את אמו ואת תלמידו אשר אהב עמדים אצלו ויאמר אל אמו אשה הנה זה בנך׃"],["50","19","27","이어서 그 제자에게 “이분이 네 어머니시다.” 하고 말씀하셨다. 그때부터 그 제자가 그분을 자기 집에 모셨다.","그 제자에게는 \"이분이 네 어머니시다.\" 하고 말씀하셨다. 이 때부터 그 제자는 마리아를 자기 집에 모셨다.","또 그 제자에게 이르시되 보라 네 어머니라 하신대 그 때부터 그 제자가 자기 집에 모시니라","또 그 제자에게 이르시되 보라 네 어머니라 하신대 그 때부터 그 제자가 자기 집에 모시니라","그리고 그 제자에게는 \"이분이 네 어머니시다\" 하고 말씀하셨다. 그때부터 그 제자는 예수의 어머니를 자기 집에 모셨다.","Then he said to the disciple, “Behold, your mother.” And from that hour the disciple took her into his home.","Then saith he to the disciple, Behold thy mother! And from that hour that disciple took her unto his own home.","and to the disciple, \"Here is your mother.\" From that time on, this disciple took her into his home.","Deinde dicit discipulo: “Ecce mater tua “. Et ex illa hora accepit eam discipulus in sua.","ואחר אמר אל תלמידו הנה זאת אמך ומן השעה ההיא אסף אתה התלמיד אל ביתו׃"],["50","19","28","그 뒤에 이미 모든 일이 다 이루어졌음을 아신 예수님께서는 성경 말씀이 이루어지게 하시려고 “목마르다.” 하고 말씀하셨다.","예수께서는 모든 것이 끝났음을 아시고 \"2)목마르다.\" 하고 말씀하셨다. 이 말씀으로 성서의 예언이 이루어졌다.시편 22:15.","그 후에 예수께서 모든 일이 이미 이루어진 줄 아시고 성경을 응하게 하려 하사 이르시되 ㄴ)내가 목마르다 하시니","이 후에 예수께서 모든 일이 이미 이룬줄 아시고 성경으로 응하게 하려하사 가라사대 ㄴ)내가 목마르다 하시니 시 69:21","예수께서는 이제 모든 것이 다 완성된 것을 아시자 성경의 말씀대로 이루시려고 \"목이 마르구나\" 하고 말씀하셨다.","After this, aware that everything was now finished, in order that the scripture might be fulfilled, Jesus said, “I thirst.”","After this, Jesus knowing that all things were now accomplished, that the scripture might be fulfilled, saith, I thirst.","Later, knowing that all was now completed, and so that the Scripture would be fulfilled, Jesus said, \"I am thirsty.\"","Post hoc sciens Iesus quia iam omnia consummata sunt, ut consummaretur Scriptura, dicit: “Sitio “.","ויהי מאחרי כן כאשר ידע ישוע כי עתה זה כלה הכל למען ימלא הכתוב כלו אמר צמאתי׃"],["50","19","29","거기에는 신 포도주가 가득 담긴 그릇이 놓여 있었다. 그래서 사람들이 신 포도주를 듬뿍 적신 해면을 우슬초 가지에 꽂아 예수님의 입에 갖다 대었다.","마침 거기에는 3)신 포도주가 가득 담긴 그릇이 있었는데 사람들이 그 포도주를 해면에 담뿍 적셔서 히솝 풀대에 꿰어가지고 예수의 입에 대어드렸다. 시편 69:21.","거기 신 포도주가 가득히 담긴 그릇이 있는지라 사람들이 신 포도주를 적신 해면을 우슬초에 매어 예수의 입에 대니","거기 신 포도주가 가득히 담긴 그릇이 있는지라 사람들이 신 포도주를 머금은 해융을 우슬초에 매어 예수의 입에 대니","ㄴ) 사람들이 항아리에 담긴 신포도주를 히솝 가지에 꿴 해면에 적셔 예수의 입에 대어 드렸다. (ㄴ. 시69:21)","There was a vessel filled with common wine. So they put a sponge soaked in wine on a sprig of hyssop and put it up to his mouth.","Now there was set a vessel full of vinegar: and they filled a spunge with vinegar, and put it upon hyssop, and put it to his mouth.","A jar of wine vinegar was there, so they soaked a sponge in it, put the sponge on a stalk of the hyssop plant, and lifted it to Jesus' lips.","Vas positum erat aceto plenum; spongiam ergo plenam aceto hyssopo circumponentes, obtulerunt ori eius.","ושם כלי מלא חמץ ויטבלו ספוג בחמץ וישימהו על אזוב ויקריבהו אל פיו׃"],["50","19","30","예수님께서는 신 포도주를 드신 다음에 말씀하셨다. “다 이루어졌다.” 이어서 고개를 숙이시며 숨을 거두셨다.","예수께서는 신 포도주를 맛보신 다음 \"이제 다 이루었다.\" 하시고 고개를 떨어뜨리시며 숨을 거두셨다.","예수께서 신 포도주를 받으신 후에 이르시되 다 이루었다 하시고 머리를 숙이니 영혼이 떠나가시니라","예수께서 신 포도주를 받으신 후 가라사대 다 이루었다 하시고 머리를 숙이시고 영혼이 돌아가시니라","예수께서는 그것으로 목을 축인 뒤 \"다 이루었다\" 하고 말씀하셨다. 그리고 머리를 아래로 떨어뜨리고 숨을 거두셨다.","When Jesus had taken the wine, he said, “It is finished.” And bowing his head, he handed over the spirit.","When Jesus therefore had received the vinegar, he said, It is finished: and he bowed his head, and gave up the ghost.","When he had received the drink, Jesus said, \"It is finished.\" With that, he bowed his head and gave up his spirit.","Cum ergo accepisset acetum, Iesus dixit: “Consummatum est! “. Et inclinato capite tradidit spiritum.","ויקח ישוע את החמץ ויאמר כלה ויט את ראשו ויפקד את רוחו׃"],["50","19","31","그날은 준비일이었고 이튿날 안식일은 큰 축일이었으므로, 유다인들은 안식일에 시신이 십자가에 매달려 있지 않게 하려고, 십자가에 못 박힌 이들의 다리를 부러뜨리고 시신을 치우게 하라고 빌라도에게 요청하였다.","그 날은 과월절 준비일이었다. 다음날 대축제일은 마침 안식일과 겹치게 되었으므로 유다인들은 안식일에 시체를 십자가에 그냥 두지 않으려고 빌라도에게 시체의 다리를 꺾어 치워달라고 청하였다.","이 날은 준비일이라 유대인들은 그 안식일이 큰 날이므로 그 안식일에 시체들을 십자가에 두지 아니하려 하여 빌라도에게 그들의 다리를 꺾어 시체를 치워 달라 하니","이 날은 예비일이라 유대인들은 그 안식일이 큰 날이므로 그 안식일에 시체들을 십자가에 두지 아니하려 하여 빌라도에게 그들의 다리를 꺾어 시체를 치워 달라 하니","유대인 지도자들은 죄수들을 그 다음날까지 십자가에 달아 두지 않을 작정이었다. 그 다음날이 안식일인데다 더욱이 유월절의 안식일은 특별한 날이었기 때문이다. 그래서 그들은 빌라도에게 가서 그 죄수들이 죽어야 시체를 내릴 수 있으니 빨리 죽도록 다리를 꺾으라는 명령을 내려 달라고 청하였다.","Now since it was preparation day, in order that the bodies might not remain on the cross on the sabbath, for the sabbath day of that week was a solemn one, the Jews asked Pilate that their legs be broken and they be taken down.","The Jews therefore, because it was the preparation, that the bodies should not remain upon the cross on the sabbath day, (for that sabbath day was an high day,) besought Pilate that their legs might be broken, and that they might be taken away.","Now it was the day of Preparation, and the next day was to be a special Sabbath. Because the Jews did not want the bodies left on the crosses during the Sabbath, they asked Pilate to have the legs broken and the bodies taken down.","Iudaei ergo, quoniam Parasceve erat, ut non remanerent in cruce corpora sabbato, erat enim magnus dies illius sabbati, rogaverunt Pilatum, ut frangerentur eorum crura, et tollerentur.","ולמען לא תשארנה הגויות על הצלב ביום השבת כי ערב שבת היה וגדול יום השבת ההוא שאלו היהודים מן פילטוס לשבר את שוקיהם ולהוריד אתם׃"],["50","19","32","그리하여 군사들이 가서 예수님과 함께 십자가에 못 박힌 첫째 사람과 또 다른 사람의 다리를 부러뜨렸다.","그래서 병사들이 와서 예수와 함께 십자가에 달린 사람들의 다리를 차례로 꺾고","군인들이 가서 예수와 함께 못 박힌 첫째 사람과 또 그 다른 사람의 다리를 꺾고","군병들이 가서 예수와 함께 못 박힌 첫째 사람과 또 그 다른 사람의 다리를 꺾고","군인들이 가서 예수와 함께 십자가에 달린 두 사람의 다리를 꺾었다.","So the soldiers came and broke the legs of the first and then of the other one who was crucified with Jesus.","Then came the soldiers, and brake the legs of the first, and of the other which was crucified with him.","The soldiers therefore came and broke the legs of the first man who had been crucified with Jesus, and then those of the other.","Venerunt ergo milites et primi quidem fregerunt crura et alterius, qui crucifixus est cum eo;","ויבאו אנשי הצבא וישברו את שוקי הראשון והשני הנצלבים עמו׃"],["50","19","33","예수님께 가서는 이미 숨지신 것을 보고 다리를 부러뜨리는 대신,","예수에게 가서는 이미 숨을 거두신 것을 보고 다리를 꺾는 대신","예수께 이르러서는 이미 죽으신 것을 보고 다리를 꺾지 아니하고","예수께 이르러는 이미 죽은 것을 보고 다리를 꺾지 아니하고","그러나 예수께 와서는 이미 숨을 거두신 것을 보고 다리를 꺾는 대신","But when they came to Jesus and saw that he was already dead, they did not break his legs,","But when they came to Jesus, and saw that he was dead already, they brake not his legs:","But when they came to Jesus and found that he was already dead, they did not break his legs.","ad Iesum autem cum venissent, ut viderunt eum iam mortuum, non fregerunt eius crura,","ויבאו אל ישוע ובראתם כי כבר מת לא שברו את שוקיו׃"],["50","19","34","군사 하나가 창으로 그분의 옆구리를 찔렀다. 그러자 곧 피와 물이 흘러나왔다.","군인 하나가 창으로 그 옆구리를 찔렀다. 그러자 곧 거기에서 피와 물이 흘러 나왔다.","그 중 한 군인이 창으로 옆구리를 찌르니 곧 피와 물이 나오더라","그 중 한 군병이 창으로 옆구리를 찌르니 곧 피와 물이 나오더라","군인 하나가 창으로 예수의 옆구리를 찔렀다. 그러자 피와 물이 흘러 나왔다.","but one soldier thrust his lance into his side, and immediately blood and water flowed out.","But one of the soldiers with a spear pierced his side, and forthwith came there out blood and water.","Instead, one of the soldiers pierced Jesus' side with a spear, bringing a sudden flow of blood and water.","sed unus militum lancea latus eius aperuit, et continuo exivit sanguis et aqua.","אך אחד מאנשי הצבא דקר בחנית את צדו וכרגע יצא דם ומים׃"],["50","19","35","이는 직접 본 사람이 증언하는 것이므로 그의 증언은 참되다. 그리고 그는 여러분이 믿도록 자기가 진실을 말한다는 것을 알고 있다.","이것은 자기 눈으로 직접 본 사람의 증언이다. 그러므로 이 증언은 참되며, 이 증언을 하는 사람은 자기 말이 틀림없는 사실이라는 것을 잘 알고 있다. 그는 여러분도 믿게 하려고 이렇게 증언하는 것이다.","이를 본 자가 증언하였으니 그 증언이 참이라 그가 자기의 말하는 것이 참인 줄 알고 너희로 믿게 하려 함이니라","이를 본 자가 증거하였으니 그 증거가 참이라 저가 자기의 말하는 것이 참인줄 알고 너희로 믿게 하려함이니라","이 모든 것은 직접 눈으로 목격한 사람의 증언이다. 그래서 이를 명확히 증거하여 여러분도 믿음을 가지도록 하려고 기록하는 것이다.","An eyewitness has testified, and his testimony is true; he knows that he is speaking the truth, so that you also may [come to] believe.","And he that saw it bare record, and his record is true: and he knoweth that he saith true, that ye might believe.","The man who saw it has given testimony, and his testimony is true. He knows that he tells the truth, and he testifies so that you also may believe.","Et qui vidit, testimonium perhibuit, et verum est eius testimonium, et ille scit quia vera dicit, ut et vos credatis.","והראה זאת העיד ועדותו נאמנה והוא יודע כי האמת יגיד למען גם אתם תאמינו׃"],["50","19","36","“그의 뼈가 하나도 부러지지 않을 것이다.” 하신 성경 말씀이 이루어지려고 이런 일들이 일어난 것이다.","이렇게 해서 \"4)그의 뼈는 하나도 부러지지 않을 것이다.\" 한 성서의 말씀이 이루어졌다.출애 12:46(민수 9:12; 시편 34:20 참조).","이 일이 일어난 것은 ㄷ)그 뼈가 하나도 꺾이지 아니하리라 한 성경을 응하게 하려 함이라","이 일이 이룬 것은 ㄷ)그 뼈가 하나도 꺾이우지 아니하리라 한 성경을 응하게 하려함이라 출 12:46, 민 9:12, 시 34:20","이 일이 일어남으로써 성경에 기록되어 있는 ㄱ) \"뼈마디 하나라도 상치 않도록 그이를 주께서 보살피신다\"라는 말씀과 ㄴ) \"그들은 자기들이 찌른 사람을 바라볼 것이다\"라는 말씀이 이루어졌다. (ㄱ. 출12:46,민9:12,시34:20. ㄴ. 슥12:10)","For this happened so that the scripture passage might be fulfilled: “Not a bone of it will be broken.”","For these things were done, that the scripture should be fulfilled, A bone of him shall not be broken.","These things happened so that the scripture would be fulfilled: \"Not one of his bones will be broken,\"","Facta sunt enim haec, ut Scriptura impleatur: “Os non comminuetur eius “,","כי כל זאת היתה למלאת הכתוב ועצם לא תשברו בו׃"],["50","19","37","또 다른 성경 구절은 “그들은 자기들이 찌른 이를 바라볼 것이다.” 하고 말한다.","그리고 성서의 다른 곳에는 \"5)그들은 자기들이 찌른 사람을 보게 될 것이다.\"라는 기록도 있다.즈가 12:10.","또 다른 성경에 ㄹ)그들이 그 찌른 자를 보리라 하였느니라","또 다른 성경에 ㄹ)저희가 그 찌른 자를 보리라 하였느니라슥 12:10","(36절에 포함되어 있음)","And again another passage says: “They will look upon him whom they have pierced.”","And again another scripture saith, They shall look on him whom they pierced.","and, as another scripture says, \"They will look on the one they have pierced.\"","et iterum alia Scriptura dicit: “Videbunt in quem transfixerunt “.","ועוד כתוב אחר אמר והביט אליו את אשר דקרו׃"],["50","19","38","그 뒤에 아리마태아 출신 요셉이 예수님의 시신을 거두게 해 달라고 빌라도에게 청하였다. 그는 예수님의 제자였지만 유다인들이 두려워 그 사실을 숨기고 있었다. 빌라도가 허락하자 그가 가서 그분의 시신을 거두었다.","그 뒤 아리마태아 사람 요셉이 빌라도에게 예수의 시체를 가져가게 하여달라고 청하였다. 그도 예수의 제자였지만 유다인들이 무서워서 그 사실을 숨기고 있었다. 빌라도의 허락을 받아 요셉은 가서 예수의 시체를 내렸다.","아리마대 사람 요셉은 예수의 제자이나 유대인이 두려워 그것을 숨기더니 이 일 후에 빌라도에게 예수의 시체를 가져가기를 구하매 빌라도가 허락하는지라 이에 가서 예수의 시체를 가져가니라","아리마대 사람 요셉이 예수의 제자나 유대인을 두려워하여 은휘하더니 이 일 후에 빌라도더러 예수의 시체를 가져가기를 구하매 빌라도가 허락하는지라 이에 가서 예수의 시체를 가져가니라","그후 아리마대 사람 요셉이 대담하게 빌라도에게 가서 예수의 시체를 모셔 가게 해달라고 청하였다. 그는 예수의 제자였으면서도 유대의 지도자들이 무서워서 그것을 감추어 오던 사람이었다. 빌라도가 허락을 하자 그는 가서 예수의 시체를 모셔 내렸다.","After this, Joseph of Arimathea, secretly a disciple of Jesus for fear of the Jews, asked Pilate if he could remove the body of Jesus. And Pilate permitted it. So he came and took his body.","And after this Joseph of Arimathaea, being a disciple of Jesus, but secretly for fear of the Jews, besought Pilate that he might take away the body of Jesus: and Pilate gave him leave. He came therefore, and took the body of Jesus.","Later, Joseph of Arimathea asked Pilate for the body of Jesus. Now Joseph was a disciple of Jesus, but secretly because he feared the Jews. With Pilate's permission, he came and took the body away.","Post haec autem rogavit Pilatum Ioseph ab Arimathaea, qui erat discipulus Iesu, occultus autem propter metum Iudaeorum, ut tolleret corpus Iesu; et permisit Pilatus. Venit ergo et tulit corpus eius.","ויהי אחרי כן בא יוסף הרמתי והוא תלמיד ישוע אך בסתר מפני היהודים וישאל מאת פילטוס אשר יתנהו לשאת את גופת ישוע וינח לו פילטוס ויבא וישא את גופת ישוע׃"],["50","19","39","언젠가 밤에 예수님을 찾아왔던 니코데모도 몰약과 침향을 섞은 것을 백 리트라쯤 가지고 왔다.","그리고 언젠가 밤에 예수를 찾아왔던 니고데모도 침향을 섞은 몰약을 백 근쯤 가지고 왔다.","일찍이 예수께 밤에 찾아왔던 니고데모도 몰약과 침향 섞은 것을 백 리트라쯤 가지고 온지라","일찍 예수께 밤에 나아왔던 니고데모도 몰약과 침향 섞은 것을 백 근쯤 가지고 온지라","예수를 밤중에 찾아온 일이 있던 니고데모도 몰약과 침향을 섞어 만든 방부제를 100근 가량 가져 왔다.","Nicodemus, the one who had first come to him at night, also came bringing a mixture of myrrh and aloes weighing about one hundred pounds.","And there came also Nicodemus, which at the first came to Jesus by night, and brought a mixture of myrrh and aloes, about an hundred pound weight.","He was accompanied by Nicodemus, the man who earlier had visited Jesus at night. Nicodemus brought a mixture of myrrh and aloes, about seventy-five pounds.","Venit autem et Nicodemus, qui venerat ad eum nocte primum, ferens mixturam myrrhae et aloes quasi libras centum.","ויבא גם נקדימון אשר בא לפנים בלילה אל ישוע ויבא ערוב מר ואהלות כמאה ליטרין׃"],["50","19","40","그들은 예수님의 시신을 모셔다가 유다인들의 장례 관습에 따라, 향료와 함께 아마포로 감쌌다.","이 두 사람은 예수의 시체를 모셔다가 유다인들의 장례 풍속대로 향료를 바르고 고운 베로 감았다.","이에 예수의 시체를 가져다가 유대인의 장례 법대로 그 향품과 함께 세마포로 쌌더라","이에 예수의 시체를 가져다가 유대인의 장례법대로 그 향품과 함께 세마포로 쌌더라","그 두 사람은 함께 예수의 시체를 모셔다가 유대인들의 장례 풍속대로 방부제를 바르고 길고 고운 베로 감았다.","They took the body of Jesus and bound it with burial cloths along with the spices, according to the Jewish burial custom.","Then took they the body of Jesus, and wound it in linen clothes with the spices, as the manner of the Jews is to bury.","Taking Jesus' body, the two of them wrapped it, with the spices, in strips of linen. This was in accordance with Jewish burial customs.","Acceperunt ergo corpus Iesu et ligaverunt illud linteis cum aromatibus, sicut mos Iudaeis est sepelire.","ויקחו את גופת ישוע ויחתלוה בתכריכין עם הבשמים כאשר נהגים היהודים לקבר את מתיהם׃"],["50","19","41","예수님께서 십자가에 못 박히신 곳에 정원이 있었는데, 그 정원에는 아직 아무도 묻힌 적이 없는 새 무덤이 있었다.","예수께서 십자가에 못박히신 곳에는 동산이 있었는데 거기에는 아직 장사지낸 일이 없는 새 무덤이 하나 있었다.","예수께서 십자가에 못 박히신 곳에 동산이 있고 동산 안에 아직 사람을 장사한 일이 없는 새 무덤이 있는지라","예수의 십자가에 못 박히신 곳에 동산이 있고 동산 안에 아직 사람을 장사한 일이 없는 새 무덤이 있는지라","예수께서 십자가에 못박히신 곳 가까이에는 동산이 하나 있었는데 그곳에는 전에 한 번도 사용한 일이 없는 새 무덤이 있었다.","Now in the place where he had been crucified there was a garden, and in the garden a new tomb, in which no one had yet been buried.","Now in the place where he was crucified there was a garden; and in the garden a new sepulchre, wherein was never man yet laid.","At the place where Jesus was crucified, there was a garden, and in the garden a new tomb, in which no one had ever been laid.","Erat autem in loco, ubi crucifixus est, hortus, et in horto monumentum novum, in quo nondum quisquam positus erat.","ובמקום אשר נצלב שם היה גן ובגן קבר חדש אשר לא הושם בו איש עד עתה׃"],["50","19","42","그날은 유다인들의 준비일이었고 또 무덤이 가까이 있었으므로, 그들은 예수님을 그곳에 모셨다.","그 날은 유다인들이 명절을 준비하는 날인데다가 그 무덤이 가까이 있었기 때문에 그들은 예수를 거기에 모셨다.","이 날은 유대인의 준비일이요 또 무덤이 가까운 고로 예수를 거기 두니라","이 날은 유대인의 예비일이요 또 무덤이 가까운고로 예수를 거기 두니라","그래서 안식일 전에 빨리 서둘러야 할 필요도 있고, 또 무덤도 가까이 있었기 때문에 그들은 예수의 시체를 거기에 모셨다.","So they laid Jesus there because of the Jewish preparation day; for the tomb was close by.","There laid they Jesus therefore because of the Jews' preparation day; for the sepulchre was nigh at hand.","Because it was the Jewish day of Preparation and since the tomb was nearby, they laid Jesus there.","Ibi ergo propter Parascevem Iudaeorum, quia iuxta erat monumentum, posuerunt Iesum.","שם שמו את ישוע כי ערב שבת היה ליהודים והקבר קרוב׃"],["50","20","1","주간 첫날 이른 아침, 아직도 어두울 때에 마리아 막달레나가 무덤에 가서 보니, 무덤을 막았던 돌이 치워져 있었다.","안식일 다음날 이른 새벽의 일이었다. 아직 어두울 때에 막달라 여자 마리아가 무덤에 가보니 무덤을 막았던 돌이 이미 치워져 있었다.","안식 후 첫날 일찍이 아직 어두울 때에 막달라 마리아가 무덤에 와서 돌이 무덤에서 옮겨진 것을 보고","안식 후 첫날 이른 아침 아직 어두울 때에 막달라 마리아가 무덤에 와서 돌이 무덤에서 옮겨간 것을 보고","안식일 다음날 새벽 어둠이 채 가시기도 전에 막달라 마리아가 무덤을 찾아갔다. 그런데 무덤 입구를 막았던 돌이 이미 치워져 있었다.","On the first day of the week, Mary of Magdala came to the tomb early in the morning, while it was still dark, and saw the stone removed from the tomb.","The first day of the week cometh Mary Magdalene early, when it was yet dark, unto the sepulchre, and seeth the stone taken away from the sepulchre.","Early on the first day of the week, while it was still dark, Mary Magdalene went to the tomb and saw that the stone had been removed from the entrance.","Prima autem sabbatorum Maria Magdalene venit ma ne, cum adhuc tenebrae essent, ad monumentum et videt lapidem sublatum a monumento.","ויהי באחד בשבת לפנות הבקר בעוד חשך ותבא מרים המגדלית אל הקבר ותרא את האבן מוסרה מעל הקבר׃"],["50","20","2","그래서 그 여자는 시몬 베드로와 예수님께서 사랑하신 다른 제자에게 달려가서 말하였다. “누가 주님을 무덤에서 꺼내 갔습니다. 어디에 모셨는지 모르겠습니다.”","그래서 그 여자는 달음질을 하여 시몬 베드로와 예수께서 사랑하시던 다른 제자에게 가서 \"누군가가 주님을 무덤에서 꺼내갔습니다. 어디에다 모셨는지 모르겠습니다.\" 하고 알려주었다.","시몬 베드로와 예수께서 사랑하시던 그 다른 제자에게 달려가서 말하되 사람들이 주님을 무덤에서 가져다가 어디 두었는지 우리가 알지 못하겠다 하니","시몬 베드로와 예수의 사랑하시던 그 다른 제자에게 달려가서 말하되 사람이 주를 무덤에서 가져다가 어디 두었는지 우리가 알지 못하겠다 하니","마리아가 급히 시몬 베드로와 예수께서 사랑하시던 다른 제자에게 달려가 말하였다. \"누가 주님의 시체를 무덤에서 가져갔습니다. 주님을 어디다 모셔 두었는지 모르겠어요.\"","So she ran and went to Simon Peter and to the other disciple whom Jesus loved, and told them, “They have taken the Lord from the tomb, and we don’t know where they put him.”","Then she runneth, and cometh to Simon Peter, and to the other disciple, whom Jesus loved, and saith unto them, They have taken away the LORD out of the sepulchre, and we know not where they have laid him.","So she came running to Simon Peter and the other disciple, the one Jesus loved, and said, \"They have taken the Lord out of the tomb, and we don't know where they have put him!\"","Currit ergo et venit ad Simonem Petrum et ad alium discipulum, quem amabat Iesus, et dicit eis: “Tulerunt Dominum de monumento, et nescimus, ubi posuerunt eum! “.","ותרץ ותבא אל שמעון פטרוס ואל התלמיד האחר אשר חשק בו ישוע ותאמר אליהם הנה נשאו את האדון מקברו ולא ידענו איפה הניחהו׃"],["50","20","3","베드로와 다른 제자는 밖으로 나와 무덤으로 갔다.","이 말을 듣고 베드로와 다른 제자는 곧 떠나 무덤으로 향하였다.","베드로와 그 다른 제자가 나가서 무덤으로 갈새","베드로와 그 다른 제자가 나가서 무덤으로 갈쌔","베드로와 다른 제자는 무덤으로 달려갔다. 베드로보다 걸음이 빠른 다른 제자가 먼저 그곳에 닿았다.","So Peter and the other disciple went out and came to the tomb.","Peter therefore went forth, and that other disciple, and came to the sepulchre.","So Peter and the other disciple started for the tomb.","Exiit ergo Petrus et ille alius discipulus, et veniebant ad monumentum.","ויצא פטרוס והתלמיד האחר וילכו אל הקבר׃"],["50","20","4","두 사람이 함께 달렸는데, 다른 제자가 베드로보다 빨리 달려 무덤에 먼저 다다랐다.","두 사람이 같이 달음질쳐 갔지만 다른 제자가 베드로보다 더 빨리 달려가 먼저 무덤에 다다랐다.","둘이 같이 달음질하더니 그 다른 제자가 베드로보다 더 빨리 달려가서 먼저 무덤에 이르러","둘이 같이 달음질하더니 그 다른 제자가 베드로보다 더 빨리 달아나서 먼저 무덤에 이르러","(3절에 포함되어 있음)","They both ran, but the other disciple ran faster than Peter and arrived at the tomb first;","So they ran both together: and the other disciple did outrun Peter, and came first to the sepulchre.","Both were running, but the other disciple outran Peter and reached the tomb first.","Currebant autem duo simul, et ille alius discipulus praecucurrit citius Petro et venit primus ad monumentum;","וירוצו שניהם יחדו וימהר התלמיד האחר לרוץ ויעבר את פטרוס ויבא ראשונה אל הקבר׃"],["50","20","5","그는 몸을 굽혀 아마포가 놓여 있는 것을 보기는 하였지만, 안으로 들어가지는 않았다.","그는 몸을 굽혀 수의가 흩어져 있는 것을 보았으나 안에 들어가지는 않았다.","구부려 세마포 놓인 것을 보았으나 들어가지는 아니하였더니","구푸려 세마포 놓인 것을 보았으나 들어가지는 아니하였더니","그는 몸을 굽히고 고운 베만 놓여 있는 것을 들여다 보았으나 안으로 들어가지는 않았다.","he bent down and saw the burial cloths there, but did not go in.","And he stooping down, and looking in, saw the linen clothes lying; yet went he not in.","He bent over and looked in at the strips of linen lying there but did not go in.","et cum se inclinasset, videt posita linteamina, non tamen introivit.","וישקף אל תוכו וירא את התכריכין מנחים אך לא בא פנימה׃"],["50","20","6","시몬 베드로가 뒤따라와서 무덤으로 들어가 아마포가 놓여 있는 것을 보았다.","곧 뒤따라온 시몬 베드로가 무덤 안에 들어가 그도 역시 수의가 흩어져 있는 것을 보았는데","시몬 베드로는 따라와서 무덤에 들어가 보니 세마포가 놓였고","시몬 베드로도 따라 와서 무덤에 들어가 보니 세마포가 놓였고","곧 뒤따라 달려온 시몬 베드로가 안으로 들어가보니 고운 베가 놓여 있었고","When Simon Peter arrived after him, he went into the tomb and saw the burial cloths there,","Then cometh Simon Peter following him, and went into the sepulchre, and seeth the linen clothes lie,","Then Simon Peter, who was behind him, arrived and went into the tomb. He saw the strips of linen lying there,","Venit ergo et Simon Petrus sequens eum et introivit in monumentum; et videt linteamina posita","ויבא שמעון פטרוס אחריו והוא נכנס אל הקבר וירא את התכריכין מנחים׃"],["50","20","7","예수님의 얼굴을 쌌던 수건은 아마포와 함께 놓여 있지 않고, 따로 한곳에 개켜져 있었다.","예수의 머리를 싸맸던 수건은 수의와 함께 흩어져 있지 않고 따로 한 곳에 잘 개켜져 있었다.","또 머리를 쌌던 수건은 세마포와 함께 놓이지 않고 딴 곳에 쌌던 대로 놓여 있더라","또 머리를 쌌던 수건은 세마포와 함께 놓이지 않고 딴 곳에 개켜 있더라","예수의 머리를 쌌던 수건은 잘 개켜져 그 옆에 놓여 있었다.","and the cloth that had covered his head, not with the burial cloths but rolled up in a separate place.","And the napkin, that was about his head, not lying with the linen clothes, but wrapped together in a place by itself.","as well as the burial cloth that had been around Jesus' head. The cloth was folded up by itself, separate from the linen.","et sudarium, quod fuerat super caput eius, non cum linteaminibus positum, sed separatim involutum in unum locum.","והסודר אשר היתה על ראשו איננה מנחת אצל התכריכין כי אם מקפלת לבדה במקומה׃"],["50","20","8","그제야 무덤에 먼저 다다른 다른 제자도 들어갔다. 그리고 보고 믿었다.","그제야 무덤에 먼저 다다른 다른 제자도 들어가서 보고 믿었다.","그 때에야 무덤에 먼저 갔던 그 다른 제자도 들어가 보고 믿더라","그 때에야 무덤에 먼저 왔던 그 다른 제자도 들어가 보고 믿더라","그제서야 다른 제자도 안으로 들어가서 그것을 보고 믿었다.","Then the other disciple also went in, the one who had arrived at the tomb first, and he saw and believed.","Then went in also that other disciple, which came first to the sepulchre, and he saw, and believed.","Finally the other disciple, who had reached the tomb first, also went inside. He saw and believed.","Tunc ergo introivit et alter discipulus, qui venerat primus ad monumentum, et vidit et credidit.","ויבא שמה גם התלמיד האחר אשר בא ראשונה אל הקבר וירא ויאמן׃"],["50","20","9","사실 그들은 예수님께서 죽은 이들 가운데에서 다시 살아나셔야 한다는 성경 말씀을 아직 깨닫지 못하고 있었던 것이다.","그들은 그 때까지도 예수께서 죽었다가 반드시 살아나실 것이라는 성서의 말씀을 깨닫지 못하고 있었던 것이다.","(그들은 성경에 그가 죽은 자 가운데서 다시 살아나야 하리라 하신 말씀을 아직 알지 못하더라)","(저희는 성경에 그가 죽은 자 가운데서 다시 살아나야 하리라 하신 말씀을 아직 알지 못하더라)","그때까지도 그들은 그분이 다시 살아나실 것이라고 말한 성경의 말씀을 깨닫지 못하고 있었던 것이다.","For they did not yet understand the scripture that he had to rise from the dead.","For as yet they knew not the scripture, that he must rise again from the dead.","(They still did not understand from Scripture that Jesus had to rise from the dead.)","Nondum enim sciebant Scripturam, quia oportet eum a mortuis resurgere.","כי לא הבינו עד עתה את הכתוב אשר קום יקום מעם המתים׃"],["50","20","10","그 제자들은 다시 집으로 돌아갔다.","두 제자는 숙소로 다시 돌아갔다.","이에 두 제자가 자기들의 집으로 돌아가니라","이에 두 제자가 자기 집으로 돌아가니라","두 제자는 그냥 집으로 돌아갔다.","Then the disciples returned home.","Then the disciples went away again unto their own home.","Then the disciples went back to their homes,","Abierunt ergo iterum ad semetipsos discipuli.","וישובו התלמידים וילכו אל ביתם׃"],["50","20","11","마리아는 무덤 밖에 서서 울고 있었다. 그렇게 울면서 무덤 쪽으로 몸을 굽혀","한편 무덤 밖에 서서 울고 있던 마리아가 몸을 굽혀 무덤 속을 들여다보니","마리아는 무덤 밖에 서서 울고 있더니 울면서 구부려 무덤 안을 들여다보니","마리아는 무덤 밖에 서서 울고 있더니 울면서 구푸려 무덤 속을 들여다보니","그런데 마리아는 다시 돌아와서 무덤 밖에서 울고 있었다. 그녀는 울다가 몸을 굽혀 무덤 안을 들여다보았다.","But Mary stayed outside the tomb weeping. And as she wept, she bent over into the tomb","But Mary stood without at the sepulchre weeping: and as she wept, she stooped down, and looked into the sepulchre,","but Mary stood outside the tomb crying. As she wept, she bent over to look into the tomb","Maria autem stabat ad monumentum foris plorans. Dum ergo fleret, inclinavit se in monumentum","ומרים עמדה בוכיה מחוץ לקבר ויהי בבכותה ותשקף אל תוך הקבר׃"],["50","20","12","들여다보니 하얀 옷을 입은 두 천사가 앉아 있었다. 한 천사는 예수님의 시신이 놓였던 자리 머리맡에, 다른 천사는 발치에 있었다.","흰 옷을 입은 두 천사가 앉아 있었다. 한 천사는 예수의 시체를 모셨던 자리 머리맡에 있었고 또 한 천사는 발치에 있었다.","흰 옷 입은 두 천사가 예수의 시체 뉘었던 곳에 하나는 머리 편에, 하나는 발 편에 앉았더라","흰 옷 입은 두 천사가 예수의 시체 뉘었던 곳에 하나는 머리 편에, 하나는 발 편에 앉았더라","무덤 안에 흰옷을 입은 천사 두 명이 앉아 있었다. 한 천사는 예수를 모셨던 자리의 머리맡에, 또 한 천사는 발치에 앉아 있었다.","and saw two angels in white sitting there, one at the head and one at the feet where the body of Jesus had been.","And seeth two angels in white sitting, the one at the head, and the other at the feet, where the body of Jesus had lain.","and saw two angels in white, seated where Jesus' body had been, one at the head and the other at the foot.","et videt duos angelos in albis sedentes, unum ad caput et unum ad pedes, ubi positum fuerat corpus Iesu.","ותרא שני מלאכים לבושי לבנים ישבים במקום אשר שמו שם את גופת ישוע אחד מראשותיו ואחד מרגלותיו׃"],["50","20","13","그들이 마리아에게 “여인아, 왜 우느냐?” 하고 묻자, 마리아가 그들에게 대답하였다. “누가 저의 주님을 꺼내 갔습니다. 어디에 모셨는지 모르겠습니다.”","천사들이 마리아에게 \"왜 울고 있느냐?\" 하고 물었다. \"누군가가 제 주님을 꺼내갔습니다. 어디에다 모셨는지 모르겠습니다.\" 마리아가 이렇게 대답하고 나서","천사들이 이르되 여자여 어찌하여 우느냐 이르되 사람들이 내 주님을 옮겨다가 어디 두었는지 내가 알지 못함이니이다","천사들이 가로되 여자여 어찌하여 우느냐 가로되 사람이 내 주를 가져다가 어디 두었는지 내가 알지 못함이니이다","천사들이 그 여자에게 물었다. \"왜 울고 있느냐?\" 그 여자가 대답하였다. \"누가 내 주님을 모셔갔습니다. 그런데 그분을 어디다 모셔 두었는지 모르겠습니다.\"","And they said to her, “Woman, why are you weeping?” She said to them, “They have taken my Lord, and I don’t know where they laid him.”","And they say unto her, Woman, why weepest thou? She saith unto them, Because they have taken away my LORD, and I know not where they have laid him.","They asked her, \"Woman, why are you crying?\" \"They have taken my Lord away,\" she said, \"and I don't know where they have put him.\"","Et dicunt ei illi: “Mulier, quid ploras? “. Dicit eis: “Tulerunt Dominum meum, et nescio, ubi posuerunt eum “.","ויאמרו אליה אשה למה תבכי ותאמר אליהם כי נשאו מזה את אדני ולא ידעתי איפה הניחהו׃"],["50","20","14","이렇게 말하고 나서 뒤로 돌아선 마리아는 예수님께서 서 계신 것을 보았다. 그러나 예수님이신 줄은 몰랐다.","뒤를 돌아다보았더니 예수께서 거기에 서 계셨다. 그러나 그분이 예수인 줄은 미처 몰랐다.","이 말을 하고 뒤로 돌이켜 예수께서 서 계신 것을 보았으나 예수이신 줄은 알지 못하더라","이 말을 하고 뒤로 돌이켜 예수의 서신 것을 보나 예수신줄 알지 못하더라","그러고 나서 마리아는 어떤 사람이 자기 등뒤에 서 있는 것 같아 고개를 돌려 보았다. 그분은 예수였다. 그러나 마리아는 그분을 알아보지 못하였다.","When she had said this, she turned around and saw Jesus there, but did not know it was Jesus.","And when she had thus said, she turned herself back, and saw Jesus standing, and knew not that it was Jesus.","At this, she turned around and saw Jesus standing there, but she did not realize that it was Jesus.","Haec cum dixisset, conversa est retrorsum et videt Iesum stantem; et non sciebat quia Iesus est.","ויהי בדברה זאת ותפן אחריה ותרא את ישוע עמד ולא ידעה כי הוא ישוע׃"],["50","20","15","예수님께서 마리아에게 “여인아, 왜 우느냐? 누구를 찾느냐?” 하고 물으셨다. 마리아는 그분을 정원지기로 생각하고, “선생님, 선생님께서 그분을 옮겨 가셨으면 어디에 모셨는지 저에게 말씀해 주십시오. 제가 모셔 가겠습니다.” 하고 말하였다.","예수께서 마리아에게 \"왜 울고 있느냐? 누구를 찾고 있느냐?\" 하고 물으셨다. 마리아는 그분이 동산지기인 줄 알고 \"여보셔요. 당신이 그분을 옮겨갔거든 어디에다 모셨는지 알려주셔요. 내가 모셔 가겠습니다.\" 하고 말하였다.","예수께서 이르시되 여자여 어찌하여 울며 누구를 찾느냐 하시니 마리아는 그가 동산지기인 줄 알고 이르되 주여 당신이 옮겼거든 어디 두었는지 내게 이르소서 그리하면 내가 가져가리이다","예수께서 가라사대 여자여 어찌하여 울며 누구를 찾느냐 하시니 마리아는 그가 동산지기인 줄로 알고 가로되 주여 당신이 옮겨 갔거든 어디 두었는지 내게 이르소서 그리하면 내가 가져가리이다","\"왜 울고 있느냐? 너는 누구를 찾고 있느냐?\" 예수께서 물으셨다. 마리아는 그가 동산지기인 줄 알고 \"여보세요, 만일 당신이 그분을 옮겨 가셨다면 어디다 모셔 두었는지 제게 알려 주세요. 제가 가서 그분을 모셔 가겠습니다\" 하고 간청하였다.","Jesus said to her, “Woman, why are you weeping? Whom are you looking for?” She thought it was the gardener and said to him, “Sir, if you carried him away, tell me where you laid him, and I will take him.”","Jesus saith unto her, Woman, why weepest thou? whom seekest thou? She, supposing him to be the gardener, saith unto him, Sir, if thou have borne him hence, tell me where thou hast laid him, and I will take him away.","\"Woman,\" he said, \"why are you crying? Who is it you are looking for?\" Thinking he was the gardener, she said, \"Sir, if you have carried him away, tell me where you have put him, and I will get him.\"","Dicit ei Iesus: “Mulier, quid ploras? Quem quaeris? “. Illa, existimans quia hortulanus esset, dicit ei: “Domine, si tu sustulisti eum, dicito mihi, ubi posuisti eum, et ego eum tollam “.","ויאמר אליה ישוע אשה למה תבכי את מי תבקשי והיא חשבה כי הוא שמר הגן ותאמר אליו אדני אם אתה נשאת אתו מזה הגידה נא לי איפה הנחתו ולקחתיו משם׃"],["50","20","16","예수님께서 “마리아야!” 하고 부르셨다. 마리아는 돌아서서 히브리 말로 “라뿌니!” 하고 불렀다. 이는 ‘스승님!’이라는 뜻이다.","예수께서 \"마리아야!\" 하고 부르시자 마리아는 예수께 돌아서서 히브리 말로 \"라뽀니!\" 하고 불렀다. (이 말은 '선생님.'이라는 뜻이다.)","예수께서 마리아야 하시거늘 마리아가 돌이켜 히브리 말로 랍오니 하니 (이는 선생님이라는 말이라)","예수께서 마리아야 하시거늘 마리아가 돌이켜 히브리 말로 랍오니여 하니 (이는 선생님이라)","예수께서 \"마리아야!\" 하고 부르시자 마리아는 예수를 향해 돌아서서 \"선생님!\" 하고 소리쳤다.","Jesus said to her, “Mary!” She turned and said to him in Hebrew, “Rabbouni,” which means Teacher.","Jesus saith unto her, Mary. She turned herself, and saith unto him, Rabboni; which is to say, Master.","Jesus said to her, \"Mary.\" She turned toward him and cried out in Aramaic, \"Rabboni!\" (which means Teacher).","Dicit ei Iesus: “Maria! “. Conversa illa dicit ei Hebraice: “Rabbuni! “ - quod dicitur Magister C.","ויאמר אליה ישוע מרים ותפן ותאמר אליו רבוני הוא מורה׃"],["50","20","17","예수님께서 마리아에게 말씀하셨다. “내가 아직 아버지께 올라가지 않았으니 나를 더 이상 붙들지 마라. 내 형제들에게 가서, ‘나는 내 아버지시며 너희의 아버지신 분, 내 하느님이시며 너희의 하느님이신 분께 올라간다.’ 하고 전하여라.”","예수께서는 마리아에게 \"내가 아직 아버지께 올라가지 않았으니 나를 붙잡지 말고 어서 내 형제들을 찾아가거라. 그리고 '나는 내 아버지이며 너희의 아버지 곧 내 하느님이며 너희의 하느님이신 분께 올라간다.'고 전하여라.\" 하고 일러주셨다.","예수께서 이르시되 나를 붙들지 말라 내가 아직 아버지께로 올라가지 아니하였노라 너는 내 형제들에게 가서 이르되 내가 내 아버지 곧 너희 아버지, 내 하나님 곧 너희 하나님께로 올라간다 하라 하시니","예수께서 이르시되 나를 만지지 말라 내가 아직 아버지께로 올라가지 못하였노라 너는 내 형제들에게 가서 이르되 내가 내 아버지 곧 너희 아버지, 내 하나님 곧 너희 하나님께로 올라간다 하라 하신대","예수께서 말씀하셨다. \"나를 만지지 말라. 아직 내가 아버지께로 올라가지 않았다. 이제 너는 내 형제들을 찾아가서 내가 내 아버지이며 너희의 아버지 곧 내 하나님이며 너희의 하나님이신 분께 올라간다고 말하라.\"","Jesus said to her, “Stop holding on to me, for I have not yet ascended to the Father. But go to my brothers and tell them, ‘I am going to my Father and your Father, to my God and your God.’”","Jesus saith unto her, Touch me not; for I am not yet ascended to my Father: but go to my brethren, and say unto them, I ascend unto my Father, and your Father; and to my God, and your God.","Jesus said, \"Do not hold on to me, for I have not yet returned to the Father. Go instead to my brothers and tell them, 'I am returning to my Father and your Father, to my God and your God.'\"","Dicit ei Iesus: “Iam noli me tenere, nondum enim ascendi ad Patrem; vade autem ad fratres meos et dic eis: Ascendo ad Patrem meum et Patrem vestrum, et Deum meum et Deum vestrum “.","ויאמר אליה ישוע אל תגעי בי כי עוד לא עליתי אל אבי אך לכי נא אל אחי ואמרי אליהם אני עלה אל אבי ואביכם ואל אלהי ואלהיכם׃"],["50","20","18","마리아 막달레나는 제자들에게 가서 “제가 주님을 뵈었습니다.” 하면서, 예수님께서 자기에게 하신 이 말씀을 전하였다.","막달라 여자 마리아는 제자들에게 가서 자기가 주님을 만나 뵌 일과 주님께서 자기에게 일러주신 말씀을 전하였다.","막달라 마리아가 가서 제자들에게 내가 주를 보았다 하고 또 주께서 자기에게 이렇게 말씀하셨다 이르니라","막달라 마리아가 가서 제자들에게 내가 주를 보았다 하고 또 주께서 자기에게 이렇게 말씀하셨다 이르니라","그래서 막달라 마리아는 제자들에게 가서 자기가 주님을 만나 뵌 일과 주님이 일러주신 말씀을 그들에게 전하였다.","Mary of Magdala went and announced to the disciples, “I have seen the Lord,” and what he told her.","Mary Magdalene came and told the disciples that she had seen the LORD, and that he had spoken these things unto her.","Mary Magdalene went to the disciples with the news: \"I have seen the Lord!\" And she told them that he had said these things to her.","Venit Maria Magdalene annuntians discipulis: “Vidi Dominum! “, et quia haec dixit ei.","ותבא מרים המגדלית ותספר אל התלמידים כי ראתה את האדון וכזאת דבר אליה׃"],["50","20","19","그날 곧 주간 첫날 저녁이 되자, 제자들은 유다인들이 두려워 문을 모두 잠가 놓고 있었다. 그런데 예수님께서 오시어 가운데에 서시며, “평화가 너희와 함께!” 하고 그들에게 말씀하셨다.","안식일 다음날 저녁에 제자들은 유다인들이 무서워서 어떤 집에 모여 문을 모두 닫아걸고 있었다. 그런데 예수께서 들어오셔서 그들 한가운데 서시며 \"너희에게 평화가 있기를!\" 하고 인사하셨다.","이 날 곧 안식 후 첫날 저녁 때에 제자들이 유대인들을 두려워하여 모인 곳의 문들을 닫았더니 예수께서 오사 가운데 서서 이르시되 너희에게 평강이 있을지어다","이날 곧 안식 후 첫날 저녁 때에 제자들이 유대인들을 두려워하여 모인 곳에 문들을 닫았더니 예수께서 오사 가운데 서서 가라사대 너희에게 평강이 있을찌어다","그날 저녁 제자들은 유대인 지도자들이 무서워서 자기들이 모여 있는 집의 문을 닫아 걸고 있었다. 그런데 갑자기 예수께서 들어오셔서 그들 가운데 서서 \"너희에게 평안이 있으라!\" 하고","On the evening of that first day of the week, when the doors were locked, where the disciples were, for fear of the Jews, Jesus came and stood in their midst and said to them, “Peace be with you.”","Then the same day at evening, being the first day of the week, when the doors were shut where the disciples were assembled for fear of the Jews, came Jesus and stood in the midst, and saith unto them, Peace be unto you.","On the evening of that first day of the week, when the disciples were together, with the doors locked for fear of the Jews, Jesus came and stood among them and said, \"Peace be with you!\"","Cum esset ergo sero die illa prima sabbatorum, et fores essent clausae, ubi erant discipuli, propter metum Iudaeorum, venit Iesus et stetit in medio et dicit eis: “Pax vobis! “.","ויהי לעת ערב ביום ההוא והוא אחד בשבת כאשר נסגרו דלתות הבית אשר נקבצו שם התלמידים מיראת היהודים ויבא ישוע ויעמד ביניהם ויאמר אליהם שלום לכם׃"],["50","20","20","이렇게 말씀하시고 나서 당신의 두 손과 옆구리를 그들에게 보여 주셨다. 제자들은 주님을 뵙고 기뻐하였다.","그리고 나서 당신의 손과 옆구리를 보여주셨다. 제자들은 주님을 뵙고 너무 기뻐서 어쩔 줄을 몰랐다.","이 말씀을 하시고 손과 옆구리를 보이시니 제자들이 주를 보고 기뻐하더라","이 말씀을 하시고 손과 옆구리를 보이시니 제자들이 주를 보고 기뻐하더라","자기 손과 옆구리를 보이셨다. 제자들은 주님을 뵙고 기뻐서 어찌할 줄을 몰랐다.","When he had said this, he showed them his hands and his side. The disciples rejoiced when they saw the Lord.","And when he had so said, he shewed unto them his hands and his side. Then were the disciples glad, when they saw the LORD.","After he said this, he showed them his hands and side. The disciples were overjoyed when they saw the Lord.","Et hoc cum dixisset, ostendit eis manus et latus. Gavisi sunt ergo discipuli, viso Domino.","ובדברו זאת הראה אתם את ידיו ואת צדו וישמחו התלמידים בראותם את האדון׃"],["50","20","21","예수님께서 다시 그들에게 이르셨다. “평화가 너희와 함께! 아버지께서 나를 보내신 것처럼 나도 너희를 보낸다.”","예수께서 다시 \"너희에게 평화가 있기를! 내 아버지께서 나를 보내주신 것처럼 나도 너희를 보낸다.\" 하고 말씀하셨다.","예수께서 또 이르시되 너희에게 평강이 있을지어다 아버지께서 나를 보내신 것 같이 나도 너희를 보내노라","예수께서 또 가라사대 너희에게 평강이 있을찌어다 아버지께서 나를 보내신 것 같이 나도 너희를 보내노라","예수께서 다시 그들에게 말씀하셨다. \"너희에게 평안이 있으라. 아버지께서 나를 보내신 것같이 나도 너희를 보낸다.\"","[Jesus] said to them again, “Peace be with you. As the Father has sent me, so I send you.”","Then said Jesus to them again, Peace be unto you: as my Father hath sent me, even so send I you.","Again Jesus said, \"Peace be with you! As the Father has sent me, I am sending you.\"","Dixit ergo eis iterum: “Pax vobis! Sicut misit me Pater, et ego mitto vos “.","ויסף ישוע לדבר אליהם שלום לכם כאשר שלח אתי האב כן אנכי שלח אתכם׃"],["50","20","22","이렇게 이르시고 나서 그들에게 숨을 불어넣으며 말씀하셨다. “성령을 받아라.","이렇게 말씀하신 다음 예수께서는 그들에게 숨을 내쉬시며 말씀을 계속하셨다. \"성령을 받아라.","이 말씀을 하시고 그들을 향하사 숨을 내쉬며 이르시되 성령을 받으라","이 말씀을 하시고 저희를 향하사 숨을 내쉬며 가라사대 성령을 받으라","그러고 나서 그들을 향하여 숨을 내쉬며 말씀하셨다. \"성령을 받으라.","And when he had said this, he breathed on them and said to them, “Receive the holy Spirit.","And when he had said this, he breathed on them, and saith unto them, Receive ye the Holy Ghost:","And with that he breathed on them and said, \"Receive the Holy Spirit.","Et cum hoc dixisset, insufflavit et dicit eis: “Accipite Spiritum Sanctum.","ויהי בדברו זאת ויפח בהם ויאמר אליהם קחו לכם את רוח הקדש׃"],["50","20","23","너희가 누구의 죄든지 용서해 주면 그가 용서를 받을 것이고, 그대로 두면 그대로 남아 있을 것이다.”","누구의 죄든지 너희가 용서해 주면 그들의 죄는 용서받을 것이고 용서해 주지 않으면 용서받지 못한 채 남아 있을 것이다.\"","너희가 누구의 죄든지 사하면 사하여질 것이요 누구의 죄든지 그대로 두면 그대로 있으리라 하시니라","너희가 뉘 죄든지 사하면 사하여질 것이요 뉘 죄든지 그대로 두면 그대로 있으리라 하시니라","만일 너희가 누구의 죄든지 용서하면 그들의 죄는 용서받을 것이고, 만일 용서해 주지 않으면 용서받지 못할 것이다.\"","Whose sins you forgive are forgiven them, and whose sins you retain are retained.”","Whose soever sins ye remit, they are remitted unto them; and whose soever sins ye retain, they are retained.","If you forgive anyone his sins, they are forgiven; if you do not forgive them, they are not forgiven.\"","Quorum remiseritis peccata, remissa sunt eis; quorum retinueritis, retenta sunt “.","והיה כל אשר תסלחו את חטאתם ונסלח להם ואשר תאשימו יאשמו׃"],["50","20","24","열두 제자 가운데 하나로서 ‘쌍둥이’라고 불리는 토마스는 예수님께서 오셨을 때에 그들과 함께 있지 않았다.","열두 제자 중 하나로서 쌍둥이라고 불리던 토마는 예수께서 오셨을 때에 그들과 함께 있지 않았었다.","열두 제자 중의 하나로서 디두모라 불리는 도마는 예수께서 오셨을 때에 함께 있지 아니한지라","열 두 제자 중에 하나인 디두모라 하는 도마는 예수 오셨을 때에 함께 있지 아니한지라","제자 가운데 쌍둥이라는 별명을 가진 도마는 마침 그 자리에 없었다.","Thomas, called Didymus, one of the Twelve, was not with them when Jesus came.","But Thomas, one of the twelve, called Didymus, was not with them when Jesus came.","Now Thomas (called Didymus), one of the Twelve, was not with the disciples when Jesus came.","Thomas autem, unus ex Duodecim, qui dicitur Didymus, non erat cum eis, quando venit Iesus.","ותומא אחד משנים העשר הנקרא דידומוס לא היה בתוכם כבוא ישוע׃"],["50","20","25","그래서 다른 제자들이 그에게 “우리는 주님을 뵈었소.” 하고 말하였다. 그러나 토마스는 그들에게, “나는 그분의 손에 있는 못 자국을 직접 보고 그 못 자국에 내 손가락을 넣어 보고 또 그분 옆구리에 내 손을 넣어 보지 않고는 결코 믿지 못하겠소.” 하고 말하였다.","다른 제자들이 그에게 \"우리는 주님을 뵈었소.\" 하고 말하자 토마는 그들에게 \"나는 내 눈으로 그분의 손에 있는 못자국을 보고 내 손가락을 그 못자국에 넣어보고 또 내 손을 그분의 옆구리에 넣어보지 않고는 결코 믿지 못하겠소.\" 하고 말하였다.","다른 제자들이 그에게 이르되 우리가 주를 보았노라 하니 도마가 이르되 내가 그의 손의 못 자국을 보며 내 손가락을 그 못 자국에 넣으며 내 손을 그 옆구리에 넣어 보지 않고는 믿지 아니하겠노라 하니라","다른 제자들이 그에게 이르되 우리가 주를 보았노라 하니 도마가 가로되 내가 그 손의 못자국을 보며 내 손가락을 그 못자국에 넣으며 내 손을 그 옆구리에 넣어 보지 않고는 믿지 아니하겠노라 하니라","그들이 도마에게 \"우리는 주님을 뵈었다오\" 하고 말하자 도마는 \"나는 내 눈으로 그분의 손에서 못자국을 보고 거기에 손가락을 넣어 보며 또 내 손을 그분의 옆구리에 넣어 보기 전에는 믿을 수가 없소\" 하고 말하였다.","So the other disciples said to him, “We have seen the Lord.” But he said to them, “Unless I see the mark of the nails in his hands and put my finger into the nailmarks and put my hand into his side, I will not believe.”","The other disciples therefore said unto him, We have seen the LORD. But he said unto them, Except I shall see in his hands the print of the nails, and put my finger into the print of the nails, and thrust my hand into his side, I will not believe.","So the other disciples told him, \"We have seen the Lord!\" But he said to them, \"Unless I see the nail marks in his hands and put my finger where the nails were, and put my hand into his side, I will not believe it.\"","Dicebant ergo ei alii discipuli: “Vidimus Dominum! “. Ille autem dixit eis: “Nisi videro in manibus eius signum clavorum et mittam digitum meum in signum clavorum et mittam manum meam in latus eius, non credam “.","ויגידו לו התלמידים הנשארים ראה ראינו את האדון ויאמר אליהם אם לא אראה בידיו את רשם המסמרות ואשים את אצבעתי במקום המסמרות ואשים את ידי בצדו לא אאמין׃"],["50","20","26","여드레 뒤에 제자들이 다시 집 안에 모여 있었는데 토마스도 그들과 함께 있었다. 문이 다 잠겨 있었는데도 예수님께서 오시어 가운데에 서시며, “평화가 너희와 함께!” 하고 말씀하셨다.","여드레 뒤에 제자들이 다시 집 안에 모여 있었는데 그 자리에는 토마도 같이 있었다. 문이 다 잠겨 있었는데도 예수께서 들어오셔서 그들 한가운데 서시며 \"너희에게 평화가 있기를!\" 하고 인사하셨다.","여드레를 지나서 제자들이 다시 집 안에 있을 때에 도마도 함께 있고 문들이 닫혔는데 예수께서 오사 가운데 서서 이르시되 너희에게 평강이 있을지어다 하시고","여드레를 지나서 제자들이 다시 집안에 있을 때에 도마도 함께 있고 문들이 닫혔는데 예수께서 오사 가운데 서서 가라사대 너희에게 평강이 있을찌어다 하시고","여드레 후에 제자들이 다시 모였다. 이번에는 도마도 그들과 같이 있었다. 문은 역시 잠겨져 있었다. 그런데 갑자기 지난번과 같이 예수께서 그들 가운데 서서 \"너희에게 평안이 있으라\" 하고 말씀하셨다.","Now a week later his disciples were again inside and Thomas was with them. Jesus came, although the doors were locked, and stood in their midst and said, “Peace be with you.”","And after eight days again his disciples were within, and Thomas with them: then came Jesus, the doors being shut, and stood in the midst, and said, Peace be unto you.","A week later his disciples were in the house again, and Thomas was with them. Though the doors were locked, Jesus came and stood among them and said, \"Peace be with you!\"","Et post dies octo iterum erant discipuli eius intus, et Thomas cum eis. Venit Iesus ianuis clausis et stetit in medio et dixit: “Pax vobis! “.","ויהי מקצה שמונת ימים ותלמידיו שנית פנימה ותומא עמהם ויבא ישוע והדלתות מסגרות ויעמד ביניהם ויאמר שלום לכם׃"],["50","20","27","그러고 나서 토마스에게 이르셨다. “네 손가락을 여기 대 보고 내 손을 보아라. 네 손을 뻗어 내 옆구리에 넣어 보아라. 그리고 의심을 버리고 믿어라.”","그리고 토마에게 \"네 손가락으로 내 손을 만져보아라. 또 네 손을 내 옆구리에 넣어보아라. 그리고 의심을 버리고 믿어라.\" 하고 말씀하셨다.","도마에게 이르시되 네 손가락을 이리 내밀어 내 손을 보고 네 손을 내밀어 내 옆구리에 넣어 보라 그리하여 믿음 없는 자가 되지 말고 믿는 자가 되라","도마에게 이르시되 네 손가락을 이리 내밀어 내 손을 보고 네 손을 내밀어 내 옆구리에 넣어보라 그리하고 믿음 없는 자가 되지 말고 믿는 자가 되라","그러고나서 도마에게 말씀하셨다. \"네 손가락을 내 손에 넣어 보고, 네 손을 내 옆구리에 넣어 보라. 그리고 이제는 더 이상 의심하지 말고 믿으라!\"","Then he said to Thomas, “Put your finger here and see my hands, and bring your hand and put it into my side, and do not be unbelieving, but believe.”","Then saith he to Thomas, Reach hither thy finger, and behold my hands; and reach hither thy hand, and thrust it into my side: and be not faithless, but believing.","Then he said to Thomas, \"Put your finger here; see my hands. Reach out your hand and put it into my side. Stop doubting and believe.\"","Deinde dicit Thomae: “Infer digitum tuum huc et vide manus meas et affer manum tuam et mitte in latus meum; et noli fieri incredulus sed fidelis! “.","ואחר אמר אל תומא שלח אצבעך הנה וראה את ידי ושלח את ידך הנה ושים בצדי ואל תהי חסר אמונה כי אם מאמין׃"],["50","20","28","토마스가 예수님께 대답하였다. “저의 주님, 저의 하느님!”","토마가 예수께 \"나의 주님, 나의 하느님!\" 하고 대답하자","도마가 대답하여 이르되 나의 주님이시요 나의 하나님이시니이다","도마가 대답하여 가로되 나의 주시며 나의 하나님이시니이다","도마가 \"나의 주님, 나의 하나님!\" 하고 외치자","Thomas answered and said to him, “My Lord and my God!”","And Thomas answered and said unto him, My LORD and my God.","Thomas said to him, \"My Lord and my God!\"","Respondit Thomas et dixit ei: “Dominus meus et Deus meus! “.","ויען תומא ויאמר אליו אדני ואלהי׃"],["50","20","29","그러자 예수님께서 토마스에게 말씀하셨다. “너는 나를 보고서야 믿느냐? 보지 않고도 믿는 사람은 행복하다.”","예수께서는 \"너는 나를 보고야 믿느냐? 나를 보지 않고도 믿는 사람은 행복하다.\" 하고 말씀하셨다.","예수께서 이르시되 너는 나를 본 고로 믿느냐 보지 못하고 믿는 자들은 복되도다 하시니라","예수께서 가라사대 너는 나를 본 고로 믿느냐 보지못하고 믿는 자들은 복되도다 하시니라","예수께서 말씀하셨다. \"너는 나를 보았기 때문에 믿는구나. 그러나 나를 보지 않고도 믿는 사람은 복이 있다.\"","Jesus said to him, “Have you come to believe because you have seen me? Blessed are those who have not seen and have believed.”","Jesus saith unto him, Thomas, because thou hast seen me, thou hast believed: blessed are they that have not seen, and yet have believed.","Then Jesus told him, \"Because you have seen me, you have believed; blessed are those who have not seen and yet have believed.\"","Dicit ei Iesus: “Quia vidisti me, credidisti. Beati, qui non viderunt et crediderunt! “.","ויאמר אליו ישוע יען ראית אתי האמנת אשרי המאמינים ואינם ראים׃"],["50","20","30","예수님께서는 이 책에 기록되지 않은 다른 많은 표징도 제자들 앞에서 일으키셨다.","예수께서는 제자들 앞에서 이 책에 기록되지 않은 다른 기적들도 수없이 행하셨다.","예수께서 제자들 앞에서 이 책에 기록되지 아니한 다른 표적도 많이 행하셨으나","예수께서 제자들 앞에서 이책에 기록되지 아니한 다른 1)표적도 많이 행하셨으나 혹 이적","예수의 제자들은 이 책에 기록된 것 외에도 예수께서 행하신 수많은 다른 이적들을 보았다. 그러나 이것을 기록해 두는 것은 사람들로 하여금 예수가 하나님의 아들 그리스도이신 것을 믿게 하고 또 그분을 믿음으로써 그분의 이름으로 생명을 얻도록 하려는 것이다.","Now Jesus did many other signs in the presence of [his] disciples that are not written in this book.","And many other signs truly did Jesus in the presence of his disciples, which are not written in this book:","Jesus did many other miraculous signs in the presence of his disciples, which are not recorded in this book.","Multa quidem et alia signa fecit Iesus in conspectu discipulorum suorum, quae non sunt scripta in libro hoc;","והנה גם אתות אחרים רבים עשה ישוע לעיני תלמידיו אשר לא נכתבו בספר הזה׃"],["50","20","31","이것들을 기록한 목적은 예수님께서 메시아시며 하느님의 아드님이심을 여러분이 믿고, 또 그렇게 믿어서 그분의 이름으로 생명을 얻게 하려는 것이다.","이 책을 쓴 목적은 다만 사람들이 예수는 그리스도이시며 하느님의 아들이심을 믿고, 또 그렇게 믿어서 주님의 이름으로 생명을 얻게 하려는 것이다.","오직 이것을 기록함은 너희로 예수께서 하나님의 아들 그리스도이심을 믿게 하려 함이요 또 너희로 믿고 그 이름을 힘입어 생명을 얻게 하려 함이니라","오직 이것을 기록함은 너희로 예수께서 하나님의 아들 그리스도이심을 믿게 하려 함이요 또 너희로 믿고 그 이름을 힘입어 생명을 얻게 하려 함이니라","(30절에 포함되어 있음)","But these are written that you may [come to] believe that Jesus is the Messiah, the Son of God, and that through this belief you may have life in his name.","But these are written, that ye might believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God; and that believing ye might have life through his name.","But these are written that you may believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, and that by believing you may have life in his name.","haec autem scripta sunt, ut credatis quia Iesus est Christus Filius Dei et ut credentes vitam habeatis in nomine eius.","אך אלה נכתבו למען תאמינו כי ישוע הוא המשיח בן אלהים ולמען יהיו לכם המאמינים חיי עולם בשמו׃"],["50","21","1","그 뒤에 예수님께서는 티베리아스 호숫가에서 다시 제자들에게 당신 자신을 드러내셨는데, 이렇게 드러내셨다.","그 뒤 예수께서 티베리아 호숫가에서 제자들에게 다시 나타나셨는데 그 경위는 이러하다.","그 후에 예수께서 디베랴 호수에서 또 제자들에게 자기를 나타내셨으니 나타내신 일은 이러하니라","그 후에 예수께서 디베랴 바다에서 또 제자들에게 자기를 나타내셨으니 나타내신 일이 이러하니라","그후 예수께서는 디베랴 바닷가에서 다시 제자들에게 모습을 나타내셨는데 그 경위는 이러하다.","After this, Jesus revealed himself again to his disciples at the Sea of Tiberias. He revealed himself in this way.","After these things Jesus shewed himself again to the disciples at the sea of Tiberias; and on this wise shewed he himself.","Afterward Jesus appeared again to his disciples, by the Sea of Tiberias. It happened this way:","Postea manifestavit se iterum Iesus discipulis ad mare Tiberiadis; manifestavit autem sic.","ויהי אחרי כן ויסף ישוע הגלות אל תלמידיו על ים טיבריה וכה נגלה אליהם׃"],["50","21","2","시몬 베드로와 ‘쌍둥이’라고 불리는 토마스, 갈릴래아 카나 출신 나타나엘과 제베대오의 아들들, 그리고 그분의 다른 두 제자가 함께 있었다.","시몬 베드로와 쌍둥이라는 토마와 갈릴래아 가나 사람 나타나엘과 제베대오의 아들들과 그 밖의 두 제자가 한자리에 모여 있었다.","시몬 베드로와 디두모라 하는 도마와 갈릴리 가나 사람 나다나엘과 세베대의 아들들과 또 다른 제자 둘이 함께 있더니","시몬 베드로와 디두모라 하는 도마와 갈릴리 가나 사람 나다나엘과 세베대의 아들들과 또 다른 제자 둘이 함께 있더니","그때 그곳에는 제자들 가운데 몇 사람, 곧 시몬 베드로, 쌍둥이 도마, 갈릴리 가나 사람 나다나엘, 세베대의 아들들, 그리고 다른 제자 두 사람이 함께 있었다.","Together were Simon Peter, Thomas called Didymus, Nathanael from Cana in Galilee, Zebedee’s sons, and two others of his disciples.","There were together Simon Peter, and Thomas called Didymus, and Nathanael of Cana in Galilee, and the sons of Zebedee, and two other of his disciples.","Simon Peter, Thomas (called Didymus), Nathanael from Cana in Galilee, the sons of Zebedee, and two other disciples were together.","Erant simul Simon Petrus et Thomas, qui dicitur Didymus, et Nathanael, qui erat a Cana Galilaeae, et filii Zebedaei et alii ex discipulis eius duo.","שמעון פטרוס ותומא הנקרא דידומוס ונתנאל מקנה אשר בארץ הגליל ובני זבדי ועוד שנים אחרים מתלמידיו ישבו יחדו׃"],["50","21","3","시몬 베드로가 그들에게 “나는 고기 잡으러 가네.” 하고 말하자, 그들이 “우리도 함께 가겠소.” 하였다. 그들이 밖으로 나가 배를 탔지만 그날 밤에는 아무것도 잡지 못하였다.","그 때 시몬 베드로가 \"나는 고기를 잡으러 가겠소.\" 하자 나머지 사람들도 같이 가겠다고 따라나섰다. 그들은 배를 타고 고기잡이를 나갔으나 그 날 밤에는 아무것도 잡지 못하였다.","시몬 베드로가 나는 물고기 잡으러 가노라 하니 그들이 우리도 함께 가겠다 하고 나가서 배에 올랐으나 그 날 밤에 아무 것도 잡지 못하였더니","시몬 베드로가 나는 물고기 잡으러 가노라 하매 저희가 우리도 함께 가겠다 하고 나가서 배에 올랐으나 이 밤에 아무 것도 잡지 못하였더니","시몬 베드로가 \"고기나 잡으러 가겠소\" 하고 나서자 \"좋습니다. 같이 갑시다\" 하고 모두들 따라 나섰다. 그런데 밤이 새도록 고기를 한 마리도 잡지 못하였다.","Simon Peter said to them, “I am going fishing.” They said to him, “We also will come with you.” So they went out and got into the boat, but that night they caught nothing.","Simon Peter saith unto them, I go a fishing. They say unto him, We also go with thee. They went forth, and entered into a ship immediately; and that night they caught nothing.","\"I'm going out to fish,\" Simon Peter told them, and they said, \"We'll go with you.\" So they went out and got into the boat, but that night they caught nothing.","Dicit eis Simon Petrus: “Vado piscari “. Dicunt ei: “Venimus et nos tecum “. Exierunt et ascenderunt in navem; et illa nocte nihil prendiderunt.","ויאמר אליהם שמעון פטרוס הנני הלך לדיג ויאמרו אליו גם אנחנו נלך עמך ויצאו וימהרו לרדת אל האניה ובלילה ההוא לא אחזו מאומה׃"],["50","21","4","어느덧 아침이 될 무렵, 예수님께서 물가에 서 계셨다. 그러나 제자들은 그분이 예수님이신 줄을 알지 못하였다.","이튿날 날이 밝아올 때 예수께서 호숫가에 서 계셨다. 그러나 제자들은 그분이 예수이신 줄을 미처 몰랐다.","날이 새어갈 때에 예수께서 바닷가에 서셨으나 제자들이 예수이신 줄 알지 못하는지라","날이 새어갈 때에 예수께서 바닷가에 서셨으나 제자들이 예수신줄 알지 못하는지라","새벽녘에 그들은 어떤 사람이 바닷가에 서 있는 것을 보았다. 그러나 그가 누구인지는 알아볼 수가 없었다.","When it was already dawn, Jesus was standing on the shore; but the disciples did not realize that it was Jesus.","But when the morning was now come, Jesus stood on the shore: but the disciples knew not that it was Jesus.","Early in the morning, Jesus stood on the shore, but the disciples did not realize that it was Jesus.","Mane autem iam facto, stetit Iesus in litore; non tamen sciebant discipuli quia Iesus est.","הבקר אור וישוע עמד על שפת הים ולא ידעו התלמידים כי ישוע הוא׃"],["50","21","5","예수님께서 그들에게, “얘들아, 무얼 좀 잡았느냐?” 하시자, 그들이 대답하였다. “못 잡았습니다.”","예수께서 \"얘들아, 무얼 좀 잡았느냐?\" 하고 물으시자 그들은 \"아무것도 못 잡았습니다.\" 하고 대답하였다.","예수께서 이르시되 얘들아 너희에게 고기가 있느냐 대답하되 없나이다","예수께서 이르시되 얘들아 너희에게 고기가 있느냐 대답하되 없나이다","\"이 사람들아, 무얼 좀 잡았나?\" 하고 그가 소리쳤다. \"한 마리도 못 잡았습니다\" 하고 그들이 대답하자","Jesus said to them, “Children, have you caught anything to eat?” They answered him, “No.”","Then Jesus saith unto them, Children, have ye any meat? They answered him, No.","He called out to them, \"Friends, haven't you any fish?\" \"No,\" they answered.","Dicit ergo eis Iesus: “Pueri, numquid pulmentarium habetis? “. Responderunt ei: “Non “.","ויאמר אליהם ישוע בני היש לכם אכל מאומה ויענו אתו אין׃"],["50","21","6","예수님께서 그들에게 이르셨다. “그물을 배 오른쪽에 던져라. 그러면 고기가 잡힐 것이다.” 그래서 제자들이 그물을 던졌더니, 고기가 너무 많이 걸려 그물을 끌어 올릴 수가 없었다.","\"그물을 배 오른편에 던져보아라. 그러면 고기가 잡힐 것이다.\" 그들이 예수께서 이르시는 대로 그물을 던졌더니 그물을 끌어올릴 수 없을 만큼 고기가 많이 걸려들었다.","이르시되 그물을 배 오른편에 던지라 그리하면 잡으리라 하시니 이에 던졌더니 물고기가 많아 그물을 들 수 없더라","가라사대 그물을 배 오른편에 던지라 그리하면 얻으리라 하신대 이에 던졌더니 고기가 많아 그물을 들 수 없더라","그가 말하였다. \"그물을 배 오른쪽에 던지게. 그러면 많이 잡힐 테니.\" 그래서 그들이 그 말대로 하였더니 고기가 너무 많이 걸려서 그물을 끌어올릴 수조차 없었다.","So he said to them, “Cast the net over the right side of the boat and you will find something.” So they cast it, and were not able to pull it in because of the number of fish.","And he said unto them, Cast the net on the right side of the ship, and ye shall find. They cast therefore, and now they were not able to draw it for the multitude of fishes.","He said, \"Throw your net on the right side of the boat and you will find some.\" When they did, they were unable to haul the net in because of the large number of fish.","Ille autem dixit eis: “Mittite in dexteram navigii rete et invenietis “. Miserunt ergo et iam non valebant illud trahere a multitudine piscium.","ויאמר להם השליכו המכמרת מימין לאניה ותמצאו וישליכו ולא יכלו עוד למשך אתה מרב הדגים׃"],["50","21","7","예수님께서 사랑하신 그 제자가 베드로에게 “주님이십니다.” 하고 말하였다. 주님이시라는 말을 듣자, 옷을 벗고 있던 베드로는 겉옷을 두르고 호수로 뛰어들었다.","예수의 사랑을 받던 제자가 베드로에게 \"저분은 주님이십니다.\" 하고 말하였다. 주님이시라는 말을 듣자 옷을 벗고 있던 시몬 베드로는 몸에 겉옷을 두르고 그냥 물 속에 뛰어들었다.","예수께서 사랑하시는 그 제자가 베드로에게 이르되 주님이시라 하니 시몬 베드로가 벗고 있다가 주님이라 하는 말을 듣고 겉옷을 두른 후에 바다로 뛰어 내리더라","예수의 사랑하시는 그 제자가 베드로에게 이르되 주시라 하니 시몬 베드로가 벗고 있다가 주라 하는 말을 듣고 겉옷을 두른 후에 바다로 뛰어 내리더라","그 순간 예수께서 사랑하시던 제자가 베드로에게 \"주님이시다\" 하고 말하였다. 그러자 옷을 벗고 있던 시몬 베드로는 겉옷을 걸치고 물속에 뛰어들어 바닷가 언덕까지 헤엄쳐 갔다.","So the disciple whom Jesus loved said to Peter, “It is the Lord.” When Simon Peter heard that it was the Lord, he tucked in his garment, for he was lightly clad, and jumped into the sea.","Therefore that disciple whom Jesus loved saith unto Peter, It is the Lord. Now when Simon Peter heard that it was the Lord, he girt his fisher's coat unto him, (for he was naked,) and did cast himself into the sea.","Then the disciple whom Jesus loved said to Peter, \"It is the Lord!\" As soon as Simon Peter heard him say, \"It is the Lord,\" he wrapped his outer garment around him (for he had taken it off) and jumped into the water.","Dicit ergo discipulus ille, quem diligebat Iesus, Petro: “Dominus est! “. Simon ergo Petrus, cum audisset quia Dominus est, tunicam succinxit se, erat enim nudus, et misit se in mare;","ויאמר התלמיד ההוא אשר ישוע אהבו אל פטרוס זה הוא האדון ויהי כשמע שמעון פטרוס כי הוא האדון ויחגר את מעילו כי עירום היה ויתנפל אל הים׃"],["50","21","8","다른 제자들은 그 작은 배로 고기가 든 그물을 끌고 왔다. 그들은 뭍에서 백 미터쯤밖에 떨어져 있지 않았던 것이다.","나머지 제자들은 고기가 잔뜩 걸려든 그물을 끌며 배를 저어 육지로 나왔다. 그들이 들어갔던 곳은 육지에서 백 미터쯤밖에 떨어지지 않은 곳이었다.","다른 제자들은 육지에서 거리가 불과 한 오십 칸쯤 되므로 작은 배를 타고 물고기 든 그물을 끌고 와서","다른 제자들은 육지에서 상거가 불과 한 오십 간쯤 되므로 작은 배를 타고 고기든 그물을 끌고 와서","배에 남아 있던 제자들도 그물을 끌며 배를 저어 약 90미터 정도 떨어진 언덕에 닿았다.","The other disciples came in the boat, for they were not far from shore, only about a hundred yards, dragging the net with the fish.","And the other disciples came in a little ship; (for they were not far from land, but as it were two hundred cubits,) dragging the net with fishes.","The other disciples followed in the boat, towing the net full of fish, for they were not far from shore, about a hundred yards.","alii autem discipuli navigio venerunt, non enim longe erant a terra, sed quasi cubitis ducentis, trahentes rete piscium.","והתלמידים הנשארים באו בספינה כי לא הרחיקו מן היבשה כי אם כמאתים אמה וימשכו את המכמרת עם הדגים׃"],["50","21","9","그들이 뭍에 내려서 보니, 숯불이 있고 그 위에 물고기가 놓여 있고 빵도 있었다.","그들이 육지에 올라와 보니 숯불이 있고 그 위에 생선이 놓여 있었다. 그리고 빵도 있었다.","육지에 올라보니 숯불이 있는데 그 위에 생선이 놓였고 떡도 있더라","육지에 올라보니 숯불이 있는데 그 위에 생선이 놓였고 떡도 있더라","그들이 언덕에 닿아 보니 숯불 위에 생선이 놓여 있고 떡도 있었다.","When they climbed out on shore, they saw a charcoal fire with fish on it and bread.","As soon then as they were come to land, they saw a fire of coals there, and fish laid thereon, and bread.","When they landed, they saw a fire of burning coals there with fish on it, and some bread.","Ut ergo descenderunt in terram, vident prunas positas et piscem superpositum et panem.","ויהי כצאתם אל היבשה ויראו שם גחלי אש ערוכים ודגים עליהם ולחם לאכל׃"],["50","21","10","예수님께서 그들에게 말씀하셨다. “방금 잡은 고기를 몇 마리 가져오너라.”","예수께서 제자들에게 \"방금 잡은 고기를 몇 마리 가져오너라.\" 하고 말씀하셨다.","예수께서 이르시되 지금 잡은 생선을 좀 가져오라 하시니","예수께서 가라사대 지금 잡은 생선을 좀 가져오라 하신대","예수께서 말씀하셨다. \"방금 잡은 생선을 몇 마리 가져오너라.\"","Jesus said to them, “Bring some of the fish you just caught.”","Jesus saith unto them, Bring of the fish which ye have now caught.","Jesus said to them, \"Bring some of the fish you have just caught.\"","Dicit eis Iesus: “Afferte de piscibus, quos prendidistis nunc “.","ויאמר אליהם ישוע הביאו הלם מן הדגים אשר אחזתם עתה׃"],["50","21","11","그러자 시몬 베드로가 배에 올라 그물을 뭍으로 끌어 올렸다. 그 안에는 큰 고기가 백쉰세 마리나 가득 들어 있었다. 고기가 그토록 많은데도 그물이 찢어지지 않았다.","시몬 베드로는 배에 가서 그물을 육지로 끌어올렸다. 그물 속에는 백쉰세 마리나 되는 큰 고기가 가득히 들어 있었다. 그렇게 많은 고기가 들어 있었는데도 그물은 터지지 않았다.","시몬 베드로가 올라가서 그물을 육지에 끌어 올리니 가득히 찬 큰 물고기가 백쉰세 마리라 이같이 많으나 그물이 찢어지지 아니하였더라","시몬 베드로가 올라가서 그물을 육지에 끌어 올리니 가득히 찬 큰 고기가 일백 쉰 세 마리라 이같이 많으나 그물이 찢어지지 아니하였더라","그래서 시몬 베드로가 배에 가서 그물을 언덕으로 끌어올렸다. 그물 안에는 큰 생선이 153마리나 들어 있었다. 그런데도 그물은 찢어져 있지 않았다.","So Simon Peter went over and dragged the net ashore full of one hundred fifty-three large fish. Even though there were so many, the net was not torn.","Simon Peter went up, and drew the net to land full of great fishes, an hundred and fifty and three: and for all there were so many, yet was not the net broken.","Simon Peter climbed aboard and dragged the net ashore. It was full of large fish, 153, but even with so many the net was not torn.","Ascendit ergo Simon Petrus et traxit rete in terram, plenum magnis piscibus centum quinquaginta tribus; et cum tanti essent, non est scissum rete.","ויעל שמעון פטרוס וימשך את המכמרת אל היבשה והיא מלאה דגים גדולים מאה וחמשים ושלשה ולא נקרעה המכמרת אף כי רבים היו׃"],["50","21","12","예수님께서 그들에게 “와서 아침을 먹어라.” 하고 말씀하셨다. 제자들 가운데에는 “누구십니까?” 하고 감히 묻는 사람이 없었다. 그분이 주님이시라는 것을 알고 있었기 때문이다.","예수께서 그들에게 \"와서 아침을 들어라.\" 하고 말씀하셨다. 제자들 중에는 감히 \"당신은 누구십니까?\" 하고 묻는 사람이 없었다. 그분이 바로 주님이시라는 것이 분명하였기 때문이다.","예수께서 이르시되 와서 조반을 먹으라 하시니 제자들이 주님이신 줄 아는 고로 당신이 누구냐 감히 묻는 자가 없더라","예수께서 가라사대 와서 조반을 먹으라 하시니 제자들이 주신 줄 아는 고로 당신이 누구냐 감히 묻는 자가 없더라","예수께서 \"이제 와서 아침 식사를 하라\" 하고 말씀하셨다. 그러나 제자들 가운데 아무도 그분께 참으로 주님이시냐고 묻는 사람이 없었다. 이미 그분이 주님이신 것을 너무나도 잘 알고 있었던 것이다.","Jesus said to them, “Come, have breakfast.” And none of the disciples dared to ask him, “Who are you?” because they realized it was the Lord.","Jesus saith unto them, Come and dine. And none of the disciples durst ask him, Who art thou? knowing that it was the Lord.","Jesus said to them, \"Come and have breakfast.\" None of the disciples dared ask him, \"Who are you?\" They knew it was the Lord.","Dicit eis Iesus: “Venite, prandete “. Nemo autem audebat discipulorum interrogare eum: “Tu quis es? “, scientes quia Dominus est.","ויאמר אליהם ישוע באו ברו לחם ואין גם אחד בתלמידים אשר מלאו לבו לשאל אתו מי אתה כי ידעו אשר הוא האדון׃"],["50","21","13","예수님께서는 다가가셔서 빵을 들어 그들에게 주시고 고기도 그렇게 주셨다.","예수께서는 제자들에게 가까이 오셔서 빵을 집어주시고 또 생선도 집어주셨다.","예수께서 가셔서 떡을 가져다가 그들에게 주시고 생선도 그와 같이 하시니라","예수께서 가셔서 떡을 가져다가 저희에게 주시고 생선도 그와 같이 하시니라","예수께서는 제자들에게 가까이 오셔서 떡과 생선을 나누어 주셨다.","Jesus came over and took the bread and gave it to them, and in like manner the fish.","Jesus then cometh, and taketh bread, and giveth them, and fish likewise.","Jesus came, took the bread and gave it to them, and did the same with the fish.","Venit Iesus et accipit panem et dat eis et piscem similiter.","ויבא ישוע ויקח את הלחם ויתן להם וגם את הדגים׃"],["50","21","14","이렇게 예수님께서는 죽은 이들 가운데에서 되살아나신 뒤에 세 번째로 제자들에게 나타나셨다.","예수께서 부활하신 뒤 제자들에게 나타나신 것은 이것이 세 번째였다.","이것은 예수께서 죽은 자 가운데서 살아나신 후에 세 번째로 제자들에게 나타나신 것이라","이것은 예수께서 죽은자 가운데서 살아나신 후에 세 번째로 제자들에게 나타나신 것이라","예수께서 부활하신 후에 제자들에게 나타나신 것이 이것으로 벌써 세번째였다.","This was now the third time Jesus was revealed to his disciples after being raised from the dead.","This is now the third time that Jesus shewed himself to his disciples, after that he was risen from the dead.","This was now the third time Jesus appeared to his disciples after he was raised from the dead.","Hoc iam tertio manifestatus est Iesus discipulis, cum resurrexisset a mortuis.","וזאת היא הפעם השלישית אשר נגלה ישוע אל תלמידיו אחרי קומו מעם המתים׃"],["50","21","15","그들이 아침을 먹은 다음에 예수님께서 시몬 베드로에게 물으셨다. “요한의 아들 시몬아, 너는 이들이 나를 사랑하는 것보다 더 나를 사랑하느냐?” 베드로가 “예, 주님! 제가 주님을 사랑하는 줄을 주님께서 아십니다.” 하고 대답하자, 예수님께서 그에게 말씀하셨다. “내 어린 양들을 돌보아라.”","모두들 조반을 끝내자 예수께서 시몬 베드로에게 \"요한의 아들 시몬아, 네가 이 사람들이 나를 사랑하는 것보다 더 나를 사랑하느냐?\" 하고 물으셨다. 베드로가 \"예, 주님. 아시는 바와 같이 저는 주님을 사랑합니다.\" 하고 대답하자 예수께서는 \"내 어린 양들을 잘 돌보아라.\" 하고 이르셨다.","그들이 조반 먹은 후에 예수께서 시몬 베드로에게 이르시되 요한의 아들 시몬아 네가 이 사람들보다 나를 더 사랑하느냐 하시니 이르되 주님 그러하나이다 내가 주님을 사랑하는 줄 주님께서 아시나이다 이르시되 내 어린 양을 먹이라 하시고","저희가 조반 먹은 후에 예수께서 시몬 베드로에게 이르시되 요한의 아들 시몬아 네가 이 1)사람들보다 나를 더 사랑하느냐 하시니 가로되 주여 그러하외다 내가 주를 사랑하는줄 주께서 아시나이다 가라사대 내 어린 양을 먹이라 하시고 혹 것들보다","아침 식사가 끝났을 때 예수께서 시몬 베드로에게 물으셨다. \"요한의 아들 시몬아, 네가 이 사람들보다 나를 더 사랑하느냐?\" 베드로가 대답하였다. \"예, 주님을 사랑하는 제 마음을 주께서 아시지 않습니까?\" 주께서 말씀하셨다. \"그러면 내 어린 양들을 먹이라.\"","When they had finished breakfast, Jesus said to Simon Peter, “Simon, son of John, do you love me more than these?” He said to him, “Yes, Lord, you know that I love you.” He said to him, “Feed my lambs.”","So when they had dined, Jesus saith to Simon Peter, Simon, son of Jonas, lovest thou me more than these? He saith unto him, Yea, Lord; thou knowest that I love thee. He saith unto him, Feed my lambs.","When they had finished eating, Jesus said to Simon Peter, \"Simon son of John, do you truly love me more than these?\" \"Yes, Lord,\" he said, \"you know that I love you.\" Jesus said, \"Feed my lambs.\"","Cum ergo prandissent, dicit Simoni Petro Iesus: “Simon Ioannis, diligis me plus his? “. Dicit ei: “Etiam, Domine, tu scis quia amo te “. Dicit ei: “Pasce agnos meos “.","ויהי אחרי אכלם אמר ישוע אל שמעון פטרוס שמעון בן יונה התאהב אתי יותר מאלה ויאמר אליו כן אדני אתה ידעת כי אהבתיך ויאמר אליו רעה את טלאי׃"],["50","21","16","예수님께서 다시 두 번째로 베드로에게 물으셨다. “요한의 아들 시몬아, 너는 나를 사랑하느냐?” 베드로가 “예, 주님! 제가 주님을 사랑하는 줄을 주님께서 아십니다.” 하고 대답하자, 예수님께서 그에게 말씀하셨다. “내 양들을 돌보아라.”","예수께서 두 번째 \"요한의 아들 시몬아, 네가 나를 정말 사랑하느냐?\" 하고 물으셨다. \"예, 주님. 아시는 바와 같이 저는 주님을 사랑합니다.\" 베드로가 이렇게 대답하자 예수께서는 \"내 양들을 잘 돌보아라.\" 하고 이르셨다.","또 두 번째 이르시되 요한의 아들 시몬아 네가 나를 사랑하느냐 하시니 이르되 주님 그러하나이다 내가 주님을 사랑하는 줄 주님께서 아시나이다 이르시되 내 양을 치라 하시고","또 두번째 가라사대 요한의 아들 시몬아 네가 나를 사랑하느냐 하시니 가로되 주여 그러하외다 내가 주를 사랑하는줄 주께서 아시나이다 가라사대 내 양을 치라 하시고","예수께서 다시 물으셨다. \"요한의 아들 시몬아, 네가 참으로 나를 사랑하느냐?\" 베드로가 대답하였다. \"예, 주님을 사랑하는 제마음을 주께서 아시지 않습니까?\" 예수께서 말씀하셨다. \"그러면 내 양들을 돌보라.\"","He then said to him a second time, “Simon, son of John, do you love me?” He said to him, “Yes, Lord, you know that I love you.” He said to him, “Tend my sheep.”","He saith to him again the second time, Simon, son of Jonas, lovest thou me? He saith unto him, Yea, Lord; thou knowest that I love thee. He saith unto him, Feed my sheep.","Again Jesus said, \"Simon son of John, do you truly love me?\" He answered, \"Yes, Lord, you know that I love you.\" Jesus said, \"Take care of my sheep.\"","Dicit ei iterum secundo: “Simon Ioannis, diligis me? “. Ait illi: “Etiam, Domine, tu scis quia amo te “. Dicit ei: “Pasce oves meas “.","ויאמר אליו עוד הפעם שמעון בן יונה התאהב אתי ויאמר אליו כן אדני אתה ידעת כי אהבתיך ויאמר אליו נהג את צאני׃"],["50","21","17","예수님께서 세 번째로 베드로에게 물으셨다. “요한의 아들 시몬아, 너는 나를 사랑하느냐?” 베드로는 예수님께서 세 번이나 “나를 사랑하느냐?” 하고 물으시므로 슬퍼하며 대답하였다. “주님, 주님께서는 모든 것을 아십니다. 제가 주님을 사랑하는 줄을 주님께서는 알고 계십니다.” 그러자 예수님께서 베드로에게 말씀하셨다. “내 양들을 돌보아라.","예수께서 세 번째로 \"요한의 아들 시몬아, 네가 나를 사랑하느냐?\" 하고 물으시자 베드로는 세 번이나 예수께서 \"나를 사랑하느냐?\" 하고 물으시는 바람에 마음이 슬퍼졌다. 그러나 \"주님, 주님께서는 모든 일을 다 알고 계십니다. 그러니 제가 주님을 사랑한다는 것을 모르실 리가 없습니다.\" 하고 말하였다. 그러자 예수께서 \"내 양들을 잘 돌보아라.\" 하고 분부하셨다.","세 번째 이르시되 요한의 아들 시몬아 네가 나를 사랑하느냐 하시니 주께서 세 번째 네가 나를 사랑하느냐 하시므로 베드로가 근심하여 이르되 주님 모든 것을 아시오매 내가 주님을 사랑하는 줄을 주님께서 아시나이다 예수께서 이르시되 내 양을 먹이라","세번째 가라사대 요한의 아들 시몬아 네가 나를 사랑하느냐 하시니 주께서 세번째 네가 나를 사랑하느냐 하시므로 베드로가 근심하여 가로되 주여 모든 것을 아시오매 내가 주를 사랑하는 줄을 주께서 아시나이다 예수께서 가라사대 내 양을 먹이라","예수께서는 한 번 더 그에게 물으셨다. \"요한의 아들 시몬아, 네가 정말로 나를 사랑하느냐?\" 베드로는 예수께서 세 번이나 같은 질문을 하시자 근심이 생겨서 \"주님, 주님은 제 진심이 어떤지를 더 잘 알고 계시지 않습니까?\" 하고 대답하였다. 예수께서 말씀하셨다. \"그러면 내 양들을 먹이라.","He said to him the third time, “Simon, son of John, do you love me?” Peter was distressed that he had said to him a third time, “Do you love me?” and he said to him, “Lord, you know everything; you know that I love you.” [Jesus] said to him, “Feed my sheep.","He saith unto him the third time, Simon, son of Jonas, lovest thou me? Peter was grieved because he said unto him the third time, Lovest thou me? And he said unto him, Lord, thou knowest all things; thou knowest that I love thee. Jesus saith unto him, Feed my sheep.","The third time he said to him, \"Simon son of John, do you love me?\" Peter was hurt because Jesus asked him the third time, \"Do you love me?\" He said, \"Lord, you know all things; you know that I love you.\" Jesus said, \"Feed my sheep.","Dicit ei tertio: “Simon Ioannis, amas me? “. Contristatus est Petrus quia dixit ei tertio: “Amas me? “, et dicit ei: “Domine, tu omnia scis, tu cognoscis quia amo te “. Dicit ei: “Pasce oves meas.","ויאמר אליו פעם שלישית שמעון בן יונה התאהב אתי ויתעצב פטרוס על כי אמר אליו בשלישית התאהב אתי ויאמר אליו אדני את כל אתה יודע וידעת כי אהבתיך ויאמר אליו ישוע רעה את צאני׃"],["50","21","18","내가 진실로 진실로 너에게 말한다. 네가 젊었을 때에는 스스로 허리띠를 매고 원하는 곳으로 다녔다. 그러나 늙어서는 네가 두 팔을 벌리면 다른 이들이 너에게 허리띠를 매어 주고서, 네가 원하지 않는 곳으로 데려갈 것이다.”","이어서 \"정말 잘 들어두어라. 네가 젊었을 때에는 제 손으로 띠를 띠고 마음대로 돌아다닐 수 있었다. 그러나 이제 나이를 먹으면 그 때는 팔을 벌리고 남이 와서 허리를 묶어 네가 원하지 않는 곳으로 끌고 갈 것이다.\" 하고 말씀하셨다.","내가 진실로 진실로 네게 이르노니 네가 젊어서는 스스로 띠 띠고 원하는 곳으로 다녔거니와 늙어서는 네 팔을 벌리리니 남이 네게 띠 띠우고 원하지 아니하는 곳으로 데려가리라","내가 진실로 진실로 네게 이르노니 젊어서는 네가 스스로 띠 띠고 원하는 곳으로 다녔거니와 늙어서는 네 팔을 벌리리니 남이 네게 띠 띠우고 원치 아니하는 곳으로 데려가리라","내가 진정으로 말한다. 젊었을 때에는 네가 원하는 일을 하고, 가고 싶은 곳에 마음대로 갈 수 있었다. 그러나 네가 늙으면 다른 사람이 네 팔을 붙잡아 벌리고 네가 원하지 않는 곳으로 데려갈 것이다.\"","Amen, amen, I say to you, when you were younger, you used to dress yourself and go where you wanted; but when you grow old, you will stretch out your hands, and someone else will dress you and lead you where you do not want to go.”","Verily, verily, I say unto thee, When thou wast young, thou girdest thyself, and walkedst whither thou wouldest: but when thou shalt be old, thou shalt stretch forth thy hands, and another shall gird thee, and carry thee whither thou wouldest not.","I tell you the truth, when you were younger you dressed yourself and went where you wanted; but when you are old you will stretch out your hands, and someone else will dress you and lead you where you do not want to go.\"","Amen, amen dico tibi: Cum esses iunior, cingebas teipsum et ambulabas, ubi volebas; cum autem senueris, extendes manus tuas, et alius te cinget et ducet, quo non vis “.","אמן אמן אני אמר לך בהיותך צעיר לימים אתה חגרת את עצמך ותלך אל אשר חפצת והיה כאשר תזקן ופרשת כפיך ואחר יחגרך ונשאך אל אשר לא תחפץ׃"],["50","21","19","예수님께서는 이렇게 말씀하시어, 베드로가 어떠한 죽음으로 하느님을 영광스럽게 할 것인지 가리키신 것이다. 이렇게 이르신 다음에 예수님께서는 베드로에게 “나를 따라라.” 하고 말씀하셨다.","예수의 이 말씀은 베드로가 장차 어떻게 죽어서 하느님의 영광을 드러내게 될 것인가를 암시하신 말씀이었다. 이 말씀을 하신 뒤 예수께서는 베드로에게 \"나를 따라라.\" 하고 말씀하셨다.","이 말씀을 하심은 베드로가 어떠한 죽음으로 하나님께 영광을 돌릴 것을 가리키심이러라 이 말씀을 하시고 베드로에게 이르시되 나를 따르라 하시니","이 말씀을 하심은 베드로가 어떠한 죽음으로 하나님께 영광을 돌릴 것을 가리키심이러라 이 말씀을 하시고 베드로에게 이르시되 나를 따르라 하시니","예수께서는 베드로가 어떤 죽음을 맞아 하나님께 영광을 돌릴 것인가를 은연 중에 알게 하시려고 이렇게 말씀하신 것이었다. 그러고 나서 예수께서는 베드로에게 \"나를 따르라\"고 말씀하셨다.","He said this signifying by what kind of death he would glorify God. And when he had said this, he said to him, “Follow me.”","This spake he, signifying by what death he should glorify God. And when he had spoken this, he saith unto him, Follow me.","Jesus said this to indicate the kind of death by which Peter would glorify God. Then he said to him, \"Follow me!\"","Hoc autem dixit significans qua morte clarificaturus esset Deum. Et hoc cum dixisset, dicit ei: “Sequere me “.","וכל זאת דבר לרמז על המיתה אשר יכבד בה את האלהים ויהי ככלותו לדבר ויאמר אליו לך אחרי׃"],["50","21","20","베드로가 돌아서서 보니 예수님께서 사랑하시는 제자가 따라오고 있었다. 그 제자는 만찬 때에 예수님 가슴에 기대어 앉아 있다가, “주님, 주님을 팔아넘길 자가 누구입니까?” 하고 물었던 사람이다.","베드로가 돌아다보았더니 예수의 사랑을 받던 제자가 뒤따라오고 있었다. 그 제자는 만찬 때에 예수의 옆 자리에 앉아 있다가 \"주님, 주님을 팔아 넘길 자가 누굽니까?\" 하고 묻던 제자였다.","베드로가 돌이켜 예수께서 사랑하시는 그 제자가 따르는 것을 보니 그는 만찬석에서 예수의 품에 의지하여 주님 주님을 파는 자가 누구오니이까 묻던 자더라","베드로가 돌이켜 예수의 사랑하시는 그 제자가 따르는 것을 보니 그는 만찬석에서 예수의 품에 의지하여 주여 주를 파는 자가 누구오니이까 묻던 자러라","베드로가 돌아다 보니 예수께서 사랑하시는 제자가 따라오고 있었다. 이 제자는 마지막 만찬 때에 예수께 \"주님, 주님을 배신할 자가 누구입니까?\" 하고 묻던 사람이었다.","Peter turned and saw the disciple following whom Jesus loved, the one who had also reclined upon his chest during the supper and had said, “Master, who is the one who will betray you?”","Then Peter, turning about, seeth the disciple whom Jesus loved following; which also leaned on his breast at supper, and said, Lord, which is he that betrayeth thee?","Peter turned and saw that the disciple whom Jesus loved was following them. (This was the one who had leaned back against Jesus at the supper and had said, \"Lord, who is going to betray you?\")","Conversus Petrus videt illum discipulum, quem diligebat Iesus, sequentem, qui et recubuit in cena super pectus eius et dixit: “Domine, quis est qui tradit te? “.","ויפן פטרוס וירא את התלמיד אשר ישוע אהבו הלך אחריהם הוא הנפל על לבו בעת הסעודה וגם שאל אדני מי הוא זה אשר ימסרך׃"],["50","21","21","그 제자를 본 베드로가 예수님께, “주님, 이 사람은 어떻게 되겠습니까?” 하고 물었다.","그 제자를 본 베드로가 \"주님, 저 사람은 어떻게 되겠습니까?\" 하고 예수께 물었다.","이에 베드로가 그를 보고 예수께 여짜오되 주님 이 사람은 어떻게 되겠사옵나이까","이에 베드로가 그를 보고 예수께 여짜오되 주여 이 사람은 어떻게 되겠삽나이까","베드로가 예수께 물었다. \"주님, 저 사람은 어떻게 되겠습니까? 그는 어떤 죽음을 맞게 될까요?\"","When Peter saw him, he said to Jesus, “Lord, what about him?”","Peter seeing him saith to Jesus, Lord, and what shall this man do?","When Peter saw him, he asked, \"Lord, what about him?\"","Hunc ergo cum vidisset Petrus, dicit Iesu: “Domine, hic autem quid? “.","ויהי בראות אתו פטרוס ויאמר אל ישוע אדני וזה מה הוא׃"],["50","21","22","예수님께서는 “내가 올 때까지 그가 살아 있기를 내가 바란다 할지라도, 그것이 너와 무슨 상관이 있느냐? 너는 나를 따라라.” 하고 말씀하셨다.","예수께서는 \"내가 돌아올 때까지 그가 살아 있기를 내가 바란다고 한들 그것이 너와 무슨 상관이 있느냐? 너는 나를 따라라.\" 하고 말씀하셨다.","예수께서 이르시되 내가 올 때까지 그를 머물게 하고자 할지라도 네게 무슨 상관이냐 너는 나를 따르라 하시더라","예수께서 가라사대 내가 올 때까지 그를 머물게 하고자 할찌라도 네게 무슨 상관이냐 너는 나를 따르라 하시더라","예수께서 대답하셨다. \"만일 내가 돌아올 때까지 그가 살아 있기를 내가 바란다고 한들 그게 너와 무슨 상관이 있느냐? 너는 나를 따르라.\"","Jesus said to him, “What if I want him to remain until I come? What concern is it of yours? You follow me.”","Jesus saith unto him, If I will that he tarry till I come, what is that to thee? follow thou me.","Jesus answered, \"If I want him to remain alive until I return, what is that to you? You must follow me.\"","Dicit ei Iesus: “Si eum volo manere donec veniam, quid ad te? Tu me sequere “.","ויאמר אליו ישוע אם חפצי כי ישאר עד באי מה לך ולזאת אתה לך אחרי׃"],["50","21","23","그래서 형제들 사이에 이 제자가 죽지 않으리라는 말이 퍼져 나갔다. 그러나 예수님께서는 그가 죽지 않으리라고 말씀하신 것이 아니라, “내가 올 때까지 그가 살아 있기를 내가 바란다 할지라도, 그것이 너와 무슨 상관이 있느냐?” 하고 말씀하신 것이다.","그래서 예수를 믿는 사람들 사이에서는 그 제자는 죽지 않으리라는 소문이 퍼졌다. 그러나 예수께서는 그가 죽지 않으리라고 하지는 않으셨고 다만 \"설사 내가 돌아올 때까지 그가 살아 있기를 내가 바란다고 한들 그것이 너와 무슨 상관이 있느냐?\"고 말씀하신 것뿐이다.","이 말씀이 형제들에게 나가서 그 제자는 죽지 아니하겠다 하였으나 예수의 말씀은 그가 죽지 않겠다 하신 것이 아니라 내가 올 때까지 그를 머물게 하고자 할지라도 네게 무슨 상관이냐 하신 것이러라","이 말씀이 형제들에게 나가서 그 제자는 죽지 아니하겠다 하였으나 예수의 말씀은 그가 죽지 않겠다 하신 것이 아니라 내가 올 때까지 그를 머물게 하고자 할찌라도 네게 무슨 상관이냐 하신 것이러라","이 말씀이 형제들 사이에 퍼져 나가서 그 제자는 죽지 않을 것이라고들 하였다. 그러나 예수께서는 그런 뜻으로 말씀하신 것이 아니라 말 그대로 \"만일 내가 돌아올 때까지 그가 살아 있기를 내가 바란다고 한들 그게 너와 무슨 상관이 있느냐?\"고 단순히 말씀하신 것이었다.","So the word spread among the brothers that that disciple would not die. But Jesus had not told him that he would not die, just “What if I want him to remain until I come? [What concern is it of yours?]”","Then went this saying abroad among the brethren, that that disciple should not die: yet Jesus said not unto him, He shall not die; but, If I will that he tarry till I come, what is that to thee?","Because of this, the rumor spread among the brothers that this disciple would not die. But Jesus did not say that he would not die; he only said, \"If I want him to remain alive until I return, what is that to you?\"","Exivit ergo sermo iste in fratres, quia discipulus ille non moritur. Non autem dixit ei Iesus: “Non moritur “, sed: “Si eum volo manere donec veniam, quid ad te? “.","על כן יצא הדבר הזה בין האחים כי התלמיד ההוא לא ימות וישוע לא אמר לו כי לא ימות אך אמר אם חפצי כי ישאר עד באי מה זה לך׃"],["50","21","24","이 제자가 이 일들을 증언하고 또 기록한 사람이다. 우리는 그의 증언이 참되다는 것을 알고 있다.","그 제자는 이 일들을 증언하고 또 글로 기록한 사람이다. 우리는 그의 증언이 참되다는 것을 알고 있다.","이 일들을 증언하고 이 일들을 기록한 제자가 이 사람이라 우리는 그의 증언이 참된 줄 아노라","이일을 증거하고 이 일을 기록한 제자가 이 사람이라 우리는 그의 증거가 참인줄 아노라","그 제자는 이 일을 증언하고 또 글로 기록한 사람이다. 이 증언이 참되다는 것은 우리 모두가 알고 있다.","It is this disciple who testifies to these things and has written them, and we know that his testimony is true.","This is the disciple which testifieth of these things, and wrote these things: and we know that his testimony is true.","This is the disciple who testifies to these things and who wrote them down. We know that his testimony is true.","Hic est discipulus, qui testimonium perhibet de his et scripsit haec; et scimus quia verum est testimonium eius.",null],["50","21","25","예수님께서 하신 일은 이 밖에도 많이 있다. 그래서 그것들을 낱낱이 기록하면, 온 세상이라도 그렇게 기록된 책들을 다 담아 내지 못하리라고 나는 생각한다.","예수께서는 이 밖에도 여러 가지 일을 하셨다. 그 하신 일들을 낱낱이 다 기록하자면 기록된 책은 이 세상을 가득히 채우고도 남을 것이라고 생각된다.","예수께서 행하신 일이 이 외에도 많으니 만일 낱낱이 기록된다면 이 세상이라도 이 기록된 책을 두기에 부족할 줄 아노라","예수의 행하신 일이 이 외에도 많으니 만일 낱낱이 기록된다면 이 세상이라도 이 기록된 책을 두기에 부족할줄 아노라","예수께서 행하신 일은 이 밖에도 많다. 만일 그것을 다 기록한다면 온 세상을 다 그 책으로 채우고도 쌓아 둘 곳이 모자랄 것이다.","There are also many other things that Jesus did, but if these were to be described individually, I do not think the whole world would contain the books that would be written.","And there are also many other things which Jesus did, the which, if they should be written every one, I suppose that even the world itself could not contain the books that should be written. Amen.","Jesus did many other things as well. If every one of them were written down, I suppose that even the whole world would not have room for the books that would be written.","Sunt autem et alia multa, quae fecit Iesus; quae, si scribantur per singula, nec ipsum arbitror mundum capere eos, qui scribendi sunt, libros.",null],["51","1","1","테오필로스 님, 첫 번째 책에서 저는 예수님의 행적과 가르침을 처음부터 다 다루었습니다.","이 책을 데오필로님께 드린다. 나는 먼젓번 책에서 예수의 모든 행적과 가르치심을 다 기록하였다.","데오빌로여 내가 먼저 쓴 글에는 무릇 예수께서 행하시며 가르치시기를 시작하심부터","데오빌로여 내가 먼저 쓴 글에는 무릇 예수의 행하시며 가르치시기를 시작하심부터","하나님을 사랑하시는 데오빌로 각하께, 첫번째 편지에서 나는 예수의 생애와 그 교훈과 또","In the first book, Theophilus, I dealt with all that Jesus did and taught","The former treatise have I made, O Theophilus, of all that Jesus began both to do and teach,","In my former book, Theophilus, I wrote about all that Jesus began to do and to teach","Primum quidem sermonem feci de omnibus, o Theophile, quae coepit Iesus facere et docere,","הן המאמר הראשון תאופילוס עשיתיהו על כל אשר החל ישוע לעשות וללמד׃"],["51","1","2","예수님께서 당신이 뽑으신 사도들에게 성령을 통하여 분부를 내리시고 나서 승천하신 날까지의 일을 다 다루었습니다.","곧 예수께서 당신이 뽑으신 사도들에게 성령의 힘으로 여러 가지 지시를 내리신 다음 승천하신 그 날까지의 일을 시초에서부터 낱낱이 기록하였다.","그가 택하신 사도들에게 성령으로 명하시고 승천하신 날까지의 일을 기록하였노라","그의 택하신 사도들에게 성령으로 명하시고 승천하신 날까지의 일을 기록하였노라","예수께서 친히 택하신 사도들에게 성령으로 여러 가지를 지시하고 하늘로 되돌아가신 일까지를 말씀드렸습니다.","until the day he was taken up, after giving instructions through the holy Spirit to the apostles whom he had chosen.","Until the day in which he was taken up, after that he through the Holy Ghost had given commandments unto the apostles whom he had chosen:","until the day he was taken up to heaven, after giving instructions through the Holy Spirit to the apostles he had chosen.","usque in diem, qua, cum praecepisset apostolis per Spiritum Sanctum, quos elegit, assumptus est;","עד היום אשר לקח למרום אחרי צותו ברוח הקדש את השליחים אשר בחר בהם׃"],["51","1","3","그분께서는 수난을 받으신 뒤, 당신이 살아 계신 분이심을 여러 가지 증거로 사도들에게 드러내셨습니다. 그러면서 사십 일 동안 그들에게 여러 번 나타나시어, 하느님 나라에 관한 말씀을 해 주셨습니다.","예수께서는 돌아가신 뒤에 다시 살아나셔서 사십 일 동안 사도들에게 자주 나타나시어 여러 가지 확실한 증거로써 당신이 여전히 살아 계시다는 것을 보여주시며 하느님 나라에 관한 말씀을 들려주셨다.","그가 고난 받으신 후에 또한 그들에게 확실한 많은 증거로 친히 살아 계심을 나타내사 사십 일 동안 그들에게 보이시며 하나님 나라의 일을 말씀하시니라","해 받으신 후에 또한 저희에게 확실한 많은 증거로 친히 사심을 나타내사 사십 일 동안 저희에게 보이시며 하나님 나라의 일을 말씀하시니라","예수께서는 십자가에 달려 죽으셨다가 다시 살아나신 후에 40일 동안 여러 번 사도들에게 나타나 몸소 자신을 보이며 살아 계시다는 것을 확실한 증거로 보여주셨습니다. 그리고 그때마다 예수께서는 하나님 나라에 대해서 말씀해 주셨습니다.","He presented himself alive to them by many proofs after he had suffered, appearing to them during forty days and speaking about the kingdom of God.","To whom also he shewed himself alive after his passion by many infallible proofs, being seen of them forty days, and speaking of the things pertaining to the kingdom of God:","After his suffering, he showed himself to these men and gave many convincing proofs that he was alive. He appeared to them over a period of forty days and spoke about the kingdom of God.","quibus et praebuit seipsum vivum post passionem suam in multis argumentis, per dies quadraginta apparens eis et loquens ea, quae sunt de regno Dei.","ואשר גם התיצב להם חי אחרי ענותו באתות רבות בהראותו אליהם ארבעים יום וידבר על מלכות האלהים׃"],["51","1","4","예수님께서는 사도들과 함께 계실 때에 그들에게 명령하셨습니다. “예루살렘을 떠나지 말고, 나에게서 들은 대로 아버지께서 약속하신 분을 기다려라.","예수께서는 사도들과 함께 계신 자리에서 이렇게 말씀하셨다. \"너희는 예루살렘을 떠나지 말고 내가 전에 일러준 아버지의 약속을 기다려라.","사도와 함께 모이사 그들에게 분부하여 이르시되 예루살렘을 떠나지 말고 내게서 들은 바 아버지께서 약속하신 것을 기다리라","사도와 같이 모이사 저희에게 분부하여 가라사대 예루살렘을 떠나지 말고 내게 들은바 아버지의 약속하신 것을 기다리라","이렇게 사도들에게 나타나시던 어느 날 예수께서 말씀하셨습니다. \"너희는 예루살렘을 떠나지 말고 아버지께서 약속을 이루시기 위해 보내실 성령을 기다려라. 내가 말해 온 대로","While meeting with them, he enjoined them not to depart from Jerusalem, but to wait for “the promise of the Father about which you have heard me speak;","And, being assembled together with them, commanded them that they should not depart from Jerusalem, but wait for the promise of the Father, which, saith he, ye have heard of me.","On one occasion, while he was eating with them, he gave them this command: \"Do not leave Jerusalem, but wait for the gift my Father promised, which you have heard me speak about.","Et convescens praecepit eis ab Hierosolymis ne discederent, sed exspectarent promissionem Patris:  “Quam audistis a me,","ובאכלו לחם עמהם צוה אתם לבלתי סור מירושלים כי אם להוחיל להבטחת האב אשר שמעתם ממני׃"],["51","1","5","요한은 물로 세례를 주었지만 너희는 며칠 뒤에 성령으로 세례를 받을 것이다.”","요한은 물로 세례를 베풀었지만 오래지 않아 너희는 성령으로 세례를 받게 될 것이다.\"","요한은 물로 세례를 베풀었으나 너희는 몇 날이 못되어 성령으로 세례를 받으리라 하셨느니라","요한은 물로 세례를 베풀었으나 너희는 몇 날이 못되어 성령으로 세례를 받으리라 하셨느니라","너희가 전에는 요한에게 물로 침례를 받았지만 이제 곧 성령으로 침례를 받게 될 것이다.\"","for John baptized with water, but in a few days you will be baptized with the holy Spirit.”","For John truly baptized with water; but ye shall be baptized with the Holy Ghost not many days hence.","For John baptized with water, but in a few days you will be baptized with the Holy Spirit.\"","quia Ioannes quidem baptizavit aqua, vos autem baptizabimini in Spiritu Sancto non post multos hos dies “.","כי יוחנן הטביל במים ואתם תטבלו ברוח הקדש בקרוב אחרי הימים האלה׃"],["51","1","6","사도들이 함께 모여 있을 때에 예수님께 물었다. “주님, 지금이 주님께서 이스라엘에 다시 나라를 일으키실 때입니까?”","사도들은 다 같이 모인 자리에서 예수께 이렇게 물었다. \"주님, 주님께서 이스라엘 왕국을 다시 세워주실 때가 바로 지금입니까?\"","그들이 모였을 때에 예수께 여쭈어 이르되 주께서 이스라엘 나라를 회복하심이 이 때니이까 하니","저희가 모였을 때에 예수께 묻자와 가로되 주께서 이스라엘 나라를 회복하심이 이 때니이까 하니","예수께서 다시 나타나셨을 때에 사도들이 물었다. \"주님, 주께서 이스라엘을 로마로부터 해방시켜 주실 때가 지금입니까?\"","When they had gathered together they asked him, “Lord, are you at this time going to restore the kingdom to Israel?”","When they therefore were come together, they asked of him, saying, Lord, wilt thou at this time restore again the kingdom to Israel?","So when they met together, they asked him, \"Lord, are you at this time going to restore the kingdom to Israel?\"","Igitur qui convenerant, interrogabant eum dicentes:  “Domine, si in tempore hoc restitues regnum Israeli? “.","ויהי כאשר נאספו יחדו וישאלהו לאמר אדנינו המשיב אתה בעת הזאת את המלוכה לישראל׃"],["51","1","7","그러자 예수님께서 그들에게 이르셨다. “그때와 시기는 아버지께서 당신의 권한으로 정하셨으니 너희가 알 바 아니다.","예수께서는 이렇게 대답하셨다. \"그 때와 시기는 아버지께서 당신의 권능으로 결정하셨으니 너희가 알 바 아니다.","이르시되 때와 시기는 아버지께서 자기의 권한에 두셨으니 너희가 알 바 아니요","가라사대 때와 기한은 아버지께서 자기의 권한에 두셨으니 너희의 알바 아니요","예수께서 말씀하셨다. \"그때가 언제인가는 아버지께서 정해 두셨으니 너희가 알 바 아니다.","He answered them, “It is not for you to know the times or seasons that the Father has established by his own authority.","And he said unto them, It is not for you to know the times or the seasons, which the Father hath put in his own power.","He said to them: \"It is not for you to know the times or dates the Father has set by his own authority.","Dixit autem eis:  “Non est vestrum nosse tempora vel momenta, quae Pater posuit in sua potestate,","ויאמר אליהם לא לכם לדעת העתים והזמנים אשר יעד האב בשלטנו׃"],["51","1","8","그러나 성령께서 너희에게 내리시면 너희는 힘을 받아, 예루살렘과 온 유다와 사마리아, 그리고 땅 끝에 이르기까지 나의 증인이 될 것이다.”","그러나 성령이 너희에게 오시면 너희는 힘을 받아 예루살렘과 온 유다와 사마리아뿐만 아니라 땅 끝에 이르기까지 어디에서나 나의 증인이 될 것이다.\"","오직 성령이 너희에게 임하시면 너희가 권능을 받고 예루살렘과 온 유대와 사마리아와 땅 끝까지 이르러 내 증인이 되리라 하시니라","오직 성령이 너희에게 임하시면 너희가 권능을 받고 예루살렘과 온 유대와 사마리아와 땅끝까지 이르러 내 증인이 되리라 하시니라","그러나 성령이 너희에게 오시면 너희는 권능을 받게 될 것이다. 그래서 예루살렘과 온 유대와 사마리아와 땅 끝까지 이르러 내 죽음과 부활을 증거하는 증인이 될 것이다.\"","But you will receive power when the holy Spirit comes upon you, and you will be my witnesses in Jerusalem, throughout Judea and Samaria, and to the ends of the earth.”","But ye shall receive power, after that the Holy Ghost is come upon you: and ye shall be witnesses unto me both in Jerusalem, and in all Judaea, and in Samaria, and unto the uttermost part of the earth.","But you will receive power when the Holy Spirit comes on you; and you will be my witnesses in Jerusalem, and in all Judea and Samaria, and to the ends of the earth.\"","sed accipietis virtutem, superveniente Sancto Spiritu in vos, et eritis mihi testes et in Ierusalem et in omni Iudaea et Samaria et usque ad ultimum terrae “.","אבל תקבלו גבורה בבוא עליכם רוח הקדש והייתם עדי בירושלים ובכל יהודה ובשמרון ועד קצה הארץ׃"],["51","1","9","예수님께서는 이렇게 이르신 다음 그들이 보는 앞에서 하늘로 오르셨는데, 구름에 감싸여 그들의 시야에서 사라지셨다.","예수께서는 이 말씀을 하시고 사도들이 보는 앞에서 승천하셨는데 마침내 구름에 싸여 그 모습이 보이지 않게 되셨다.","이 말씀을 마치시고 그들이 보는데 올려져 가시니 구름이 그를 가리어 보이지 않게 하더라","이 말씀을 마치시고 저희 보는데서 올리워 가시니 구름이 저를 가리워 보이지 않게 하더라","이 말씀을 하시고 예수께서는 그들이 지켜 보는 가운데서 하늘로 올라가시니 구름에 싸여 보이지 않게 되었다.","When he had said this, as they were looking on, he was lifted up, and a cloud took him from their sight.","And when he had spoken these things, while they beheld, he was taken up; and a cloud received him out of their sight.","After he said this, he was taken up before their very eyes, and a cloud hid him from their sight.","Et cum haec dixisset, videntibus illis, elevatus est, et nubes suscepit eum ab oculis eorum.","ויהי כדברו זאת העלה והם ראים וישאהו ענן מנגד עיניהם׃"],["51","1","10","예수님께서 올라가시는 동안 그들이 하늘을 유심히 바라보는데, 갑자기 흰 옷을 입은 두 사람이 그들 곁에 서서,","예수께서 하늘로 올라가시는 동안 그들은 하늘만을 쳐다보고 있었다. 그 때 흰 옷을 입은 사람 둘이 갑자기 그들 앞에 나타나서","올라가실 때에 제자들이 자세히 하늘을 쳐다보고 있는데 흰 옷 입은 두 사람이 그들 곁에 서서","올라가실 때에 제자들이 자세히 하늘을 쳐다 보고 있는데 흰옷 입은 두 사람이 저희 곁에 서서","그들이 예수께서 승천하시는 모습을 한없이 바라보고 있는데 갑자기 흰옷을 입은 두 사람이 그들 곁에 나타나서","While they were looking intently at the sky as he was going, suddenly two men dressed in white garments stood beside them.","And while they looked stedfastly toward heaven as he went up, behold, two men stood by them in white apparel;","They were looking intently up into the sky as he was going, when suddenly two men dressed in white stood beside them.","Cumque intuerentur in caelum, eunte illo, ecce duo viri astiterunt iuxta illos in vestibus albis,","ויביטו אחריו השמימה בעברו והנה שני אנשים לבושי בדים נצבים עליהם׃"],["51","1","11","이렇게 말하였다. “갈릴래아 사람들아, 왜 하늘을 쳐다보며 서 있느냐? 너희를 떠나 승천하신 저 예수님께서는, 너희가 보는 앞에서 하늘로 올라가신 모습 그대로 다시 오실 것이다.”","이렇게 말했다. \"갈릴래아 사람들아, 왜 너희는 여기에 서서 하늘만 쳐다보고 있느냐? 너희 곁을 떠나 승천하신 저 예수께서는 너희가 보는 앞에서 하늘로 올라가시던 그 모양으로 다시 오실 것이다.\"","이르되 갈릴리 사람들아 어찌하여 서서 하늘을 쳐다보느냐 너희 가운데서 하늘로 올려지신 이 예수는 하늘로 가심을 본 그대로 오시리라 하였느니라","가로되 갈릴리 사람들아 어찌하여 서서 하늘을 쳐다 보느냐 너희 가운데서 하늘로 올리우신 이 예수는 하늘로 가심을 본 그대로 오시리라 하였느니라","말하였다. \"갈릴리 사람들아, 왜 여기 서서 하늘만 쳐다보고 있느냐? 예수께서는 하늘로 올라가셨다. 그러나 훗날 그분은 올라가시던 그대로 다시 오실 것이다.\"","They said, “Men of Galilee, why are you standing there looking at the sky? This Jesus who has been taken up from you into heaven will return in the same way as you have seen him going into heaven.”","Which also said, Ye men of Galilee, why stand ye gazing up into heaven? this same Jesus, which is taken up from you into heaven, shall so come in like manner as ye have seen him go into heaven.","\"Men of Galilee,\" they said, \"why do you stand here looking into the sky? This same Jesus, who has been taken from you into heaven, will come back in the same way you have seen him go into heaven.\"","qui et dixerunt:  “Viri Galilaei, quid statis aspicientes in caelum? Hic Iesus, qui assumptus est a vobis in caelum, sic veniet quemadmodum vidistis eum euntem in caelum “.","ויאמרו אתם אנשי הגליל מה תעמדו פה ועיניכם השמימה ישוע זה אשר לקח מאתכם השמימה כן בוא יבוא כאשר ראיתם אתו עלה השמימה׃"],["51","1","12","그 뒤에 사도들은 올리브 산이라고 하는 그곳을 떠나 예루살렘으로 돌아갔다. 그 산은 안식일에도 걸어갈 수 있을 만큼 예루살렘에 가까이 있었다.","그 뒤 사도들은 그 올리브라고 하는 산을 떠나 안식일에 걸어도 괜찮을 거리에 있는 예루살렘으로 돌아왔다.","제자들이 감람원이라 하는 산으로부터 예루살렘에 돌아오니 이 산은 예루살렘에서 가까워 안식일에 가기 알맞은 길이라","제자들이 감람원이라 하는 산으로부터 예루살렘에 돌아오니 이 산은 예루살렘에서 가까와 안식일에 가기 알맞은 길이라","이 일이 있었던 장소는 감람산이었다. 그들은 곧 그곳을 떠나 안식일에 걸어도 괜찮을 거리만큼 떨어져 있는 예루살렘으로 돌아왔다.","Then they returned to Jerusalem from the mount called Olivet, which is near Jerusalem, a sabbath day’s journey away.","Then returned they unto Jerusalem from the mount called Olivet, which is from Jerusalem a sabbath day's journey.","Then they returned to Jerusalem from the hill called the Mount of Olives, a Sabbath day's walk from the city.","Tunc reversi sunt in Ierusalem a monte, qui vocatur Oliveti, qui est iuxta Ierusalem sabbati habens iter.","ויפנו וילכו ירושלימה מן ההר הנקרא הר הזיתים והוא קרוב לירושלים דרך תחום שבת׃"],["51","1","13","성안에 들어간 그들은 자기들이 묵고 있던 위층 방으로 올라갔다. 그들은 베드로와 요한과 야고보와 안드레아, 필립보와 토마스, 바르톨로메오와 마태오, 알패오의 아들 야고보와 열혈당원 시몬과 야고보의 아들 유다였다.","성안에 들어온 사도들은 자기네가 묵고 있던 이층 방으로 올라갔는데 그 일행은 베드로, 요한, 야고보, 안드레아, 필립보, 토마, 바르톨로메오, 마태오, 알패오의 아들 야고보, 혁명당원 시몬, 야고보의 아들 유다 들이었다.","들어가 그들이 유하는 다락방으로 올라가니 베드로, 요한, 야고보, 안드레와 빌립, 도마와 바돌로매, 마태와 및 알패오의 아들 야고보, 셀롯인 시몬, 야고보의 아들 유다가 다 거기 있어","들어가 저희 유하는 다락에 올라가니 베드로, 요한, 야고보, 안드레와 빌립, 도마와 바돌로매, 마태와 및 알패오의 아들 야고보, 1)셀롯인 시몬, 야고보의 2)아들 유다가 다 거기 있어 열심당혹 형제","그리고 자기들이 묵고 있던 2층 방으로 올라가서 기도회를 열었다.","When they entered the city they went to the upper room where they were staying, Peter and John and James and Andrew, Philip and Thomas, Bartholomew and Matthew, James son of Alphaeus, Simon the Zealot, and Judas son of James.","And when they were come in, they went up into an upper room, where abode both Peter, and James, and John, and Andrew, Philip, and Thomas, Bartholomew, and Matthew, James the son of Alphaeus, and Simon Zelotes, and Judas the brother of James.","When they arrived, they went upstairs to the room where they were staying. Those present were Peter, John, James and Andrew; Philip and Thomas, Bartholomew and Matthew; James son of Alphaeus and Simon the Zealot, and Judas son of James.","Et cum introissent, in cenaculum ascenderunt, ubi manebant et Petrus et Ioannes et Iacobus et Andreas, Philippus et Thomas, Bartholomaeus et Matthaeus, Iacobus Alphaei et Simon Zelotes et Iudas Iacobi.","ויבאו העירה ויעלו אל העליה אשר היו ישבים בה פטרוס ויעקב ויוחנן ואנדרי פילפוס ותומא בר תלמי ומתי יעקב בן חלפי ושמעון הקנא ויהודה בן יעקב׃"],["51","1","14","그들은 모두, 여러 여자와 예수님의 어머니 마리아와 그분의 형제들과 함께 한마음으로 기도에 전념하였다.","그 자리에는 예수의 어머니 마리아를 비롯하여 여러 여자들과 예수의 형제들도 함께 있었다. 그들은 모두 마음을 모아 기도에만 힘썼다.","여자들과 예수의 어머니 마리아와 예수의 아우들과 더불어 마음을 같이하여 오로지 기도에 힘쓰더라","여자들과 예수의 모친 마리아와 예수의 아우들로 더불어 마음을 같이하여 전혀 기도에 힘쓰니라","기도회에는 베드로, 요한, 야고보, 안드레, 빌립, 도마, 바돌로매. 마태, 알패오의 아들 야고보, 셀롯인 시몬, 야고보의 아들 유다. 그리고 예수의 형제들과 예수의 어머니를 비롯한 몇 사람의 여자들이 참석하였다.","All these devoted themselves with one accord to prayer, together with some women, and Mary the mother of Jesus, and his brothers.","These all continued with one accord in prayer and supplication, with the women, and Mary the mother of Jesus, and with his brethren.","They all joined together constantly in prayer, along with the women and Mary the mother of Jesus, and with his brothers.","Hi omnes erant perseverantes unanimiter in oratione cum mulieribus et Maria matre Iesu et fratribus eius.","כל אלה היו שקדים יחדו בלב אחד להתפלל ולהתחנן ועמהם הנשים ומרים אם ישוע וגם אחיו׃"],["51","1","15","그 무렵 베드로가 형제들 한가운데에 서서 말하였다. 그 자리에는 백스무 명가량 되는 무리가 모여 있었다.","그 무렵 어느 날 교우가 백이십 명 가량 모여 있었는데 그 자리에 베드로가 일어나 이렇게 말하였다.","모인 무리의 수가 약 백이십 명이나 되더라 그 때에 베드로가 그 형제들 가운데 일어서서 이르되","모인 무리의 수가 한 일백 이십 명이나 되더라 그 때에 베드로가 그 형제 가운데 일어서서 가로되","이 기도회는 며칠 동안 계속되었는데 어느 날 120명 가량의 사람들이 모여 있을 때였다. 베드로가 일어나서 말하였다.","During those days Peter stood up in the midst of the brothers (there was a group of about one hundred and twenty persons in the one place). He said,","And in those days Peter stood up in the midst of the disciples, and said, (the number of names together were about an hundred and twenty,)","In those days Peter stood up among the believers (a group numbering about a hundred and twenty)","Et in diebus illis exsurgens Petrus in medio fratrum dixit - erat autem turba hominum simul fere centum viginti C:","ובימים האלה קם פטרוס בתוך התלמידים ומספר שמות הנקהלים יחד כמאה ועשרים ויאמר׃"],["51","1","16","“형제 여러분, 예수님을 붙잡은 자들의 앞잡이가 된 유다에 관해서는, 성령께서 다윗의 입을 통하여 예언하신 성경 말씀이 이루어져야 했습니다.","\"교우 여러분, 예수를 잡은 자들의 앞잡이가 된 유다에 관하여 성령께서 다윗의 입을 빌려 예언하신 말씀은 정녕 이루어져야만 했습니다.","형제들아 성령이 다윗의 입을 통하여 예수 잡는 자들의 길잡이가 된 유다를 가리켜 미리 말씀하신 성경이 응하였으니 마땅하도다","형제들아 성령이 다윗의 입을 의탁하사 예수 잡는 자들을 지로한 유다를 가리켜 미리 말씀하신 성경이 응하였으니 마땅하도다","\"형제 여러분, 폭도들에게 주님을 넘겨 준 배반자 유다가 당한 일은 이미 오래전 성령께서 다윗의 입을 빌려 예언하셨던 말씀이 이루어진 당연한 귀결입니다.","“My brothers, the scripture had to be fulfilled which the holy Spirit spoke beforehand through the mouth of David, concerning Judas, who was the guide for those who arrested Jesus.","Men and brethren, this scripture must needs have been fulfilled, which the Holy Ghost by the mouth of David spake before concerning Judas, which was guide to them that took Jesus.","and said, \"Brothers, the Scripture had to be fulfilled which the Holy Spirit spoke long ago through the mouth of David concerning Judas, who served as guide for those who arrested Jesus--","Viri fratres, oportebat impleri Scripturam, quam praedixit Spiritus Sanctus per os David de Iuda, qui fuit dux eorum, qui comprehenderunt Iesum,","אנשים אחים מן הצרך היה כי ימלא הכתוב ההוא אשר דבר מקדם רוח הקדש בפי דוד על יהודה אשר היה מוליך את תפשי ישוע׃"],["51","1","17","유다는 우리 가운데 한 사람으로서 우리와 함께 이 직무를 받았습니다.","그는 본래 우리 열두 사람 중 하나로서 우리와 함께 일하던 사람이었습니다.","이 사람은 본래 우리 수 가운데 참여하여 이 직무의 한 부분을 맡았던 자라","이 사람이 본래 우리 수 가운데 참예하여 이 3)직무의 한 부분을 맡았던 자라 헬, 봉사의","유다도 우리들과 똑같이 사도로 선택받은 자였고 우리들의 동료였습니다.","He was numbered among us and was allotted a share in this ministry.","For he was numbered with us, and had obtained part of this ministry.","he was one of our number and shared in this ministry.\"","quia connumeratus erat in nobis et sortitus est sortem ministerii huius.","כי היה נמנה אתנו וזכה בגורל השרות הזה׃"],["51","1","18","그런데 그자는 부정한 삯으로 밭을 산 뒤, 거꾸로 떨어져 배가 터지고 내장이 모조리 쏟아졌습니다.","그는 주님을 판 돈으로 밭을 샀습니다. 그러나 그는 땅에 거꾸러져서 배가 갈라져 내장이 온통 터져 나왔습니다.","(이 사람이 불의의 삯으로 밭을 사고 후에 몸이 곤두박질하여 배가 터져 창자가 다 흘러 나온지라","(이 사람이 불의의 삯으로 밭을 사고 후에 몸이 곤두박질하여 배가 터져 창자가 다 흘러나온지라","그는 주님을 팔아 그 돈으로 밭을 샀다가 결국 땅에 거꾸러져 배가 터지고 창자가 밖으로 쏟아져 나와 죽었습니다.","He bought a parcel of land with the wages of his iniquity, and falling headlong, he burst open in the middle, and all his insides spilled out.","Now this man purchased a field with the reward of iniquity; and falling headlong, he burst asunder in the midst, and all his bowels gushed out.","(With the reward he got for his wickedness, Judas bought a field; there he fell headlong, his body burst open and all his intestines spilled out.","Hic quidem possedit agrum de mercede iniquitatis; et pronus factus crepuit medius, et diffusa sunt omnia viscera eius.","והנה הוא קנה לו שדה במחיר הרשעה ויפל על פניו ארצה ויבקע בתוך וישפכו כל מעיו׃"],["51","1","19","이 일이 예루살렘의 모든 주민에게 알려져, 그 밭이 그들의 지방 말로 ‘하켈 드마’라고 불리게 되었는데, ‘피밭’이라는 뜻입니다.","예루살렘의 시민들이 모두 이 사실을 전해 듣고 그 밭을 그들 말로 '아겔다마'라고 불렀습니다. '피의 밭'이란 뜻입니다.","이 일이 예루살렘에 사는 모든 사람에게 알리어져 그들의 말로는 그 밭을 아겔다마라 하니 이는 피밭이라는 뜻이라)","이 일이 예루살렘에 사는 모든 사람에게 알게 되어 본방언에 그 밭을 이르되 아겔다마라 하니 이는 피밭이라는 뜻이라)","그가 이런 꼴로 죽었다는 소식은 순식간에 온 예루살렘 시민들에게 퍼져 나가 사람들은 그곳을 아겔다마 곧 \"피의 밭\"이라고 부르게 되었습니다.","This became known to everyone who lived in Jerusalem, so that the parcel of land was called in their language ‘Akeldama,’ that is, Field of Blood.","And it was known unto all the dwellers at Jerusalem; insomuch as that field is called in their proper tongue, Aceldama, that is to say, The field of blood.","Everyone in Jerusalem heard about this, so they called that field in their language Akeldama, that is, Field of Blood.)","Et notum factum est omnibus habitantibus Ierusalem, ita ut appellaretur ager ille lingua eorum Aceldamach, hoc est ager Sanguinis.","וגם נודעה זאת לכל ישבי ירושלים ויקרא בשפתם לשדה ההוא חקל דמא הוא שדה הדם׃"],["51","1","20","사실 시편에 ‘그의 처소가 황폐해지고 그 안에 사는 자 없게 하소서.’ 또 ‘그의 직책을 다른 이가 넘겨받게 하소서.’라고 기록되어 있습니다.","시편에, '1)그의 집을 폐허로 만드시고 아무도 거기에 드는 이 없게 하여주십시오.'","시편에 기록하였으되 ㄱ)그의 거처를 황폐하게 하시며 거기 거하는 자가 없게 하소서 하였고 또 일렀으되 ㄴ)그의 직분을 타인이 취하게 하소서 하였도다","시편에 기록하였으되 ㄱ)그의 거처로 황폐하게 하시며 거기 거하는 자가 없게 하소서 하였고 또 일렀으되 ㄴ)그 4)직분을 타인이 취하게 하소서 하였도다 시 69:25시 109:8헬, 감독의 직분","다윗이 시편에서 이미 예언한 그대로 된 것입니다. ㄱ) \"저들이 살고 있는 집마다 쑥밭이 되게 하소서. 저들이 쳐놓은 장막마다 사람의 발길이 끊어지게 하소서.\" 그리고 또 이렇게도 기록되어 있습니다. ㄴ) \"그가 앉아 있던 자리도 남 차지가 되게 해버리자.\" (ㄱ. 시69:25. ㄴ. 시109:8)","For it is written in the Book of Psalms: ‘Let his encampment become desolate, and may no one dwell in it.’ And: ‘May another take his office.’","For it is written in the book of Psalms, Let his habitation be desolate, and let no man dwell therein: and his bishoprick let another take.","\"For,\" said Peter, \"it is written in the book of Psalms, \"'May his place be deserted; let there be no one to dwell in it,' and, \"'May another take his place of leadership.'","Scriptum est enim in libro Psalmorum:  “Fiat commorat?o eius deserta, et non sit qui inhabitet in ea “ et:  “Episcopatum eius accipiat alius “.","כי כתוב בספר תהלים תהי טירתו נשמה ואל יהי בה ישב ופקדתו יקח אחר׃"],["51","1","21","그러므로 주 예수님께서 우리와 함께 지내시는 동안 줄곧 우리와 동행한 이들 가운데에서,","그러므로 우리는 우리 주 예수께서 우리와 함께 지내오시는 동안, 곧 요한이 세례를 주던 때부터 예수께서 우리 곁을 떠나 승천하신 날까지 줄곧 우리와 같이 있던 사람 중에서","이러하므로 요한의 세례로부터 우리 가운데서 올려져 가신 날까지 주 예수께서 우리 가운데 출입하실 때에","이러하므로 요한의 세례로부터 우리 가운데서 올리워 가신 날까지 주 예수께서 우리 가운데 출입하실 때에","그러므로 이제 우리는 유다 대신에 다른 사람을 택하여 예수의 부활의 증인으로 세워야 하겠습니다. 그 사람은 우리가 주님의 제자가 되었던 때부터 늘 우리와 함께 다니던 사람이어야 합니다. 주님이 침례 요한에게서 침례받으신 때부터 우리를 떠나 하늘로 올라가신 날까지 말입니다.\"","Therefore, it is necessary that one of the men who accompanied us the whole time the Lord Jesus came and went among us,","Wherefore of these men which have companied with us all the time that the Lord Jesus went in and out among us,","Therefore it is necessary to choose one of the men who have been with us the whole time the Lord Jesus went in and out among us,","Oportet ergo ex his viris, qui nobiscum congregati erant in omni tempore, quo intravit et exivit inter nos Dominus Iesus,","ועל כן מן הצרך כי מן האנשים האלה אשר התהלכו אתנו כל ימי היות אדנינו ישוע יוצא ובא לפנינו׃"],["51","1","22","곧 요한이 세례를 주던 때부터 시작하여 예수님께서 우리를 떠나 승천하신 날까지 그렇게 한 이들 가운데에서 한 사람이 우리와 함께 예수님 부활의 증인이 되어야 합니다.”","하나를 뽑아 우리와 더불어 주 예수의 부활의 증인이 되게 해야 하겠습니다.\"","항상 우리와 함께 다니던 사람 중에 하나를 세워 우리와 더불어 예수께서 부활하심을 증언할 사람이 되게 하여야 하리라 하거늘","항상 우리와 함께 다니던 사람 중에 하나를 세워 우리로 더불어 예수의 부활하심을 증거할 사람이 되게 하여야 하리라 하거늘","(21절에 포함되어 있음)","beginning from the baptism of John until the day on which he was taken up from us, become with us a witness to his resurrection.”","Beginning from the baptism of John, unto that same day that he was taken up from us, must one be ordained to be a witness with us of his resurrection.","beginning from John's baptism to the time when Jesus was taken up from us. For one of these must become a witness with us of his resurrection.\"","incipiens a baptismate Ioannis usque in diem, qua assumptus est a nobis, testem resurrectionis eius nobiscum fieri unum ex istis “.","החל מטבילת יוחנן עד יום הלקחו מאתנו כי אחד מהם יהיה לעד עמנו על קומו מן המתים׃"],["51","1","23","그래서 그들은 바르사빠스라고도 하고 유스투스라는 별명도 지닌 요셉과 마티아 두 사람을 앞에 세우고,","그들은 바르사빠라고도 하고 유스도라고도 하는 요셉과 마티아 두 사람을 천거한 다음","그들이 두 사람을 내세우니 하나는 바사바라고도 하고 별명은 유스도라고 하는 요셉이요 하나는 맛디아라","저희가 두 사람을 천하니 하나는 바사바라고도 하고 별명은 유스도라고 하는 요셉이요 하나는 맛디아라","그래서 총회는 바사바라고도 하고 유스도라고도 하는 요셉과 맛디아 두 사람을 후보자로 세우고","So they proposed two, Joseph called Barsabbas, who was also known as Justus, and Matthias.","And they appointed two, Joseph called Barsabas, who was surnamed Justus, and Matthias.","So they proposed two men: Joseph called Barsabbas (also known as Justus) and Matthias.","Et statuerunt duos, Ioseph, qui vocabatur Barsabbas, qui cognominatus est Iustus, et Matthiam.","ויעמידו שנים את יוסף הנקרא בר שבא והוא מכנה יוסטוס ואת מתיה׃"],["51","1","24","이렇게 기도하였다. “모든 사람의 마음을 아시는 주님, 이 둘 가운데에서 주님께서 뽑으신 한 사람을 가리키시어,","이렇게 기도하였다. \"모든 사람의 마음을 다 아시는 주님, 주님께서 이 두 사람 중 누구를 뽑으셨는지 알려주십시오.","그들이 기도하여 이르되 뭇 사람의 마음을 아시는 주여 이 두 사람 중에 누가 주님께 택하신 바 되어","저희가 기도하여 가로되 뭇사람의 마음을 아시는 주여 이 두 사람 중에 누가 주의 택하신바 되어","적임자를 뽑기 위하여 한마음으로 기도를 드렸다. \"오, 모든 사람의 마음을 헤아리시는 주님, 이 두 사람 가운데 누구를 사도로 택하여 배반자 유다 대신에 앉혀야 할지 알려 주소서. 유다는 마땅히 제 갈 곳으로 갔습니다.\"","Then they prayed, “You, Lord, who know the hearts of all, show which one of these two you have chosen","And they prayed, and said, Thou, Lord, which knowest the hearts of all men, shew whether of these two thou hast chosen,","Then they prayed, \"Lord, you know everyone's heart. Show us which of these two you have chosen","Et orantes dixerunt:  “Tu, Domine, qui corda nosti omnium, ostende quem elegeris ex his duobus unum","ויתפללו ויאמרו אתה אדני היודע כל הלבבות הראה נא מן השנים האלה את האחד אשר בחרת בו׃"],["51","1","25","유다가 제 갈 곳으로 가려고 내버린 이 직무, 곧 사도직의 자리를 넘겨받게 해 주십시오.”","유다는 사도직을 버리고 제 갈 곳으로 갔습니다. 그 직분을 누구에게 맡기시렵니까?\"","봉사와 및 사도의 직무를 대신할 자인지를 보이시옵소서 유다는 이 직무를 버리고 제 곳으로 갔나이다 하고","봉사와 및 사도의 직무를 대신할 자를 보이시옵소서 유다는 이를 버리옵고 제 곳으로 갔나이다 하고","(24절에 포함되어 있음)","to take the place in this apostolic ministry from which Judas turned away to go to his own place.”","That he may take part of this ministry and apostleship, from which Judas by transgression fell, that he might go to his own place.","to take over this apostolic ministry, which Judas left to go where he belongs.\"","accipere locum ministerii huius et apostolatus, de quo praevaricatus est Iudas, ut abiret in locum suum “.","לקחת את גורל השרות הזה והשליחות אשר סר ממנה יהודה להלך אל מקומו׃"],["51","1","26","그러고 나서 그들에게 제비를 뽑게 하니 마티아가 뽑혀, 그가 열한 사도와 함께 사도가 되었다.","그리고 나서 제비를 뽑았더니 마티아가 뽑혀서 열한 사도와 같이 사도직을 맡게 되었다.","제비 뽑아 맛디아를 얻으니 그가 열한 사도의 수에 들어가니라","제비 뽑아 맛디아를 얻으니 저가 열 한 사도의 수에 가입하니라","그러고나서 그들이 제비를 뽑으니 맛디아의 이름이 나왔다. 그래서 그는 열한 사도와 함께 사도직을 맡게 되었다.","Then they gave lots to them, and the lot fell upon Matthias, and he was counted with the eleven apostles.","And they gave forth their lots; and the lot fell upon Matthias; and he was numbered with the eleven apostles.","Then they cast lots, and the lot fell to Matthias; so he was added to the eleven apostles.","Et dederunt sortes eis, et cecidit sors super Matthiam, et annumeratus est cum undecim apostolis.","ויפילו גורלות ויפל הגורל על מתיה ויספח אל עשתי עשר השליחים׃"],["51","2","1","오순절이 되었을 때 그들은 모두 한자리에 모여 있었다.","마침내 오순절이 되어 신도들이 모두 한 곳에 모여 있었는데","오순절 날이 이미 이르매 그들이 다같이 한 곳에 모였더니","오순절날이 이미 이르매 저희가 다 같이 한곳에 모였더니","예수께서 죽으셨다가 부활하신 지 일곱 주간이 지난 오순절이었다. 신도들이 한곳에 모여 있는데","When the time for Pentecost was fulfilled, they were all in one place together.","And when the day of Pentecost was fully come, they were all with one accord in one place.","When the day of Pentecost came, they were all together in one place.","Et cum compleretur dies Pen tecostes, erant omnes pariter in eodem loco.","וביום מלאת שבעת השבעות ויתאספו כלם לב אחד׃"],["51","2","2","그런데 갑자기 하늘에서 거센 바람이 부는 듯한 소리가 나더니, 그들이 앉아 있는 온 집 안을 가득 채웠다.","갑자기 하늘에서 세찬 바람이 부는 듯한 소리가 들려오더니 그들이 앉아 있던 온 집안을 가득 채웠다.","홀연히 하늘로부터 급하고 강한 바람 같은 소리가 있어 그들이 앉은 온 집에 가득하며","홀연히 하늘로부터 급하고 강한 바람 같은 소리가 있어 저희 앉은 온 집에 가득하며","갑자기 하늘에서 강한 바람이 휘몰아오는 듯한 소리가 그들이 모여 있는 온 집안으로 울려 퍼졌다.","And suddenly there came from the sky a noise like a strong driving wind, and it filled the entire house in which they were.","And suddenly there came a sound from heaven as of a rushing mighty wind, and it filled all the house where they were sitting.","Suddenly a sound like the blowing of a violent wind came from heaven and filled the whole house where they were sitting.","Et factus est repente de caelo sonus tamquam advenientis spiritus vehementis et replevit totam domum, ubi erant sedentes.","ויהי פתאם קול רעש מן השמים כקול רוח סערה וימלא את כל הבית אשר ישבו בו׃"],["51","2","3","그리고 불꽃 모양의 혀들이 나타나 갈라지면서 각 사람 위에 내려앉았다.","그러자 혀 같은 것들이 나타나 불길처럼 갈라지며 각 사람 위에 내렸다.","마치 불의 혀처럼 갈라지는 것들이 그들에게 보여 각 사람 위에 하나씩 임하여 있더니","불의 혀 같이 갈라지는 것이 저희에게 보여 각 사람 위에 임하여 있더니","그리고 불길이 혀처럼 갈라져 나타나서 각 사람 위에 머물렀다.","Then there appeared to them tongues as of fire, which parted and came to rest on each one of them.","And there appeared unto them cloven tongues like as of fire, and it sat upon each of them.","They saw what seemed to be tongues of fire that separated and came to rest on each of them.","Et apparuerunt illis dispertitae linguae tamquam ignis, seditque supra singulos eorum;","ותראינה אליהם לשנות נחלקות ומראיהן כאש ותנוחינה אחת אחת על כל אחד מהם׃"],["51","2","4","그러자 그들은 모두 성령으로 가득 차, 성령께서 표현의 능력을 주시는 대로 다른 언어들로 말하기 시작하였다.","그들의 마음은 성령으로 가득 차서 성령이 시키시는 대로 여러 가지 외국어로 말을 하기 시작하였다.","그들이 다 성령의 충만함을 받고 성령이 말하게 하심을 따라 다른 언어들로 말하기를 시작하니라","저희가 다 성령의 충만함을 받고 성령이 말하게 하심을 따라 다른 방언으로 말하기를 시작하니라","그러자 성령으로 충만함을 받은 그들은 자신도 알지 못하는 다른 나라 말을 하기 시작하였다. 성령께서 이런 능력을 그들에게 주신 것이다.","And they were all filled with the holy Spirit and began to speak in different tongues, as the Spirit enabled them to proclaim.","And they were all filled with the Holy Ghost, and began to speak with other tongues, as the Spirit gave them utterance.","All of them were filled with the Holy Spirit and began to speak in other tongues as the Spirit enabled them.","et repleti sunt omnes Spiritu Sancto et coeperunt loqui aliis linguis, prout Spiritus dabat eloqui illis.","וימלאו כלם רוח הקדש ויחלו לדבר בלשנות אחרות כאשר נתנם הרוח להטיף׃"],["51","2","5","그때에 예루살렘에는 세계 모든 나라에서 온 독실한 유다인들이 살고 있었는데,","그 때 예루살렘에는 세계 각국에서 온 경건한 유다인들이 살고 있었다.","그 때에 경건한 유대인들이 천하 각국으로부터 와서 예루살렘에 머물러 있더니","그 때에 경건한 유대인이 천하 각국으로부터 와서 예루살렘에 우거하더니","그때 예루살렘에는 많은 경건한 유대인들이 명절을 지키려고 여러 나라에서 건너와 머물고 있었다.","Now there were devout Jews from every nation under heaven staying in Jerusalem.","And there were dwelling at Jerusalem Jews, devout men, out of every nation under heaven.","Now there were staying in Jerusalem God-fearing Jews from every nation under heaven.","Erant autem in Ierusalem habitantes Iudaei, viri religiosi ex omni natione, quae sub caelo est;","ובירושלים שכנו יהודים אנשי חסד מכל גוי וגוי אשר תחת השמים׃"],["51","2","6","그 말소리가 나자 무리를 지어 몰려왔다. 그리고 제자들이 말하는 것을 저마다 자기 지방 말로 듣고 어리둥절해하였다.","그 소리가 나자 많은 사람들이 몰려들었다. 그리고 사도들이 말하는 것이 사람들에게는 저마다 자기네 지방 말로 들리므로 모두 어리둥절해졌다.","이 소리가 나매 큰 무리가 모여 각각 자기의 방언으로 제자들이 말하는 것을 듣고 소동하여","이 소리가 나매 큰 무리가 모여 각각 자기의 방언으로 제자들의 말하는 것을 듣고 소동하여","하늘로부터 큰소리가 그 집 위에 들리자 많은 사람이 무슨 일이 일어났는가 보려고 달려왔다. 그들은 각각 자기네 나라 말이 제자들의 입에서 흘러 나오는 것을 듣고 어리둥절하였다.","At this sound, they gathered in a large crowd, but they were confused because each one heard them speaking in his own language.","Now when this was noised abroad, the multitude came together, and were confounded, because that every man heard them speak in his own language.","When they heard this sound, a crowd came together in bewilderment, because each one heard them speaking in his own language.","facta autem hac voce, convenit multitudo et confusa est, quoniam audiebat unusquisque lingua sua illos loquentes.","ויהי בהיות קול הרעש ההוא ויקבצו עם רב ויהיו נבכים כי איש איש שמע אתם מדברים בשפת עמו׃"],["51","2","7","그들은 놀라워하고 신기하게 여기며 말하였다. “지금 말하고 있는 저들은 모두 갈릴래아 사람들이 아닌가?","그들은 놀라고 또 한편 신기하게 여기며 \"지금 말하고 있는 저 사람들은 모두  갈릴래아 사람들이 아닌가!","다 놀라 신기하게 여겨 이르되 보라 이 말하는 사람들이 다 갈릴리 사람이 아니냐","다 놀라 기이히 여겨 이르되 보라 이 말하는 사람이 다 갈릴리 사람이 아니냐","\"어떻게 이런 일이 있을 수 있을까?\" 그들이 소리쳤다. \"이 사람들은 모두 갈릴리 사람들이 아닌가?","They were astounded, and in amazement they asked, “Are not all these people who are speaking Galileans?","And they were all amazed and marvelled, saying one to another, Behold, are not all these which speak Galilaeans?","Utterly amazed, they asked: \"Are not all these men who are speaking Galileans?","Stupebant autem et mirabantur dicentes:  “Nonne ecce omnes isti, qui loquuntur, Galilaei sunt?","וישתוממו ויתמהו ויאמרו איש אל רעהו הנה כל אלה המדברים הלא גלילים המה׃"],["51","2","8","그런데 우리가 저마다 자기가 태어난 지방 말로 듣고 있으니 어찌 된 일인가?","그런데 우리는 저 사람들이 하는 말을 저마다 자기가 태어난 지방의 말로 듣고 있으니 어찌 된 셈인가?","우리가 우리 각 사람이 난 곳 방언으로 듣게 되는 것이 어찌 됨이냐","우리가 우리 각 사람의 난 곳 방언으로 듣게 되는 것이 어찜이뇨","그런데 지금 이들의 말이 우리가 태어난 곳의 말로 들리다니!","Then how does each of us hear them in his own native language?","And how hear we every man in our own tongue, wherein we were born?","Then how is it that each of us hears them in his own native language?","Et quomodo nos audimus unusquisque propria lingua nostra, in qua nati sumus?","ואיך אנחנו שמעים אתם איש כשפת ארץ מולדתנו׃"],["51","2","9","파르티아 사람, 메디아 사람, 엘람 사람, 또 메소포타미아와 유다와 카파도키아와 폰토스와 아시아 주민,","이 가운데는 바르티아 사람, 메대 사람, 엘람 사람이 있는가 하면 메소포타미아, 유다, 갑바도기아, 본도, 아시아에서 온 사람들도 있고","우리는 바대인과 메대인과 엘람인과 또 메소보다미아, 유대와 갑바도기아, 본도와 아시아,","우리는 바대인과 메대인과 엘림인과 또 메소보다미아, 유대와 가바도기아, 본도와 아시아,","우리 가운데는 바대 사람, 메대 사람, 엘람 사람, 메소보다미아, 유대, 가바도기아, 본도, 아시아,","We are Parthians, Medes, and Elamites, inhabitants of Mesopotamia, Judea and Cappadocia, Pontus and Asia,","Parthians, and Medes, and Elamites, and the dwellers in Mesopotamia, and in Judaea, and Cappadocia, in Pontus, and Asia,","Parthians, Medes and Elamites; residents of Mesopotamia, Judea and Cappadocia, Pontus and Asia,","Parthi et Medi et Elamitae et qui habitant Mesopotamiam, Iudaeam quoque et Cappadociam, Pontum et Asiam,","פרתיים ומדים ועילמים וישבי ארם נהרים יהודה וקפודקיה פנטוס ואסיא׃"],["51","2","10","프리기아와 팜필리아와 이집트 주민, 키레네 부근 리비아의 여러 지방 주민, 여기에 머무르는 로마인,","프리기아, 밤필리아, 이집트, 또 키레네에 가까운 리비야의 여러 지방 사람들도 있다. 그리고 로마에서 나그네로 온","브루기아와 밤빌리아, 애굽과 및 구레네에 가까운 리비야 여러 지방에 사는 사람들과 로마로부터 온 나그네 곧 유대인과 유대교에 들어온 사람들과","브루기아와 밤빌리아, 애굽과 및 구레네에 가까운 리비야 여러 지방에 사는 사람들과 로마로부터 온 나그네 곧 유대인과 유대교에 들어 온 사람들과","브루기아, 밤빌리아, 애굽 태생의 사람들이 있고, 구레네에 가까운 리비야 지방 사람들, 로마에서 찾아온 유대인들과 유대교로 개종한 이방인들,","Phrygia and Pamphylia, Egypt and the districts of Libya near Cyrene, as well as travelers from Rome,","Phrygia, and Pamphylia, in Egypt, and in the parts of Libya about Cyrene, and strangers of Rome, Jews and proselytes,","Phrygia and Pamphylia, Egypt and the parts of Libya near Cyrene; visitors from Rome","Phrygiam quoque et Pamphyliam, Aegyptum et partes Libyae, quae est circa Cyrenem, et advenae Romani,","פרוגיא ופמפוליא מצרים וחבל לוב אשר על יד קוריני והבאים מרומי גם יהודים גם גרים׃"],["51","2","11","유다인과 유다교로 개종한 이들, 그리고 크레타 사람과 아라비아 사람인 우리가 저들이 하느님의 위업을 말하는 것을 저마다 자기 언어로 듣고 있지 않는가?”","유다인들과 유다교에 개종한 이방인들이 있고 그레데 사람들과 아라비아 사람들도 있다. 그런데 저 사람들이 지금 하느님께서 하신 큰 일들을 전하고 있는데 그것을 우리는 저마다 자기네 말로 듣고 있지 않은가?\" 하고 말하였다.","그레데인과 아라비아인들이라 우리가 다 우리의 각 언어로 하나님의 큰 일을 말함을 듣는도다 하고","그레데인과 아라비아인들이라 우리가 다 우리의 각 방언으로 하나님의 큰 일을 말함을 듣는도다 하고","거기다가 그레데 사람과 아라비아 사람들까지 있지 않은가! 그런데 우리가 각기 자기 나라 말로 하나님의 크신 이적에 대해 말하는 것을 듣고 있다니!\"","both Jews and converts to Judaism, Cretans and Arabs, yet we hear them speaking in our own tongues of the mighty acts of God.”","Cretes and Arabians, we do hear them speak in our tongues the wonderful works of God.","(both Jews and converts to Judaism); Cretans and Arabs--we hear them declaring the wonders of God in our own tongues!\"","Iudaei quoque et proselyti, Cretes et Arabes, audimus loquentes eos nostris linguis magnalia Dei “.","כרתים וערבים הנה אנחנו שמעים אתם מספרים בלשנותינו גדלות האלהים׃"],["51","2","12","그들은 모두 놀라워하고 어쩔 줄 몰라 하며, “도대체 어찌 된 영문인가?” 하고 서로 말하였다.","이렇게 모두 놀라고 어안이 벙벙하여 \"도대체 어찌 된 영문인가?\" 하며 웅성거렸는데","다 놀라며 당황하여 서로 이르되 이 어찌 된 일이냐 하며","다 놀라며 의혹하여 서로 가로되 이 어찐 일이냐 하며","그들은 너무도 놀랍고 신기하여 \"이게 대체 어떻게 된 일이오?\" 하고 서로 물었다.","They were all astounded and bewildered, and said to one another, “What does this mean?”","And they were all amazed, and were in doubt, saying one to another, What meaneth this?","Amazed and perplexed, they asked one another, \"What does this mean?\"","Stupebant autem omnes et haesitabant ad invicem dicentes:  “Quidnam hoc vult esse? “;","וישתוממו כלם ויבהלו ויאמרו איש אל אחיו מה תהיה זאת׃"],["51","2","13","그러나 더러는 “새 포도주에 취했군.” 하며 비웃었다.","그 중에는 \"저 사람들이 술에 취했군!\" 하고 빈정거리는 사람들도 있었다.","또 어떤 이들은 조롱하여 이르되 그들이 새 술에 취하였다 하더라","또 어떤이들은 조롱하여 가로되 저희가 새 술이 취하였다 하더라","그러나 그중에는 \"술에 취해 하는 짓거리야!\" 하고 조롱하는 사람들도 있었다.","But others said, scoffing, “They have had too much new wine.”","Others mocking said, These men are full of new wine.","Some, however, made fun of them and said, \"They have had too much wine.\"","alii autem irridentes dicebant:  “Musto pleni sunt isti “.","ואחרים לעגו ויאמרו כי מלאי עסיס המה׃"],["51","2","14","그때에 베드로가 열한 사도와 함께 일어나 목소리를 높여 그들에게 말하였다. “유다인들과 모든 예루살렘 주민 여러분, 여러분은 이 사실을 알아야 합니다. 내 말을 귀담아들으십시오.","그 때 베드로가 다른 열한 사도들과 함께 일어서서 군중을 보고 큰소리로 이렇게 말했다. \"유다 동포와 예루살렘 시민 여러분, 내가 하는 말을 귀담아듣고 잘 생각해 보십시오.","베드로가 열한 사도와 함께 서서 소리를 높여 이르되 유대인들과 예루살렘에 사는 모든 사람들아 이 일을 너희로 알게 할 것이니 내 말에 귀를 기울이라","베드로가 열 한 사도와 같이 서서 소리를 높여 가로되 유대인들과 예루살렘에 사는 모든 사람들아 이 일을 너희로 알게 할 것이니 내 말에 귀를 기울이라","그때 베드로가 열한 사도와 함께 앞으로 나서서 군중들에게 외쳤다. \"유대 동포 여러분, 그리고 예루살렘 시민 여러분, 자, 들어 보십시오.","Then Peter stood up with the Eleven, raised his voice, and proclaimed to them, “You who are Jews, indeed all of you staying in Jerusalem. Let this be known to you, and listen to my words.","But Peter, standing up with the eleven, lifted up his voice, and said unto them, Ye men of Judaea, and all ye that dwell at Jerusalem, be this known unto you, and hearken to my words:","Then Peter stood up with the Eleven, raised his voice and addressed the crowd: \"Fellow Jews and all of you who live in Jerusalem, let me explain this to you; listen carefully to what I say.","Stans autem Petrus cum Undecim levavit vocem suam et locutus est eis:  “Viri Iudaei et qui habitatis Ierusalem universi, hoc vobis notum sit, et auribus percipite verba mea.","אז יעמד פטרוס ועשתי העשר עמו וישא את קולו וידבר אליהם אנשי יהודה וישבי ירושלים כלכם זאת תודע לכם והאזינו אל דברי׃"],["51","2","15","지금은 아침 아홉 시입니다. 그러니 이 사람들은 여러분이 생각하듯이 취하지 않았습니다.","지금 시각이 아침 아홉 시인데 어떻게 술에 취했다고 생각하십니까? 이 사람들은 술에 취한 것이 아닙니다.","때가 제 삼 시니 너희 생각과 같이 이 사람들이 취한 것이 아니라","때가 제 삼시니 너희 생각과 같이 이 사람들이 취한 것이 아니라","여러분 중에는 우리가 술에 취해서 그런다고 하는 이도 계십니다만 그런 일은 절대 없습니다. 아직 술 취하기에는 이른 시간입니다. 아침 9시부터 술 취하는 사람이 어디 있습니까?","These people are not drunk, as you suppose, for it is only nine o’clock in the morning.","For these are not drunken, as ye suppose, seeing it is but the third hour of the day.","These men are not drunk, as you suppose. It's only nine in the morning!","Non enim, sicut vos aestimatis, hi ebrii sunt, est enim hora diei tertia;","כי אלה לא שכורים המה כאשר חשבתם כי שעה שלישית ביום עתה׃"],["51","2","16","이 일은 요엘 예언자를 통하여 하신 말씀대로 된 것입니다.","이것은 예언자 요엘이 예언한 대로 된 것입니다.","이는 곧 선지자 요엘을 통하여 말씀하신 것이니 일렀으되","이는 곧 선지자 요엘로 말씀하신 것이니 일렀으되","오늘 아침에 여러분이 보신 이 일은 이미 오래 전에 예언자 요엘이 예언한 것입니다.","No, this is what was spoken through the prophet Joel:","But this is that which was spoken by the prophet Joel;","No, this is what was spoken by the prophet Joel:","sed hoc est, quod dictum est per prophetam Ioel:","אבל זה הוא האמור על ידי יואל הנביא׃"],["51","2","17","‘하느님께서 말씀하신다. 마지막 날에 나는 모든 사람에게 내 영을 부어 주리라. 그리하여 너희 아들딸들은 예언을 하고 너희 젊은이들은 환시를 보며 너희 노인들은 꿈을 꾸리라.","하느님께서 말씀하신다. 마지막 날에 1)나는 모든 사람에게 나의 성령을 부어주리니 너희 아들 딸들은 예언을 하고 젊은이들은 계시의 영상을 보며 늙은이들은 꿈을 꾸리라. 요엘 3:1-5.","ㄱ)하나님이 말씀하시기를 말세에 내가 내 영을 모든 육체에 부어 주리니 너희의 자녀들은 예언할 것이요 너희의 젊은이들은 환상을 보고 너희의 늙은이들은 꿈을 꾸리라","ㄱ)하나님이 가라사대 말세에 내가 내 영으로 모든 육체에게 부어 주리니 너희의 자녀들은 예언할 것이요 너희의 젊은이들은 환상을 보고 너희의 늙은이들은 꿈을 꾸리라 욜 2:28 이하","ㄱ) \"하나님이 말씀하신다. 마지막 날에 내가 다시 너희에게 나의 비를 부어 준 다음에, 너희 모두에게 나의 영을 부어 주겠다. 너희의 아들딸들은 예언을 할 것이다. 너희의 늙은이들은 여러 가지 꿈을 꿀 것이고 너희의 젊은이들은 온갖 환상을 볼 것이다. (ㄱ. 70인역 욜3:1-5)","‘It will come to pass in the last days,’ God says, ‘that I will pour out a portion of my spirit upon all flesh. Your sons and your daughters shall prophesy, your young men shall see visions, your old men shall dream dreams.","And it shall come to pass in the last days, saith God, I will pour out of my Spirit upon all flesh: and your sons and your daughters shall prophesy, and your young men shall see visions, and your old men shall dream dreams:","\"'In the last days, God says, I will pour out my Spirit on all people. Your sons and daughters will prophesy, your young men will see visions, your old men will dream dreams.","Et erit: in novissimis diebus, dicit Deus, effundam de Spiritu meo super omnem carnem, et prophetabunt filii vestri et filiae vestrae, et iuvenes vestri visiones videbunt, et seniores vestri somnia somniabunt;","והיה באחרית הימים נאם אלהים אשפך את רוחי על כל בשר ונבאו בניכם ובנתיכם ובחוריכם חזינות יראו וזקניכם חלמות יחלמון׃"],["51","2","18","그날에 나의 남종들과 여종들에게도 내 영을 부어 주리니 그들도 예언을 하리라.","그 때에는 나의 남종에게도 여종에게도 나의 성령을 부어주리니 그들도 예언을 하리라.","그 때에 내가 내 영을 내 남종과 여종들에게 부어 주리니 그들이 예언할 것이요","그 때에 내가 내 영으로 내 남종과 여종들에게 부어 주리니 저희가 예언할 것이요","또 그날이 오면 너희의 남녀 노예들에게도 똑같이 나의 영을 부어 주고","Indeed, upon my servants and my handmaids I will pour out a portion of my spirit in those days, and they shall prophesy.","And on my servants and on my handmaidens I will pour out in those days of my Spirit; and they shall prophesy:","Even on my servants, both men and women, I will pour out my Spirit in those days, and they will prophesy.","et quidem super servos meos et super ancillas meas in diebus illis effundam de Spiritu meo, et prophetabunt.","וגם על עבדי ועל שפחותי בימים ההמה אשפך את רוחי ונבאו׃"],["51","2","19","또 나는 위로 하늘에서는 이적들을, 아래로 땅에서는 표징들을 일으키리니 곧 피와 불과 짙은 연기다.","나는 하늘 높은 곳에서 표징을 보이며 땅에서 기적을 행하리니 피와 불과 짙은 연기가 일고","또 내가 위로 하늘에서는 기사를 아래로 땅에서는 징조를 베풀리니 곧 피와 불과 연기로다","또 내가 위로 하늘에서는 기사와 아래로 땅에서는 징조를 베풀리니 곧 피와 불과 연기로다","땅과 하늘에서 이상한 상징들, 곧 피와 불과 버섯 연기들을 보여주겠다.","And I will work wonders in the heavens above and signs on the earth below: blood, fire, and a cloud of smoke.","And I will shew wonders in heaven above, and signs in the earth beneath; blood, and fire, and vapour of smoke:","I will show wonders in the heaven above and signs on the earth below, blood and fire and billows of smoke.","Et dabo prodigia in caelo sursum et signa in terra deorsum, sanguinem et ignem et vaporem fumi;","ונתתי מופתים בשמים ממעל ואתות בארץ מתחת דם ואש ותימרות עשן׃"],["51","2","20","그 크고 찬란한 주님의 날이 오기 전에 해는 어둠으로, 달은 피로 바뀌리라.","해는 빛을 잃어 어두워지고 달은 피와 같이 붉어져 마침내 크고 영광스러운 주의 날이 오리라.","주의 크고 영화로운 날이 이르기 전에 해가 변하여 어두워지고 달이 변하여 피가 되리라","주의 크고 영화로운 날이 이르기 전에 해가 변하여 어두워지고 달이 변하여 피가 되리라","여호와의 그 위대하고 무서운 날이 오기 전에 해는 캄캄해지고 달은 피같이 붉어질 것이다.","The sun shall be turned to darkness, and the moon to blood, before the coming of the great and splendid day of the Lord,","The sun shall be turned into darkness, and the moon into blood, before the great and notable day of the Lord come:","The sun will be turned to darkness and the moon to blood before the coming of the great and glorious day of the Lord.","sol convertetur in tenebras, et luna in sanguinem, antequam veniat dies Domini magnus et manifestus.","השמש יהפך לחשך והירח לדם לפני בוא יום יהוה הגדול והנורא׃"],["51","2","21","그때에 주님의 이름을 받들어 부르는 이는 모두 구원을 받으리라.’","그 때 주의 이름을 부르는 자는 구원을 받으리라.'","누구든지 주의 이름을 부르는 자는 구원을 받으리라 하였느니라","누구든지 주의 이름을 부르는 자는 구원을 얻으리라 하였느니라","그날에 여호와의 이름을 부르는 사람은 누구든지 구원을 받을 것이다. 주께서 약속하신 것과 똑같이 시온산과 예루살렘 도성에서 구원을 받는 자들이 있을 것이다. 그리고 여호와께서 불러내시는 자들은 살아 남을 것이다.\"","and it shall be that everyone shall be saved who calls on the name of the Lord.’","And it shall come to pass, that whosoever shall call on the name of the Lord shall be saved.","And everyone who calls on the name of the Lord will be saved.'","Et erit: omnis quicumque invocaverit nomen Domini, salvus erit “.","והיה כל אשר יקרא בשם יהוה ימלט׃"],["51","2","22","이스라엘인 여러분, 이 말을 들으십시오. 여러분도 알다시피, 나자렛 사람 예수님은 하느님께서 여러 기적과 이적과 표징으로 여러분에게 확인해 주신 분이십니다. 하느님께서 그분을 통하여 여러분 가운데에서 그것들을 일으키셨습니다.","이스라엘 동포 여러분, 내 말을 들으시오. 나자렛 예수는 하느님께로부터 오신 분이었습니다. 하느님께서는 이것을 분명히 보여주시려고 여러분이 보는 앞에서 그분을 통하여 여러 가지 기적과 놀라운 일과 표징을 나타내셨습니다. 이 사실은 여러분이 잘 알고 있습니다.","이스라엘 사람들아 이 말을 들으라 너희도 아는 바와 같이 하나님께서 나사렛 예수로 큰 권능과 기사와 표적을 너희 가운데서 베푸사 너희 앞에서 그를 증언하셨느니라","이스라엘 사람들아 이 말을 들으라 너희도 아는바에 하나님께서 나사렛 예수로 큰 권능과 기사와 1)표적을 너희 가운데서 베푸사 너희 앞에서 그를 증거하셨느니라 혹 이적","이스라엘 사람들이여, 들어 보십시오. 여러분이 아시다시피 하나님께서는 나사렛 예수를 통하여 놀라운 이적들을 베푸셨습니다. 이것은 하나님께서 모든 사람 앞에 예수가 자기가 보낸 분임을 증거하려고 행하신 일입니다.","You who are Israelites, hear these words. Jesus the Nazorean was a man commended to you by God with mighty deeds, wonders, and signs, which God worked through him in your midst, as you yourselves know.","Ye men of Israel, hear these words; Jesus of Nazareth, a man approved of God among you by miracles and wonders and signs, which God did by him in the midst of you, as ye yourselves also know:","\"Men of Israel, listen to this: Jesus of Nazareth was a man accredited by God to you by miracles, wonders and signs, which God did among you through him, as you yourselves know.","Viri Israelitae, audite verba haec: Iesum Nazarenum, virum approbatum a Deo apud vos virtutibus et prodigiis et signis, quae fecit per illum Deus in medio vestri, sicut ipsi scitis,","אנשי ישראל שמעו הדברים האלה ישוע הנצרי האיש אשר נאמן לכם מאת האלהים בגבורות ובמופתים ובאתות אשר האלהים עשה על ידו בתוככם כאשר ידעתם גם אתם׃"],["51","2","23","하느님께서 미리 정하신 계획과 예지에 따라 여러분에게 넘겨지신 그분을, 여러분은 무법자들의 손을 빌려 십자가에 못 박아 죽였습니다.","그런데 하느님께서 미리 정하신 뜻과 계획에 따라 여러분의 손에 넘어간 이 예수를 여러분은 악인들의 손을 빌려 십자가에 못박아 죽였던 것입니다.","그가 하나님께서 정하신 뜻과 미리 아신 대로 내준 바 되었거늘 너희가 법 없는 자들의 손을 빌려 못 박아 죽였으나","그가 하나님의 정하신 뜻과 미리 아신대로 내어준바 되었거늘 너희가 법 없는 자들의 손을 빌어 못 박아 죽였으나","하나님께서는 미리 작정하신 대로 그분을 여러분의 손으로 로마 정부에 넘겨 십자가에 못박아 죽이는 일을 허락하셨습니다.","This man, delivered up by the set plan and foreknowledge of God, you killed, using lawless men to crucify him.","Him, being delivered by the determinate counsel and foreknowledge of God, ye have taken, and by wicked hands have crucified and slain:","This man was handed over to you by God's set purpose and foreknowledge; and you, with the help of wicked men, put him to death by nailing him to the cross.","hunc definito consilio et praescientia Dei traditum per manum iniquorum affigentes interemistis,","אתו הנמסר על פי עצת האלהים הנחרצה וידיעתו מקום לקחתם ובידי רשעים הוקעתם והרגתם אתו׃"],["51","2","24","그러나 하느님께서는 그분을 죽음의 고통에서 풀어 다시 살리셨습니다. 그분께서는 죽음에 사로잡혀 계실 수가 없었던 것입니다.","그러나 하느님께서는 그분을 되살리시고 죽음의 고통에서 풀어주셨습니다. 예수께서는 죽음의 세력에 사로잡혀 계실 분이 아닙니다.","하나님께서 그를 사망의 고통에서 풀어 살리셨으니 이는 그가 사망에 매여 있을 수 없었음이라","하나님께서 사망의 고통을 풀어 살리셨으니 이는 그가 사망에게 매여 있을 수 없었음이라","그런 뒤에 하나님께서는 그분을 죽음의 고통에서 해방시켜 다시 살아나게 하셨습니다. 죽음의 손아귀에 그분을 가두어 둔다는 것은 있을 수 없는 일이기 때문입니다.","But God raised him up, releasing him from the throes of death, because it was impossible for him to be held by it.","Whom God hath raised up, having loosed the pains of death: because it was not possible that he should be holden of it.","But God raised him from the dead, freeing him from the agony of death, because it was impossible for death to keep its hold on him.","quem Deus suscitavit, solutis doloribus mortis, iuxta quod impossibile erat teneri illum ab ea.","והאלהים הקימו מן המתים בהתיר את חבלי המות באשר נמנע מן המות לעצר אתו׃"],["51","2","25","그래서 다윗이 그분을 두고 이렇게 말합니다. ‘나 언제나 주님을 내 앞에 모시어 그분께서 내 오른쪽에 계시니 나는 흔들리지 않는다.","그분에 관해서 다윗은 이렇게 말하였습니다. '2)주께서 내 오른편에 계시오니 나는 항상 주님을 가까이 뵈오며 내 마음은 흔들리지 않습니다. 시편 16:8-11.","다윗이 그를 가리켜 이르되 ㄴ)내가 항상 내 앞에 계신 주를 뵈었음이여 나로 요동하지 않게 하기 위하여 그가 내 우편에 계시도다","다윗이 저를 가리켜 가로되 ㄴ)내가 항상 내 앞에 계신 주를 뵈웠음이여 나로 요동치 않게 하기 위하여 그가 내 우편에 계시도다 시 16:8 이하","다윗은 그분에 대해서 이렇게 말한 바 있습니다. ㄴ) \"나 여호와를 한마음으로 모시고 살며 주께서 내 가까이에 계시니 떨리지 않습니다. (ㄴ. 시16:8-11)","For David says of him: ‘I saw the Lord ever before me, with him at my right hand I shall not be disturbed.","For David speaketh concerning him, I foresaw the Lord always before my face, for he is on my right hand, that I should not be moved:","David said about him: \"'I saw the Lord always before me. Because he is at my right hand, I will not be shaken.","David enim dicit circa eum:  “Providebam Dominum coram me semper, quoniam a dextris meis est, ne commovear.","כי דוד אמר עליו שויתי יהוה לנגדי תמיד כי מימיני בל אמוט׃"],["51","2","26","그러기에 내 마음은 기뻐하고 내 혀는 즐거워하였다. 내 육신마저 희망 속에 살리라.","그러기에 내 마음은 기쁨에 넘치고 내 혀는 즐거워 노래하며 이 육신마저 희망 속에 살 것입니다.","그러므로 내 마음이 기뻐하였고 내 혀도 즐거워하였으며 육체도 희망에 거하리니","이러므로 내 마음이 기뻐하였고 내 입술도 즐거워하였으며 육체는 희망에 거하리니","하여 이 마음 기쁘고 한없이 즐겁습니다. 이 몸도 편안히 살아갑니다.","Therefore my heart has been glad and my tongue has exulted; my flesh, too, will dwell in hope,","Therefore did my heart rejoice, and my tongue was glad; moreover also my flesh shall rest in hope:","Therefore my heart is glad and my tongue rejoices; my body also will live in hope,","Propter hoc laetatum est cor meum, et exsultavit lingua mea; insuper et caro mea requiescet in spe.","לכן שמח לבי ויגל כבודי אף בשרי ישכן לבטח׃"],["51","2","27","당신께서 제 영혼을 저승에 버려두지 않으시고 당신의 거룩한 이에게 죽음의 나라를 아니 보게 하실 것이기 때문입니다.","당신은 내 영혼을 죽음의 세계에 버려두지 않으시고 당신의 거룩한 종을 썩지 않게 지켜주실 것입니다.","이는 내 영혼을 음부에 버리지 아니하시며 주의 거룩한 자로 썩음을 당하지 않게 하실 것임이로다","이는 내 영혼을 음부에 버리지 아니하시며 주의 거룩한 자로 썩음을 당치 않게 하실 것임이로다","주께서 이 몸을 스올로 팽개치지 않으시고 주님만을 애타게 그리는 이 몸 버리지 않으시리니","because you will not abandon my soul to the netherworld, nor will you suffer your holy one to see corruption.","Because thou wilt not leave my soul in hell, neither wilt thou suffer thine Holy One to see corruption.","because you will not abandon me to the grave, nor will you let your Holy One see decay.","Quoniam non derelinques animam meam in inferno neque dabis Sanctum tuum videre corruptionem.","כי לא תעזב נפשי לשאול לא תתן חסידך לראות שחת׃"]]