[["48","14","63","그러자 대사제가 자기 옷을 찢고 이렇게 말하였다. “이제 우리에게 무슨 증인이 더 필요합니까?","이 말을 듣고 대사제는 자기 옷을 찢으며 \"이 이상 무슨 증거가 더 필요하겠소?","대제사장이 자기 옷을 찢으며 이르되 우리가 어찌 더 증인을 요구하리요","대제사장이 자기 옷을 찢으며 가로되 우리가 어찌 더 증인을 요구하리요","그러자 대제사장이 자기 옷을 찢으며 \"더 이상 무슨 말이 필요하겠습니까? 하나님을 모독하는 저 사람의 말을 우리 모두가 직접 들었는데 또 다른 증언이 필요할까요? 여러분의 의견은 어떻습니까?\" 하고 묻자 그들은 만장 일치로 사형판결을 내렸다.","At that the high priest tore his garments and said, “What further need have we of witnesses?","Then the high priest rent his clothes, and saith, What need we any further witnesses?","The high priest tore his clothes. \"Why do we need any more witnesses?\" he asked.","Summus autem sacerdos scindens vestimenta sua ait:  “Quid adhuc necessarii sunt nobis testes?",null],["48","14","64","여러분도 하느님을 모독하는 말을 듣지 않았습니까? 여러분의 생각은 어떻습니까?” 그들은 모두 예수님께서 사형을 받아야 마땅하다고 단죄하였다.","여러분은 방금 이 모독하는 말을 듣지 않았습니까? 자, 어떻게 했으면 좋겠소?\" 하고 묻자 사람들은 일제히 예수는 사형감이라고 단정하였다.","그 신성모독 하는 말을 너희가 들었도다 너희는 어떻게 생각하느냐 하니 그들이 다 예수를 사형에 해당한 자로 정죄하고","그 참람한 말을 너희가 들었도다 너희는 어떻게 생각하느뇨 하니 저희가 다 예수를 사형에 해당한 자로 정죄하고","(63절에 포함되어 있음)","You have heard the blasphemy. What do you think?” They all condemned him as deserving to die.","Ye have heard the blasphemy: what think ye? And they all condemned him to be guilty of death.","\"You have heard the blasphemy. What do you think?\" They all condemned him as worthy of death.","Audistis blasphemiam. Quid vobis videtur? “. Qui omnes condemnaverunt eum esse reum mortis.",null],["48","14","65","어떤 자들은 예수님께 침을 뱉고 그분의 얼굴을 가린 다음, 주먹으로 치면서 “알아맞혀 보아라.” 하며 놀려 대기 시작하였다. 시종들도 예수님의 뺨을 때렸다.","어떤 자들은 예수께 침을 뱉으며 그의 얼굴을 가리고 주먹으로 치면서 \"자, 누가 때렸는지 알아맞혀 보아라.\" 하며 조롱하였다. 경비원들도 예수께 손찌검을 하였다.","어떤 사람은 그에게 침을 뱉으며 그의 얼굴을 가리고 주먹으로 치며 이르되 선지자 노릇을 하라 하고 하인들은 손바닥으로 치더라","혹은 그에게 침을 뱉으며 그의 얼굴을 가리우고 주먹으로 치며 가로되 선지자 노릇을 하라 하고 하속들은 손바닥으로 치더라","그들 가운데 몇 사람이 예수께 침을 뱉고 얼굴을 가린 후에 주먹으로 치면서 \"누가 너를 쳤는지 알아맞혀 보아라\" 하고 조롱하였다. 심지어는 경비원들까지도 예수를 손찌검하였다.","Some began to spit on him. They blindfolded him and struck him and said to him, “Prophesy!” And the guards greeted him with blows.","And some began to spit on him, and to cover his face, and to buffet him, and to say unto him, Prophesy: and the servants did strike him with the palms of their hands.","Then some began to spit at him; they blindfolded him, struck him with their fists, and said, \"Prophesy!\" And the guards took him and beat him.","Et coeperunt quidam conspuere eum et velare faciem eius et colaphis eum caedere et dicere ei:  “Prophetiza “; et ministri alapis eum caedebant.",null],["48","14","66","베드로가 안뜰 아래쪽에 있는데 대사제의 하녀 하나가 와서,","그 동안 베드로는 뜰 아래쪽에 있었는데 대사제의 여종 하나가 오더니","베드로는 아랫뜰에 있더니 대제사장의 여종 하나가 와서","베드로는 아래 뜰에 있더니 대제사장의 비자 하나가 와서","그동안 베드로는 뜰 아래쪽에 있었다. 그런데 대제사장의 집에서 일하는 여종 하나가","While Peter was below in the courtyard, one of the high priest’s maids came along.","And as Peter was beneath in the palace, there cometh one of the maids of the high priest:","While Peter was below in the courtyard, one of the servant girls of the high priest came by.","Et cum esset Petrus in atrio deorsum, venit una ex ancillis summi sacerdotis",null],["48","14","67","불을 쬐고 있는 베드로를 보고 그를 찬찬히 살피면서 말하였다. “당신도 저 나자렛 사람 예수와 함께 있던 사람이지요?”","베드로가 불을 쬐고 있는 것을 보고 그의 얼굴을 유심히 들여다보며 \"당신도 저 나자렛 사람 예수와 함께 다니던 사람이군요?\" 하고 말하였다.","베드로가 불 쬐고 있는 것을 보고 주목하여 이르되 너도 나사렛 예수와 함께 있었도다 하거늘","베드로의 불 쬠을 보고 주목하여 가로되 너도 나사렛 예수와 함께 있었도다 하거늘","불을 쬐고 있는 베드로를 보고 \"당신은 나사렛 예수와 같이 다니던 사람이군요\" 하고 말하였다.","Seeing Peter warming himself, she looked intently at him and said, “You too were with the Nazarene, Jesus.”","And when she saw Peter warming himself, she looked upon him, and said, And thou also wast with Jesus of Nazareth.","When she saw Peter warming himself, she looked closely at him. \"You also were with that Nazarene, Jesus,\" she said.","et, cum vidisset Petrum calefacientem se, aspiciens illum ait:  “Et tu cum hoc Nazareno, Iesu, eras! “.",null],["48","14","68","그러자 베드로는, “나는 당신이 무슨 말을 하는지 알지도 이해하지도 못하겠소.” 하고 부인하였다. 그가 바깥뜰로 나가자 닭이 울었다.","그러나 베드로는 \"도대체 무슨 소리를 하는 거요? 나는 도무지 알 수가 없소.\" 하고 부인하였다. 그리고 베드로가 대문께로 나가자","베드로가 부인하여 이르되 나는 네가 말하는 것이 무엇인지 알지도 못하고 깨닫지도 못하겠노라 하며 앞뜰로 나갈새","베드로가 부인하여 가로되 나는 네 말하는 것이 무엇인지 알지도 못하고 깨닫지도 못하겠노라 하며 앞뜰로 나갈쌔6) 어떤 사본에는, 68절 끝에 [마침 닭이 울더라]가 있음","ㄱ) 그러자 당황한 베드로는 \"도대체 무슨 말을 하는지 모르겠다\"고 부인하며 바깥뜰로 나가 버렸다. 바로 그때 닭이 울었다. (ㄱ. 이 구절은 몇몇 고대 사본에만 있다)","But he denied it saying, “I neither know nor understand what you are talking about.” So he went out into the outer court. [Then the cock crowed.]","But he denied, saying, I know not, neither understand I what thou sayest. And he went out into the porch; and the cock crew.","But he denied it. \"I don't know or understand what you're talking about,\" he said, and went out into the entryway.","At ille negavit dicens:  “Neque scio neque novi quid tu dicas! “. Et exiit foras ante atrium, et gallus cantavit.",null],["48","14","69","그 하녀가 베드로를 보면서 곁에 서 있는 이들에게 다시, “이 사람은 그들과 한패예요.” 하고 말하기 시작하였다.","그 여종이 그를 보고 곁에 있던 사람들에게 다시 \"저 사람은 예수와 한패입니다.\" 하고 말하였다.","여종이 그를 보고 곁에 서 있는 자들에게 다시 이르되 이 사람은 그 도당이라 하되","비자가 그를 보고 곁에 서 있는 자들에게 다시 이르되 이 사람은 그 당이라 하되","그 여종은 다시 베드로가 거기 서 있는 것을 보고 곁에 있는 사람들에게 \"이 사람은 예수의 제자가 틀림없어요\" 하고 말하였다.","The maid saw him and began again to say to the bystanders, “This man is one of them.”","And a maid saw him again, and began to say to them that stood by, This is one of them.","When the servant girl saw him there, she said again to those standing around, \"This fellow is one of them.\"","Et ancilla, cum vidisset illum, rursus coepit dicere circumstantibus:  “Hic ex illis est! “.",null],["48","14","70","그러나 베드로는 또 부인하였다. 그런데 조금 뒤에 곁에 서 있던 이들이 다시 베드로에게, “당신은 갈릴래아 사람이니 그들과 한패임에 틀림없소.” 하고 말하였다.","그러나 베드로는 이 말을 또다시 부인하였다. 얼마 뒤에 옆에 서 있던 사람들이 베드로에게 다시 \"당신은 갈릴래아 사람이니 틀림없이 예수와 한패일 거요.\" 하고 말하였다.","또 부인하더라 조금 후에 곁에 서 있는 사람들이 다시 베드로에게 말하되 너도 갈릴리 사람이니 참으로 그 도당이니라","또 부인하더라 조금 후에 곁에 서 있는 사람들이 다시 베드로에게 말하되 너는 갈릴리 사람이니 참으로 그 당이니라","베드로는 다시 이를 부인하였다. 조금 뒤에 곁에 서 있는 사람들이 다시 베드로에게 말하였다. \"당신도 갈릴리 사람이니 예수와 한패인 게 틀림없소\" 하고 말하자","Once again he denied it. A little later the bystanders said to Peter once more, “Surely you are one of them; for you too are a Galilean.”","And he denied it again. And a little after, they that stood by said again to Peter, Surely thou art one of them: for thou art a Galilaean, and thy speech agreeth thereto.","Again he denied it. After a little while, those standing near said to Peter, \"Surely you are one of them, for you are a Galilean.\"","At ille iterum negabat. Et post pusillum rursus, qui astabant, dicebant Petro:  “Vere ex illis es, nam et Galilaeus es “.",null],["48","14","71","베드로는 거짓이면 천벌을 받겠다고 맹세하기 시작하며, “나는 당신들이 말하는 그 사람을 알지 못하오.” 하였다.","이 말을 듣고 베드로는 거짓말이라면 천벌이라도 받겠다고 맹세하면서 \"나는 당신들이 말하는 그 사람은 알지도 못하오.\" 하고 잡아떼었다.","그러나 베드로가 저주하며 맹세하되 나는 너희가 말하는 이 사람을 알지 못하노라 하니","베드로가 저주하며 맹세하되 나는 너희의 말하는 이 사람을 알지 못하노라 하니","베드로는 \"나는 당신들이 말하는 그 사람을 만난 적도 없소. 내 말이 거짓이라면 천벌이라도 받겠소\"라고 맹세까지 하였다.","He began to curse and to swear, “I do not know this man about whom you are talking.”","But he began to curse and to swear, saying, I know not this man of whom ye speak.","He began to call down curses on himself, and he swore to them, \"I don't know this man you're talking about.\"","Ille autem coepit anathematizare et iurare:  “Nescio hominem istum, quem dicitis! “.",null],["48","14","72","그러자 곧 닭이 두 번째 울었다. 베드로는 예수님께서, “닭이 두 번 울기 전에 너는 세 번이나 나를 모른다고 할 것이다.” 하신 말씀이 생각나서 울기 시작하였다.","바로 그 때에 닭이 두 번째 울었다. 베드로는 예수께서 \"닭이 두 번번 울기 전에 네가 세 번이나 나를 모른다고 할 것이다.\" 하신 말씀이 머리에 떠올랐다. 그는 땅에 쓰러져 슬피 울었다.","닭이 곧 두 번째 울더라 이에 베드로가 예수께서 자기에게 하신 말씀 곧 닭이 두 번 울기 전에 네가 세 번 나를 부인하리라 하심이 기억되어 그 일을 생각하고 울었더라","닭이 곧 두번째 울더라 이에 베드로가 예수께서 자기에게 하신 말씀 곧 닭이 두번 울기 전에 네가 세번 나를 부인하리라 하심이 기억되어 생각하고 울었더라","그때 곧 닭이 두번째로 울었다. 베드로는 \"닭이 두번 울기 전에 너는 세 번이나 나를 모른다고 할 것이다\"라고 하신 예수의 말씀이 떠올라 슬피 울었다.","And immediately a cock crowed a second time. Then Peter remembered the word that Jesus had said to him, “Before the cock crows twice you will deny me three times.” He broke down and wept.","And the second time the cock crew. And Peter called to mind the word that Jesus said unto him, Before the cock crow twice, thou shalt deny me thrice. And when he thought thereon, he wept.","Immediately the rooster crowed the second time. Then Peter remembered the word Jesus had spoken to him: \"Before the rooster crows twice you will disown me three times.\" And he broke down and wept.","Et statim iterum gallus cantavit; et recordatus est Petrus verbi, sicut dixerat ei Iesus:  “Priusquam gallus cantet bis, ter me negabis “. Et coepit flere.",null],["48","15","1","아침이 되자 수석 사제들은 곧바로 원로들과 율법 학자들, 곧 온 최고 의회와 의논한 끝에, 예수님을 결박하여 끌고 가서 빌라도에게 넘겼다.","날이 밝자 곧 대사제들은 원로들과 율법학자들을 비롯하여 온 의회를 소집하고 의논한 끝에 예수를 결박하여 빌라도에게 끌고 가 넘기었다.","새벽에 대제사장들이 즉시 장로들과 서기관들 곧 온 공회와 더불어 의논하고 예수를 결박하여 끌고 가서 빌라도에게 넘겨 주니","새벽에 대제사장들이 즉시 장로들과 서기관들 곧 온 공회로 더불어 의논하고 예수를 결박하여 끌고 가서 빌라도에게 넘겨주니","아침 일찍부터 대제사장과 장로와 율법학자들은 다음 일을 의논하려고 회의를 열었다. 그리고 그들 모두는 예수를 결박해서 로마 총독 빌라도에게 보내기로 결의하였다.","As soon as morning came, the chief priests with the elders and the scribes, that is, the whole Sanhedrin, held a council. They bound Jesus, led him away, and handed him over to Pilate.","And straightway in the morning the chief priests held a consultation with the elders and scribes and the whole council, and bound Jesus, and carried him away, and delivered him to Pilate.","Very early in the morning, the chief priests, with the elders, the teachers of the law and the whole Sanhedrin, reached a decision. They bound Jesus, led him away and handed him over to Pilate.","Et confestim mane consilium facientes summi sacerdotes cum senioribus et scribis, id est universum concilium, vincientes Iesum duxerunt et tradiderunt Pilato.","וישכימו ראשי הכהנים עם הזקנים והסופרים וכל הסנהדרין בבקר ויתיעצו ויאסרו את ישוע ויוליכהו משם וימסרהו אל פילטוס׃"],["48","15","2","빌라도가 예수님께 “당신이 유다인들의 임금이오?” 하고 묻자, 그분께서 “네가 그렇게 말하고 있다.” 하고 대답하셨다.","빌라도는 예수께 \"네가 유다인의 왕인가?\" 하고 물었다. 예수께서는 \"그것은 네 말이다.\" 하고 대답하셨다.","빌라도가 묻되 네가 유대인의 왕이냐 예수께서 대답하여 이르시되 네 말이 옳도다 하시매","빌라도가 묻되 네가 유대인의 왕이냐 예수께서 대답하여 가라사대 네 말이 옳도다 하시매","빌라도가 자기 앞에 끌려온 예수께 물었다. \"네가 유대인의 왕이냐?\" 예수께서 대답하셨다. \"그렇다. 네가 말한 대로다.\"","Pilate questioned him, “Are you the king of the Jews?” He said to him in reply, “You say so.”","And Pilate asked him, Art thou the King of the Jews? And he answering said unto them, Thou sayest it.","\"Are you the king of the Jews?\" asked Pilate. \"Yes, it is as you say,\" Jesus replied.","Et interrogavit eum Pilatus:  “Tu es rex Iudaeorum? “. At ille respondens ait illi:  “Tu dicis “.","וישאל אותו פילטוס האתה מלך היהודים ויען ויאמר אליו אתה אמרת׃"],["48","15","3","그러자 수석 사제들이 여러 가지로 예수님을 고소하였다.","대사제들이 여러 가지로 예수를 고발하자","대제사장들이 여러 가지로 고발하는지라","대제사장들이 여러가지로 고소하는지라","대제사장들이 예수를 고소하는 여러 가지 죄목을 일일이 나열하자 예수께서는 가만히 듣고만 계셨다. 그러자 빌라도가 예수께 물었다. \"왜 아무 말도 하지 않고 있느냐? 너는 할 말이 하나도 없느냐? 도대체 이 모든 사람들이 이렇게 너를 고소하는 이유가 뭐란 말이냐?\"","The chief priests accused him of many things.","And the chief priests accused him of many things: but he answered nothing.","The chief priests accused him of many things.","Et accusabant eum summi sacerdotes in multis.","וראשי הכהנים הרבו לשטנו׃"],["48","15","4","빌라도가 다시 예수님께, “당신은 아무 대답도 하지 않소? 보시오, 저들이 당신을 갖가지로 고소하고 있지 않소?” 하고 물었으나,","빌라도는 예수께 \"보라. 사람들이 저렇게 여러 가지 죄목을 들어 고발하고 있는데 너는 할 말이 하나도 없느냐?\" 하고 다시 물었다.","빌라도가 또 물어 이르되 아무 대답도 없느냐 그들이 얼마나 많은 것으로 너를 고발하는가 보라 하되","빌라도가 또 물어 가로되 아무 대답도 없느냐 저희가 얼마나 많은 것으로 너로 고소하는가 보라 하되","(3절에 포함되어 있음)","Again Pilate questioned him, “Have you no answer? See how many things they accuse you of.”","And Pilate asked him again, saying, Answerest thou nothing? behold how many things they witness against thee.","So again Pilate asked him, \"Aren't you going to answer? See how many things they are accusing you of.\"","Pilatus autem rursum interrogabat eum dicens:  “Non respondes quidquam? Vide in quantis te accusant “.","ויוסף פילטוס וישאלהו לאמר האינך משיב דבר ראה כמה הם מעידים בך׃"],["48","15","5","예수님께서는 더 이상 아무 대답도 하지 않으셨다. 그래서 빌라도는 이상하게 여겼다.","그러나 예수께서는 빌라도가 이상하게 여길 정도로 아무런 대답도 하지 않으셨다.","예수께서 다시 아무 말씀으로도 대답하지 아니하시니 빌라도가 놀랍게 여기더라","예수께서 다시 아무 말씀도 대답지 아니하시니 빌라도가 기이히 여기더라","그러나 예수께서는 아무 말씀도 하시지 않았다. 빌라도는 이를 기이하게 생각하였다.","Jesus gave him no further answer, so that Pilate was amazed.","But Jesus yet answered nothing; so that Pilate marvelled.","But Jesus still made no reply, and Pilate was amazed.","Iesus autem amplius nihil respondit, ita ut miraretur Pilatus.","וישוע לא השיב עוד אף דבר אחד ויתמה פילטוס׃"],["48","15","6","빌라도는 축제 때마다 사람들이 요구하는 죄수 하나를 풀어 주곤 하였다.","명절 때마다 총독은 사람들이 요구하는 죄수 하나를 놓아주는 관례가 있었다.","명절이 되면 백성들이 요구하는 대로 죄수 한 사람을 놓아 주는 전례가 있더니","명절을 당하면 백성의 구하는대로 죄수 하나를 놓아 주는 전례가 있더니","유월절이 되면 해마다 백성들이 원하는 죄수 하나를 총독이 석방해 주는 관례가 있었다.","Now on the occasion of the feast he used to release to them one prisoner whom they requested.","Now at that feast he released unto them one prisoner, whomsoever they desired.","Now it was the custom at the Feast to release a prisoner whom the people requested.","Per diem autem festum dimittere solebat illis unum ex vinctis, quem peterent.","ובכל חג היה דרכו לפטר להם אסיר אחד את אשר יבקשו׃"],["48","15","7","마침 바라빠라고 하는 사람이 반란 때에 살인을 저지른 반란군들과 함께 감옥에 있었다.","마침 그 때에 반란을 일으키다가 사람을 죽이고 감옥에 갇혀 있던 폭도들 가운데 바라빠라는 사람이 있었다.","민란을 꾸미고 그 민란중에 살인하고 체포된 자 중에 바라바라 하는 자가 있는지라","민란을 꾸미고 이 민란에 살인하고 포박된 자 중에 바라바라 하는 자가 있는지라","마침 그때 반란을 일으키다가 사람을 죽이고 감옥에 갇혀 있는 폭도들 중에 바라바라는 사람이 있었다.","A man called Barabbas was then in prison along with the rebels who had committed murder in a rebellion.","And there was one named Barabbas, which lay bound with them that had made insurrection with him, who had committed murder in the insurrection.","A man called Barabbas was in prison with the insurrectionists who had committed murder in the uprising.","Erat autem qui dicebatur Barabbas, vinctus cum seditiosis, qui in seditione fecerant homicidium.","ויהי איש הנקרא בשם בר אבא אסור עם המורדים אשר רצחו רצח בעת המרד׃"],["48","15","8","그래서 군중은 올라가 자기들에게 해 오던 대로 해 달라고 요청하기 시작하였다.","군중은 빌라도에게 몰려가서 전례대로 죄수 하나를 놓아달라고 요구하였다.","무리가 나아가서 전례대로 하여 주기를 요구한대","무리가 나아가서 전례대로 하여주기를 구한대","군중은 빌라도에게 몰려와서 전례대로 죄수 하나를 놓아 달라고 요구하였다.","The crowd came forward and began to ask him to do for them as he was accustomed.","And the multitude crying aloud began to desire him to do as he had ever done unto them.","The crowd came up and asked Pilate to do for them what he usually did.","Et cum ascendisset turba, coepit rogare, sicut faciebat illis.","וישא ההמון את קולו ויחלו לבקש שיעשה להם כפעם בפעם׃"],["48","15","9","빌라도가 그들에게 “유다인들의 임금을 풀어 주기를 바라는 것이오?” 하고 물었다.","빌라도가 그들에게 \"유다인의 왕을 놓아달라는 것이냐?\" 하고 물었다.","빌라도가 대답하여 이르되 너희는 내가 유대인의 왕을 너희에게 놓아 주기를 원하느냐 하니","빌라도가 대답하여 가로되 너희는 내가 유대인의 왕을 너희에게 놓아 주기를 원하느냐 하니","그러자 빌라도가 \"유대인의 왕이라는 사람을 놓아주면 어떻겠소? 당신들이 놓아 주기를 바라는 사람이 바로 그 사람이 아니오?\" 하고 물었다.","Pilate answered, “Do you want me to release to you the king of the Jews?”","But Pilate answered them, saying, Will ye that I release unto you the King of the Jews?","\"Do you want me to release to you the king of the Jews?\" asked Pilate,","Pilatus autem respondit eis et dixit:  “Vultis dimittam vobis regem Iudaeorum? “.","ויען אתם פילטוס ויאמר התחפצו כי אפטר לכם את מלך היהודים׃"],["48","15","10","그는 수석 사제들이 예수님을 시기하여 자기에게 넘겼음을 알고 있었던 것이다.","빌라도는 대사제들이 예수를 시기한 나머지 자기에게까지 끌고 왔다는 것을 알고 있었던 것이다.","이는 그가 대제사장들이 시기로 예수를 넘겨 준 줄 앎이러라","이는 저가 대제사장들이 시기로 예수를 넘겨준줄 앎이러라","빌라도는 대제사장들이 예수를 시기한 나머지 뒤에서 이 사건을 조종하여 흉계를 꾸민 것이라는 점을 알고 있었기 때문에 그와 같이 말하였던 것이다.","For he knew that it was out of envy that the chief priests had handed him over.","For he knew that the chief priests had delivered him for envy.","knowing it was out of envy that the chief priests had handed Jesus over to him.","Sciebat enim quod per invidiam tradidissent eum summi sacerdotes.","כי ידע אשר רק מקנאה מסרוהו ראשי הכהנים׃"],["48","15","11","그러나 수석 사제들은 군중을 부추겨 그분이 아니라 바라빠를 풀어 달라고 청하게 하였다.","빌라도의 말을 들은 대사제들은 군중을 선동하여 차라리 바라빠를 놓아달라고 청하게 하였다.","그러나 대제사장들이 무리를 충동하여 도리어 바라바를 놓아 달라 하게 하니","그러나 대제사장들이 무리를 충동하여 도리어 바라바를 놓아 달라 하게 하니","그러나 대제사장들은 군중을 선동하여 예수 대신에 바라바를 놓아달라고 요구하게 하였다.","But the chief priests stirred up the crowd to have him release Barabbas for them instead.","But the chief priests moved the people, that he should rather release Barabbas unto them.","But the chief priests stirred up the crowd to have Pilate release Barabbas instead.","Pontifices autem concitaverunt turbam, ut magis Barabbam dimitteret eis.","וראשי הכהנים הסיתו את ההמון לבלתי פטר להם כי אם בר אבא׃"],["48","15","12","빌라도가 다시 그들에게, “그러면 여러분이 유다인들의 임금이라고 부르는 이 사람은 어떻게 하기를 바라는 것이오?” 하고 물었다.","빌라도는 다시 군중에게 \"그러면 너희가 유다인의 왕이라고 부르는 이 사람은 어떻게 하면 좋겠느냐?\" 하고 물었다.","빌라도가 또 대답하여 이르되 그러면 너희가 유대인의 왕이라 하는 이를 내가 어떻게 하랴","빌라도가 또 대답하여 가로되 그러면 너희가 유대인의 왕이라 하는 이는 내가 어떻게 하랴","빌라도가 그들에게 물었다. \"그렇다면 유대의 왕이라고 부르는 사람은 어떻게 하면 좋겠소?\"","Pilate again said to them in reply, “Then what [do you want] me to do with [the man you call] the king of the Jews?”","And Pilate answered and said again unto them, What will ye then that I shall do unto him whom ye call the King of the Jews?","\"What shall I do, then, with the one you call the king of the Jews?\" Pilate asked them.","Pilatus autem iterum respondens aiebat illis:  “Quid ergo vultis faciam regi Iudaeorum? “.","ויסף פילטוס ויען ויאמר להם ומה אפוא חפצתם ואעשה לאשר אתם קראים מלך היהודים׃"],["48","15","13","그러자 그들은 “십자가에 못 박으시오!” 하고 거듭 소리 질렀다.","그러자 군중은 \"십자가에 못박으시오!\" 하고 소리질렀다.","그들이 다시 소리 지르되 그를 십자가에 못 박게 하소서","저희가 다시 소리지르되 저를 십자가에 못 박게 하소서","그들은 소리를 질러 댔다. \"그는 십자가에 못박으시오.\"","They shouted again, “Crucify him.”","And they cried out again, Crucify him.","\"Crucify him!\" they shouted.","At illi iterum clamaverunt:  “Crucifige eum! “.","ויוסיפו לצעק הצלב אותו׃"],["48","15","14","빌라도가 그들에게 “도대체 그가 무슨 나쁜 짓을 하였다는 말이오?” 하자, 그들은 더욱 큰 소리로 “십자가에 못 박으시오!” 하고 외쳤다.","빌라도가 \"도대체 이 사람의 잘못이 무엇이냐?\" 하고 물었으나 사람들은 더 악을 써가며 \"십자가에 못박으시오!\" 하고 외쳤다.","빌라도가 이르되 어찜이냐 무슨 악한 일을 하였느냐 하니 더욱 소리 지르되 십자가에 못 박게 하소서 하는지라","빌라도가 가로되 어찜이뇨 무슨 악한 일을 하였느냐 하니 더욱 소리지르되 십자가에 못 박게 하소서 하는지라","빌라도가 \"이유가 뭐요? 그가 무슨 나쁜 일을 하였소?\" 하고 묻자 그들은 더욱 요란하게 떠들어대며 \"그를 십자가에 못박으시오\"라고 소리쳤다.","Pilate said to them, “Why? What evil has he done?” They only shouted the louder, “Crucify him.”","Then Pilate said unto them, Why, what evil hath he done? And they cried out the more exceedingly, Crucify him.","\"Why? What crime has he committed?\" asked Pilate. But they shouted all the louder, \"Crucify him!\"","Pilatus vero dicebat eis:  “Quid enim mali fecit? “. At illi magis clamaverunt:  “Crucifige eum! “.","ויאמר אליהם פילטוס מה אפוא עשה רעה והם הרבו עוד לצעק הצלב אותו׃"],["48","15","15","그리하여 빌라도는 군중을 만족시키려고, 바라빠를 풀어 주고 예수님을 채찍질하게 한 다음 십자가에 못 박으라고 넘겨주었다.","그래서 빌라도는 군중을 만족시키려고 바라빠를 놓아주고 예수를 채찍질하게 한 다음 십자가형에 처하라고 내어주었다.","빌라도가 무리에게 만족을 주고자 하여 바라바는 놓아 주고 예수는 채찍질하고 십자가에 못 박히게 넘겨 주니라","빌라도가 무리에게 만족을 주고자 하여 바라바는 놓아 주고 예수는 채찍질하고 십자가에 못 박히게 넘겨주니라","폭동이 일어날까봐 겁을 먹은 빌라도는 군중들의 기분을 맞추려고 바라바를 석방하였다. 그리고 예수를 채찍질한 후에 십자가에 못박으라고 내주었다.","So Pilate, wishing to satisfy the crowd, released Barabbas to them and, after he had Jesus scourged, handed him over to be crucified.","And so Pilate, willing to content the people, released Barabbas unto them, and delivered Jesus, when he had scourged him, to be crucified.","Wanting to satisfy the crowd, Pilate released Barabbas to them. He had Jesus flogged, and handed him over to be crucified.","Pilatus autem, volens populo satisfacere, dimisit illis Barabbam et tradidit Iesum flagellis caesum, ut crucifigeretur.","ויואל פילטוס לעשות כרצון העם ויפטר להם את בר אבא ואת ישוע הכה בשוטים וימסר אותו להצלב׃"],["48","15","16","군사들은 예수님을 뜰 안으로 끌고 갔다. 그곳은 총독 관저였다. 그들은 온 부대를 집합시킨 다음,","병사들은 예수를 총독 관저 뜰 안으로 끌고 들어가서 전 부대원을 불러들였다.","군인들이 예수를 끌고 브라이도리온이라는 뜰 안으로 들어가서 온 군대를 모으고","군병들이 예수를 끌고 브라이도리온이라는 뜰 안으로 들어가서 온 군대를 모으고","로마 군인들은 총독 관저의 뜰로 예수를 끌고 들어가서 온 부대를 집합시켰다.","The soldiers led him away inside the palace, that is, the praetorium, and assembled the whole cohort.","And the soldiers led him away into the hall, called Praetorium; and they call together the whole band.","The soldiers led Jesus away into the palace (that is, the Praetorium) and called together the whole company of soldiers.","Milites autem duxerunt eum intro in atrium, quod est praetorium, et convocant totam cohortem.","ויוליכהו אנשי הצלב אל החצר הפנימית הוא בית המשפט ויזעיקו את כל הגדוד׃"],["48","15","17","그분께 자주색 옷을 입히고 가시관을 엮어 머리에 씌우고서는,","그리고 예수께 자주색 옷을 입히고 가시관을 엮어 머리에 씌운 다음","예수에게 자색 옷을 입히고 가시관을 엮어 씌우고","예수에게 자색 옷을 입히고 가시 면류관을 엮어 씌우고","그리고 예수께 자색 옷을 입히고 가시관을 엮어 머리에 씌운 뒤에","They clothed him in purple and, weaving a crown of thorns, placed it on him.","And they clothed him with purple, and platted a crown of thorns, and put it about his head,","They put a purple robe on him, then twisted together a crown of thorns and set it on him.","Et induunt eum purpuram et imponunt ei plectentes spineam coronam;","וילבישהו ארגמן וישרגו עטרת קצים ויעטרהו׃"],["48","15","18","“유다인들의 임금님, 만세!” 하며 인사하기 시작하였다.","\"유다인의 왕 만세!\" 하고 외치면서 경례하였다.","경례하여 이르되 유대인의 왕이여 평안할지어다 하고","예하여 가로되 유대인의 왕이여 평안할찌어다 하고","경례를 하면서 \"유대인의 왕 만세!\" 하고 외쳤다.","They began to salute him with, “Hail, King of the Jews!”","And began to salute him, Hail, King of the Jews!","And they began to call out to him, \"Hail, king of the Jews!\"","et coeperunt salutare eum:  “Ave, rex Iudaeorum! “,","ויחלו לברכו לאמר שלום לך מלך היהודים׃"],["48","15","19","또 갈대로 그분의 머리를 때리고 침을 뱉고서는, 무릎을 꿇고 엎드려 예수님께 절하였다.","또 갈대로 예수의 머리를 치고 침을 뱉으며 무릎을 꿇고 경배하였다.","갈대로 그의 머리를 치며 침을 뱉으며 꿇어 절하더라","갈대로 그의 머리를 치며 침을 뱉으며 꿇어 절하더라","또 갈대로 예수의 머리를 치고 침을 뱉는가 하면 무릎을 꿇어 경배하였다.","and kept striking his head with a reed and spitting upon him. They knelt before him in homage.","And they smote him on the head with a reed, and did spit upon him, and bowing their knees worshipped him.","Again and again they struck him on the head with a staff and spit on him. Falling on their knees, they paid homage to him.","et percutiebant caput eius arundine et conspuebant eum et ponentes genua adorabant eum.","ויכו על ראשו בקנה וירקו בו ויכרעו על ברכיהם וישתחוו לו׃"],["48","15","20","그렇게 예수님을 조롱하고 나서 자주색 옷을 벗기고 그분의 겉옷을 입혔다. 그리고 예수님을 십자가에 못 박으러 끌고 나갔다.","이렇게 희롱한 뒤에 그 자주색 옷을 벗기고 예수의 옷을 도로 입혀서 십자가에 못박으러 끌고 나갔다.","희롱을 다 한 후 자색 옷을 벗기고 도로 그의 옷을 입히고 십자가에 못 박으려고 끌고 나가니라","희롱을 다한 후 자색 옷을 벗기고 도로 그의 옷을 입히고 십자가에 못 박으려고 끌고 나가니라","이렇게 실컷 희롱을 한 후에 자색 옷을 벗기고 다시 그의 옷을 입혀서 십자가에 못박으려고 끌고 나갔다.","And when they had mocked him, they stripped him of the purple cloak, dressed him in his own clothes, and led him out to crucify him.","And when they had mocked him, they took off the purple from him, and put his own clothes on him, and led him out to crucify him.","And when they had mocked him, they took off the purple robe and put his own clothes on him. Then they led him out to crucify him.","Et postquam illuserunt ei, exuerunt illum purpuram et induerunt eum vestimentis suis. Et educunt illum, ut crucifigerent eum.","ואחרי התלוצצם בו הפשיטו אותו את הארגמן וילבישהו את בגדיו ויוציאהו לצלב אותו׃"],["48","15","21","그들은 지나가는 어떤 사람에게 강제로 예수님의 십자가를 지게 하였다. 그는 키레네 사람 시몬으로서 알렉산드로스와 루포스의 아버지였는데, 시골에서 올라오는 길이었다.","그 때 마침 알렉산더와 루포의 아버지 시몬이라는 키레네 사람이 시골에서 올라오다가 그 곳을 지나가게 되었는데 병사들은 그를 붙들어 억지로 예수의 십자가를 지고 가게 하였다.","마침 알렉산더와 루포의 아버지인 구레네 사람 시몬이 시골로부터 와서 지나가는데 그들이 그를 억지로 같이 가게 하여 예수의 십자가를 지우고","마침 알렉산더와 루포의 아비인 구레네 사람 시몬이 시골로서 와서 지나가는데 저희가 그를 억지로 같이 가게 하여 예수의 십자가를 지우고","마침 그때 구레네 사람 시몬이 시골에서 올라와 그곳을 지나가게 되었는데 그들은 그를 붙들어 억지로 예수의 십자가를 지고 가게 하였다. 시몬은 알렉산더와 루포의 아버지였다.","They pressed into service a passer-by, Simon, a Cyrenian, who was coming in from the country, the father of Alexander and Rufus, to carry his cross.","And they compel one Simon a Cyrenian, who passed by, coming out of the country, the father of Alexander and Rufus, to bear his cross.","A certain man from Cyrene, Simon, the father of Alexander and Rufus, was passing by on his way in from the country, and they forced him to carry the cross.","Et angariant praetereuntem quempiam Simonem Cyrenaeum venientem de villa, patrem Alexandri et Rufi, ut tolleret crucem eius.","ויאנסו איש עבר אחד הבא מן השדה ושמו שמעון הקוריני אבי אלכסנדרוס ורופוס לשאת את צלבו׃"],["48","15","22","그들은 예수님을 골고타라는 곳으로 데리고 갔다. 이는 번역하면 ‘해골 터’라는 뜻이다.","그들은 예수를 끌고 골고타라는 곳으로 갔다. 골고타는 해골산이라는 뜻이다.","예수를 끌고 골고다라 하는 곳(번역하면 해골의 곳)에 이르러","예수를 끌고 골고다라 하는 곳(번역하면 해골의 곳)에 이르러","그들은 예수를 끌고 골고다라는 곳으로 갔다. 골고다는 \"해골의 언덕\"이라는 뜻이다.","They brought him to the place of Golgotha (which is translated Place of the Skull).","And they bring him unto the place Golgotha, which is, being interpreted, The place of a skull.","They brought Jesus to the place called Golgotha (which means The Place of the Skull).","Et perducunt illum in Golgotha locum, quod est interpretatum Calvariae locus.","ויביאהו אל מקום גלגלתא הוא מקום הגלגלת׃"],["48","15","23","그들이 몰약을 탄 포도주를 예수님께 건넸지만 그분께서는 받지 않으셨다.","그들은 포도주에 몰약을 타서 예수께 주었으나 예수께서는 드시지 않았다.","몰약을 탄 포도주를 주었으나 예수께서 받지 아니하시니라","몰약을 탄 포도주를 주었으나 예수께서 받지 아니하시니라","그들이 몰약을 탄 포도주를 드렸으나 예수께서는 그것을 거절하셨다.","They gave him wine drugged with myrrh, but he did not take it.","And they gave him to drink wine mingled with myrrh: but he received it not.","Then they offered him wine mixed with myrrh, but he did not take it.","Et dabant ei myrrhatum vinum; ille autem non accepit.","ויתנו לו יין מזוג במר והוא לא קבל׃"],["48","15","24","그들은 예수님을 십자가에 못 박았다. 그러고 나서 그분의 겉옷을 나누어 가졌는데 누가 무엇을 차지할지 제비를 뽑아 결정하였다.","마침내 그들은 예수를 십자가에 못박았다. 그리고 1)주사위를 던져 각자의 몫을 정하여 예수의 옷을 나누어 가졌다. 시편 22:18.","십자가에 못 박고 그 옷을 나눌새 누가 어느 것을 가질까 하여 제비를 뽑더라","십자가에 못 박고 그 옷을 나눌쌔 누가 어느 것을 얻을까 하여 제비를 뽑더라","마침내 그들은 예수를 십자가에 못박았다. 그러고나서 주사위를 던져 예수의 ㄱ) 옷을 나누어 가졌다. (ㄱ. 시22:18)","Then they crucified him and divided his garments by casting lots for them to see what each should take.","And when they had crucified him, they parted his garments, casting lots upon them, what every man should take.","And they crucified him. Dividing up his clothes, they cast lots to see what each would get.","Et crucifigunt eum et dividunt vestimenta eius, mittentes sortem super eis, quis quid tolleret.","ויהי כאשר צלבו אותו ויחלקו בגדיו להם בהפילם עליהם גורל מה יקח איש איש׃"],["48","15","25","그들이 예수님을 십자가에 못 박은 때는 아침 아홉 시였다.","예수를 십자가에 못박은 때는 아침 아홉 시였다.","때가 제삼시가 되어 십자가에 못 박으니라","때가 제삼시가 되어 십자가에 못 박으니라","예수를 십자가에 못박은 때는 아침 9시였다.","It was nine o’clock in the morning when they crucified him.","And it was the third hour, and they crucified him.","It was the third hour when they crucified him.","Erat autem hora tertia, et crucifixerunt eum.","ותהי השעה השלישית ויצלבהו׃"],["48","15","26","그분의 죄명 패에는 ‘유다인들의 임금’이라고 쓰여 있었다.","예수의 죄목을 적은 명패에는 \"유다인의 왕\" 이라고 씌어 있었다.","그 위에 있는 죄패에 유대인의 왕이라 썼고","그 위에 있는 죄 패에 유대인의 왕이라 썼고","예수를 못박은 십자가 위에는 \"유대인의 왕\"이라고 죄목을 붙인 패가 달려 있었다.","The inscription of the charge against him read, “The King of the Jews.”","And the superscription of his accusation was written over, THE KING OF THE JEWS.","The written notice of the charge against him read: THE KING OF THE JEWS.","Et erat titulus causae eius inscriptus:  “Rex Iudaeorum “.","ומכתב דבר אשמתו כתוב למעלה מלך היהודים׃"],["48","15","27","그들은 예수님과 함께 강도 둘을 십자가에 못 박았는데, 하나는 오른쪽에 다른 하나는 왼쪽에 못 박았다.","예수와 함께 강도 두 사람도 십자가형을 받았는데 하나는 그의 오른편에, 다른 하나는 왼편에 달렸다.2)어떤 사본에는 28절에 다음과 같은 말이 있다. \"그리하여 '그는 범죄자로 간주되었다.' 한 성서의 말씀이 이루어졌다.\"","강도 둘을 예수와 함께 십자가에 못 박으니 하나는 그의 우편에, 하나는 좌편에 있더라","강도 둘을 예수와 함께 십자가에 못 박으니 하나는 그의 우편에, 하나는 좌편에 있더라","강도 두 명도 그날 아침에 십자가에 달려 예수의 십자가 양쪽에 세워졌다. 이렇게 해서 \"그는 악한 자의 하나로 간주되었다\"라고 한 성경이 그대로 이루어졌다.","With him they crucified two revolutionaries, one on his right and one on his left.","And with him they crucify two thieves; the one on his right hand, and the other on his left.","They crucified two robbers with him, one on his right and one on his left.","Et cum eo crucifigunt duos latrones, unum a dextris et alium a sinistris eius.","ויצלבו אתו שני פריצים אחד לימינו ואחד לשמאלו׃"],["48","15","28","그리하여 ‘그는 죄인들 가운데 하나로 헤아려졌다.’는 성경 말씀이 이루어졌다.",null,"(없음)","1)(없음) 어떤 사본에는, 28 [불법자와 함께 인정함을 받았다 한 성경이 응하였느니라]가 있음","(없음)","(empty)","And the scripture was fulfilled, which saith, And he was numbered with the transgressors.","(None)",null,"וימלא הכתוב האמר ואת פשעים נמנה׃"],["48","15","29","지나가는 자들이 머리를 흔들며 그분을 이렇게 모독하였다. “저런! 성전을 허물고 사흘 안에 다시 짓겠다더니.","지나가던 사람들이 머리를 흔들며 \"하하, 너는 성전을 헐고 사흘 안에 다시 짓는다더니","지나가는 자들은 자기 머리를 흔들며 예수를 모욕하여 이르되 아하 성전을 헐고 사흘에 짓는다는 자여","지나가는 자들은 자기 머리를 흔들며 예수를 모욕하여 가로되 아하 성전을 헐고 사흘에 짓는 자여","지나가는 사람들이 머리를 흔들며 예수를 조롱하였다. \"하하! 꼴 좋다. 성전을 헐고 사흘 만에 다시 지을 수 있다고 큰소리치더니!","Those passing by reviled him, shaking their heads and saying, “Aha! You who would destroy the temple and rebuild it in three days,","And they that passed by railed on him, wagging their heads, and saying, Ah, thou that destroyest the temple, and buildest it in three days,","Those who passed by hurled insults at him, shaking their heads and saying, \"So! You who are going to destroy the temple and build it in three days,","Et praetereuntes blasphemabant eum moventes capita sua et dicentes:  “Vah, qui destruit templum et in tribus diebus aedificat;","והעברים גדפו אותו ויניעו ראשם לאמר האח אתה ההורס את ההיכל ובונה אותו בשלשת ימים׃"],["48","15","30","십자가에서 내려와 너 자신이나 구해 보아라.”","십자가에서 내려와 네 목숨이나 건져보아라.\" 하며 모욕하였다.","네가 너를 구원하여 십자가에서 내려오라 하고","네가 너를 구원하여 십자가에서 내려 오라 하고","그런 이적을 보일 수 있거든 십자가에서 내려와 네 목숨이나 구해 보시지.\"","save yourself by coming down from the cross.”","Save thyself, and come down from the cross.","come down from the cross and save yourself!\"","salvum fac temetipsum descendens de cruce! “.","הושע את עצמך ורדה מן הצלב׃"],["48","15","31","수석 사제들도 이런 식으로 율법 학자들과 함께 조롱하며 서로 말하였다. “다른 이들은 구원하였으면서 자신은 구원하지 못하는군.","같은 모양으로 대사제들과 율법학자들도 조롱하며 \"남을 살리면서 자기는 살리지 못하는구나!","그와 같이 대제사장들도 서기관들과 함께 희롱하며 서로 말하되 그가 남은 구원하였으되 자기는 구원할 수 없도다","그와 같이 대제사장들도 서기관들과 함께 희롱하며 서로 말하되 저가 남은 구원하였으되 자기는 구원할 수 없도다","대제사장과 율법학자들도 둘러서서 예수를 조롱하며 \"남은 구원하면서도 자기 자신은 구원하지 못하는군.","Likewise the chief priests, with the scribes, mocked him among themselves and said, “He saved others; he cannot save himself.","Likewise also the chief priests mocking said among themselves with the scribes, He saved others; himself he cannot save.","In the same way the chief priests and the teachers of the law mocked him among themselves. \"He saved others,\" they said, \"but he can't save himself!","Similiter et summi sacerdotes ludentes ad alterutrum cum scribis dicebant:  “Alios salvos fecit, seipsum non potest salvum facere.","וכן לעגו לו גם ראשי הכהנים עם הסופרים באמרם איש אל רעהו את אחרים הושיע ואת עצמו לא יוכל להושיע׃"],["48","15","32","우리가 보고 믿게, 이스라엘의 임금 메시아는 지금 십자가에서 내려와 보시지.” 예수님과 함께 십자가에 못 박힌 자들도 그분께 비아냥거렸다.","어디 이스라엘의 왕 그리스도가 지금 십자가에서 내려오나 보자. 그렇게만 한다면 우린들 안 믿을 수 있겠느냐?\" 하고 서로 지껄였다. 예수와 함께 십자가에 달린 자들까지도 예수를 모욕하였다.","이스라엘의 왕 그리스도가 지금 십자가에서 내려와 우리가 보고 믿게 할지어다 하며 함께 십자가에 못 박힌 자들도 예수를 욕하더라","이스라엘의 왕 그리스도가 지금 십자가에서 내려와 우리로 보고 믿게 할찌어다 하며 함께 십자가에 못 박힌 자들도 예수를 욕하더라","이봐, 이스라엘의 왕 그리스도여! 십자가에서 내려와 보시지. 그러면 우리가 믿어드리지\" 하고 빈정거렸다. 심지어 양쪽 십자가에 달린 두 강도까지도 예수께 욕을 퍼부었다.","Let the Messiah, the King of Israel, come down now from the cross that we may see and believe.” Those who were crucified with him also kept abusing him.","Let Christ the King of Israel descend now from the cross, that we may see and believe. And they that were crucified with him reviled him.","Let this Christ, this King of Israel, come down now from the cross, that we may see and believe.\" Those crucified with him also heaped insults on him.","Christus rex Israel descendat nunc de cruce, ut videamus et credamus “. Etiam qui cum eo crucifixi erant, conviciabantur ei.","המשיח מלך ישראל ירד נא מן הצלב למען נראה ונאמין וגם הנצלבים אתו חרפוהו׃"],["48","15","33","낮 열두 시가 되자 어둠이 온 땅에 덮여 오후 세 시까지 계속되었다.","낮 열두 시가 되자 온 땅이 어둠에 덮여 오후 세 시까지 계속되었다.","제육시가 되매 온 땅에 어둠이 임하여 제구시까지 계속하더니","제 육시가 되매 온 땅에 어두움이 임하여 제 구시까지 계속하더니","낮 12시쯤 어둠이 온 땅을 덮기 시작하더니 오후 3시까지 계속되었다.","At noon darkness came over the whole land until three in the afternoon.","And when the sixth hour was come, there was darkness over the whole land until the ninth hour.","At the sixth hour darkness came over the whole land until the ninth hour.","Et, facta hora sexta, tenebrae factae sunt per totam terram usque in horam nonam.","ובהיות השעה הששית היה חשך על כל הארץ עד השעה התשיעית׃"],["48","15","34","오후 세 시에 예수님께서 큰 소리로, “엘로이 엘로이 레마 사박타니?” 하고 부르짖으셨다. 이는 번역하면, ‘저의 하느님, 저의 하느님, 어찌하여 저를 버리셨습니까?’라는 뜻이다.","세 시에 예수께서 큰소리로 \"엘로이, 엘로이, 레마 사박타니?\" 하고 부르짖으셨다. 이 말씀은 '3)나의 하느님, 나의 하느님, 어찌하여 나를 버리셨나이까?'라는 뜻이다. 시편 22:1.","제구시에 예수께서 크게 소리 지르시되 엘리 엘리 라마 사박다니 하시니 이를 번역하면 나의 하나님, 나의 하나님 어찌하여 나를 버리셨나이까 하는 뜻이라","제 구시에 예수께서 크게 소리지르시되 엘리 엘리 라마 사박다니 하시니 이를 번역하면 나의 하나님 나의 하나님 어찌하여 나를 버리셨나이까 하는 뜻이라","그런데 3시쯤 되었을 때였다. 예수께서 큰소리로 \"엘리, 엘리, 라마 사박다니\" 하고 부르짖으셨다. 이것은 ㄴ) \"하나님, 나의 하나님, 왜 나를 버리셨나이까?\"라는 뜻이다. (ㄴ. 시22:1)","And at three o’clock Jesus cried out in a loud voice, “Eloi, Eloi, lema sabachthani?” which is translated, “My God, my God, why have you forsaken me?”","And at the ninth hour Jesus cried with a loud voice, saying, Eloi, Eloi, lama sabachthani? which is, being interpreted, My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?","And at the ninth hour Jesus cried out in a loud voice, \"Eloi, Eloi, lama sabachthani?\"--which means, \"My God, my God, why have you forsaken me?\"","Et hora nona exclamavit Iesus voce magna:  “Heloi, Heloi, lema sabacthani? “, quod est interpretatum:  “Deus meus, Deus meus, ut quid dereliquisti me? “.","ובשעה התשיעית ויצעק ישוע בקול גדול אלהי אלהי למה שבקתני אשר פרושו אלי אלי למה עזבתני׃"],["48","15","35","곁에 서 있던 자들 가운데 몇이 이 말씀을 듣고, “저것 봐! 엘리야를 부르네.” 하고 말하였다.","거기에 서 있던 사람들 몇이 이 말을 듣고 \"저것 봐! 이 사람이 엘리야를 부르는구나.\" 하였다.","곁에 섰던 자 중 어떤 이들이 듣고 이르되 보라 엘리야를 부른다 하고","곁에 섰던 자 중 어떤이들이 듣고 가로되 보라 엘리야를 부른다 하고","거기 섰던 사람들은 이 말씀을 듣고 예언자 엘리야를 부르는 것으로 생각하였다.","Some of the bystanders who heard it said, “Look, he is calling Elijah.”","And some of them that stood by, when they heard it, said, Behold, he calleth Elias.","When some of those standing near heard this, they said, \"Listen, he's calling Elijah.\"","Et quidam de circumstantibus audientes dicebant:  “Ecce, Eliam vocat “.","ומקצת העמדים אצלו בשמעם את זאת אמרו הנה אל אליהו הוא קורא׃"],["48","15","36","그러자 어떤 사람이 달려가서 해면을 신 포도주에 적신 다음, 갈대에 꽂아 예수님께 마시라고 갖다 대며, “자, 엘리야가 와서 그를 내려 주나 봅시다.” 하고 말하였다.","어떤 사람은 달려오더니 4)해면을 신 포도주에 적시어 갈대 끝에 꽂아 예수의 입에 대면서 \"어디 엘리야가 와서 그를 내려주나 봅시다.\" 하고 말하였다. 시편 69:21.","한 사람이 달려가서 해면에 신 포도주를 적시어 갈대에 꿰어 마시게 하고 이르되 가만 두라 엘리야가 와서 그를 내려 주나 보자 하더라","한 사람이 달려가서 해융에 신포도주를 머금게 하여 갈대에 꿰어 마시우고 가로되 가만 두어라 엘리야가 와서 저를 내려 주나 보자 하더라","그래서 한 사람이 달려가 해면에다 신 포도주를 적셔 가지고 갈대 끝에 꽂아 올려 주고는 \"엘리야가 와서 그를 내려 주나 보자\" 하고 말하였다.","One of them ran, soaked a sponge with wine, put it on a reed, and gave it to him to drink, saying, “Wait, let us see if Elijah comes to take him down.”","And one ran and filled a spunge full of vinegar, and put it on a reed, and gave him to drink, saying, Let alone; let us see whether Elias will come to take him down.","One man ran, filled a sponge with wine vinegar, put it on a stick, and offered it to Jesus to drink. \"Now leave him alone. Let's see if Elijah comes to take him down,\" he said.","Currens autem unus et implens spongiam aceto circumponensque calamo potum dabat ei dicens:  “Sinite, videamus, si veniat Elias ad deponendum eum “.","וירץ אחד מהם וימלא ספוג חמץ וישם על קנה וישקהו ויאמר הניחו ונראה אם יבא אליהו להורידו׃"],["48","15","37","예수님께서는 큰 소리를 지르시고 숨을 거두셨다.","예수께서는 큰소리를 지르시고 숨을 거두셨다.","예수께서 큰 소리를 지르시고 숨지시니라","예수께서 큰 소리를 지르시고 운명하시다","그러나 예수께서는 곧 큰소리를 지르시고 숨을 거두셨다.","Jesus gave a loud cry and breathed his last.","And Jesus cried with a loud voice, and gave up the ghost.","With a loud cry, Jesus breathed his last.","Iesus autem, emissa voce magna, exspiravit.","וישוע נתן קול גדול ויפח את נפשו׃"],["48","15","38","그때에 성전 휘장이 위에서 아래까지 두 갈래로 찢어졌다.","그 때 성전 휘장이 위에서 아래까지 두 폭으로 찢어졌다.","이에 성소 휘장이 위로부터 아래까지 찢어져 둘이 되니라","이에 성소 휘장이 위로부터 아래까지 찢어져 둘이 되니라","그때 성전 휘장이 위에서 아래까지 두 폭으로 찢어졌다.","The veil of the sanctuary was torn in two from top to bottom.","And the veil of the temple was rent in twain from the top to the bottom.","The curtain of the temple was torn in two from top to bottom.","Et velum templi scissum est in duo a sursum usque deorsum.","ופרכת ההיכל נקרעה לשנים קרעים מלמעלה למטה׃"],["48","15","39","그리고 예수님을 마주 보고 서 있던 백인대장이 그분께서 그렇게 숨을 거두시는 것을 보고, “참으로 이 사람은 하느님의 아드님이셨다.” 하고 말하였다.","예수를 지켜보고 서 있던 백인대장이 예수께서 그렇게 소리를 지르고 숨을 거두시는 광경을 보고 \"이 사람이야말로 정말 하느님의 아들이었구나!\" 하고 말하였다.","예수를 향하여 섰던 백부장이 그렇게 숨지심을 보고 이르되 이 사람은 진실로 하나님의 아들이었도다 하더라","예수를 향하여 섰던 백부장이 그렇게 운명하심을 보고 가로되 이 사람은 진실로 하나님의 아들이었도다 하더라","십자가 곁에 서서 예수께서 숨을 거두시는 것을 지켜 보고 있던 백부장은 \"이분은 참으로 하나님의 아들이었다\" 라고 말하였다.","When the centurion who stood facing him saw how he breathed his last he said, “Truly this man was the Son of God!”","And when the centurion, which stood over against him, saw that he so cried out, and gave up the ghost, he said, Truly this man was the Son of God.","And when the centurion, who stood there in front of Jesus, heard his cry and saw how he died, he said, \"Surely this man was the Son of God!\"","Videns autem centurio, qui ex adverso stabat, quia sic clamans exspirasset, ait:  “Vere homo hic Filius Dei erat “.","וירא שר המאה העמד לנגדו כי בזעקו כן נפח את נפשו ויאמר אכן האיש הזה היה בן האלהים׃"],["48","15","40","여자들도 멀리서 지켜보고 있었는데, 그들 가운데에는 마리아 막달레나, 작은 야고보와 요세의 어머니 마리아, 그리고 살로메가 있었다.","또 여자들도 먼 데서 이 광경을 지켜보고 있었는데 그들 가운데에는 막달라 여자 마리아, 작은 야고보와 요셉의 어머니 마리아, 그리고 살로메가 있었다.","멀리서 바라보는 여자들도 있었는데 그 중에 막달라 마리아와 또 작은 야고보와 요세의 어머니 마리아와 또 살로메가 있었으니","멀리서 바라보는 여자들도 있는데 그 중에 막달라 마리아와 또 작은 야고보와 요세의 어머니 마리아와 또 살로메가 있었으니","여자들도 멀리서 지켜 보고 있었는데 그 중에는 막달라 마리아, 젊은 야고보와 요세의 어머니 마리아, 그리고 살로메가 있었다.","There were also women looking on from a distance. Among them were Mary Magdalene, Mary the mother of the younger James and of Joses, and Salome.","There were also women looking on afar off: among whom was Mary Magdalene, and Mary the mother of James the less and of Joses, and Salome;","Some women were watching from a distance. Among them were Mary Magdalene, Mary the mother of James the younger and of Joses, and Salome.","Erant autem et mulieres de longe aspicientes, inter quas et Maria Magdalene et Maria Iacobi minoris et Iosetis mater et Salome,","וגם נשים היו שם ראות מרחוק ובתוכן גם מרים המגדלית ומרים אמו של יעקב הצעיר ושל יוסי ושלמית׃"],["48","15","41","그들은 예수님께서 갈릴래아에 계실 때에 그분을 따르며 시중들던 여자들이었다. 그 밖에도 예수님과 함께 예루살렘에 올라온 다른 여자들俑?많이 있었다.","그들은 예수께서 갈릴래아에 계실 때에 따라다니며 예수께 시중을 들던 여자들이다. 그 밖에도 예수를 따라 예루살렘에 올라온 여자들이 거기에 많이 있었다.","이들은 예수께서 갈릴리에 계실 때에 따르며 섬기던 자들이요 또 이 외에 예수와 함께 예루살렘에 올라온 여자들도 많이 있었더라","이들은 예수께서 갈릴리에 계실 때에 좇아 섬기던 자요 또 이 외에도 예수와 함께 예루살렘에 올라온 여자가 많이 있었더라","이들은 예수께서 갈릴리에 계실 때에 따르며 시중 들던 여자들이었다. 그곳에는 이들 외에도 예수를 따라 예루살렘에 올라온 많은 여자들이 있었다.","These women had followed him when he was in Galilee and ministered to him. There were also many other women who had come up with him to Jerusalem.","(Who also, when he was in Galilee, followed him, and ministered unto him;) and many other women which came up with him unto Jerusalem.","In Galilee these women had followed him and cared for his needs. Many other women who had come up with him to Jerusalem were also there.","quae, cum esset in Galilaea, sequebantur eum et ministrabant ei, et aliae multae, quae simul cum eo ascenderant Hierosolymam.","אשר גם הלכו אחריו ושרתהו בהיותו בגליל ואחרות רבות אשר עלו אתו ירושלים׃"],["48","15","42","이미 저녁때가 되어 있었다. 그날은 준비일 곧 안식일 전날이었으므로,","날이 이미 저물었다. 그 날은 준비일, 곧 안식일 전날이었기 때문에","이 날은 준비일 곧 안식일 전날이므로 저물었을 때에","이 날은 예비일 곧 안식일 전날이므로 저물었을 때에","이 일은 모두 안식일 전날에 이루어졌다. 그날 오후 늦게 아리마대 출신의 의회원으로 존경받고 있는 요셉이 용기를 내어 빌라도에게 가서 예수의 시신을 내달라고 청하였다. 그는 하나님의 나라가 이루어지기를 열심히 기다리는 사람이었다.","When it was already evening, since it was the day of preparation, the day before the sabbath,","And now when the even was come, because it was the preparation, that is, the day before the sabbath,","It was Preparation Day (that is, the day before the Sabbath). So as evening approached,","Et cum iam sero esset factum, quia erat Parasceve, quod est ante sabbatum,","ועת הערב הגיע ומפני אשר ערב שבת היה הוא היום שלפני השבת׃"],["48","15","43","아리마태아 출신 요셉이 빌라도에게 당당히 들어가, 예수님의 시신을 내 달라고 청하였다. 그는 명망 있는 의회 의원으로서 하느님의 나라를 열심히 기다리던 사람이었다.","아리마태아 사람 요셉이 용기를 내어 빌라도에게 가서 예수의 시체를 내어달라고 청하였다. 그는 명망 있는 의회 의원이었고 하느님 나라를 열심히 대망하고 있는 사람이었다.","아리마대 사람 요셉이 와서 당돌히 빌라도에게 들어가 예수의 시체를 달라 하니 이 사람은 존경 받는 공회원이요 하나님의 나라를 기다리는 자라","아리마대 사람 요셉이 와서 당돌히 빌라도에게 들어가 예수의 시체를 달라 하니 이 사람은 존귀한 공회원이요 하나님의 나라를 기다리는 자라","(20절에 포함되어 있음)","Joseph of Arimathea, a distinguished member of the council, who was himself awaiting the kingdom of God, came and courageously went to Pilate and asked for the body of Jesus.","Joseph of Arimathaea, an honourable counsellor, which also waited for the kingdom of God, came, and went in boldly unto Pilate, and craved the body of Jesus.","Joseph of Arimathea, a prominent member of the Council, who was himself waiting for the kingdom of God, went boldly to Pilate and asked for Jesus' body.","venit Ioseph ab Arimathaea nobilis decurio, qui et ipse erat exspectans regnum Dei, et audacter introivit ad Pilatum et petiit corpus Iesu.","ויבא יוסף הרמתי יועץ נכבד אשר היה מחכה גם הוא למלכות האלהים ויתחזק ויבא אל פילטוס וישאל את גופת ישוע׃"],["48","15","44","빌라도는 예수님께서 벌써 돌아가셨을까 의아하게 생각하여, 백인대장을 불러 예수님께서 돌아가신 지 오래되었느냐고 물었다.","이 말을 듣고 빌라도는 예수가 벌써 죽었을까 하고 백인대장을 불러 그가 죽은 지 오래되었는가 물어보았다.","빌라도는 예수께서 벌써 죽었을까 하고 이상히 여겨 백부장을 불러 죽은 지가 오래냐 묻고","빌라도는 예수께서 벌써 죽었을까 하고 이상히 여겨 백부장을 불러 죽은지 오래냐 묻고","빌라도는 벌써 예수가 죽었다는 데 놀라 백부장을 불러 그가 죽은 지 오래 되었는가를 묻고","Pilate was amazed that he was already dead. He summoned the centurion and asked him if Jesus had already died.","And Pilate marvelled if he were already dead: and calling unto him the centurion, he asked him whether he had been any while dead.","Pilate was surprised to hear that he was already dead. Summoning the centurion, he asked him if Jesus had already died.","Pilatus autem miratus est si iam obisset, et, accersito centurione, interrogavit eum si iam mortuus esset,","ויתמה פילטוס על אשר הוא כבר מת ויקרא אל שר המאה וישאלהו הגוע כבר׃"],["48","15","45","빌라도는 백인대장에게 알아보고 나서 요셉에게 시신을 내주었다.","그리고 백인대장에게서 예수가 분명히 죽었다는 사실을 전해 듣고는 시체를 요셉에게 내어주었다.","백부장에게 알아 본 후에 요셉에게 시체를 내주는지라","백부장에게 알아 본 후에 요셉에게 시체를 내어 주는지라","자세한 것을 알아본 뒤에 요셉에게 예수의 시체를 가져가도 좋다고 허락하였다.","And when he learned of it from the centurion, he gave the body to Joseph.","And when he knew it of the centurion, he gave the body to Joseph.","When he learned from the centurion that it was so, he gave the body to Joseph.","et, cum cognovisset a centurione, donavit corpus Ioseph.","וידע מפי שר המאה כי כן ויתן את גופתו מתנה ליוסף׃"],["48","15","46","요셉은 아마포를 사 가지고 와서, 그분의 시신을 내려 아마포로 싼 다음 바위를 깎아 만든 무덤에 모시고, 무덤 입구에 돌을 굴려 막아 놓았다.","요셉은 시체를 내려다가 미리 사가지고 온 고운 베로 싸서 바위를 파서 만든 무덤에 모신 다음, 큰 돌을 굴려 무덤 입구를 막아놓았다.","요셉이 세마포를 사서 예수를 내려다가 그것으로 싸서 바위 속에 판 무덤에 넣어 두고 돌을 굴려 무덤 문에 놓으매","요셉이 세마포를 사고 예수를 내려다가 이것으로 싸서 바위 속에 판 무덤에 넣어 두고 돌을 굴려 무덤 문에 놓으매","요셉은 예수의 시체를 십자가에서 내린 다음 가지고 간 고운 베로 시신을 쌌다. 그리고 바위를 깍아 만든 무덤 안에 모셔다 놓고 돌을 굴려 무덤문을 막았다.","Having bought a linen cloth, he took him down, wrapped him in the linen cloth and laid him in a tomb that had been hewn out of the rock. Then he rolled a stone against the entrance to the tomb.","And he bought fine linen, and took him down, and wrapped him in the linen, and laid him in a sepulchre which was hewn out of a rock, and rolled a stone unto the door of the sepulchre.","So Joseph bought some linen cloth, took down the body, wrapped it in the linen, and placed it in a tomb cut out of rock. Then he rolled a stone against the entrance of the tomb.","Is autem mercatus sindonem et deponens eum involvit sindone et posuit eum in monumento, quod erat excisum de petra, et advolvit lapidem ad ostium monumenti.","והוא קנה סדין ויורד אתו ויכרכהו בסדין וישימהו בקבר חצוב בסלע ויגל אבן על פתח הקבר׃"],["48","15","47","마리아 막달레나와 요세의 어머니 마리아는 그분을 어디에 모시는지 지켜보고 있었다.","막달라 여자 마리아와 요셉의 어머니 마리아가 예수를 모신 곳을 지켜보고 있었다.","막달라 마리아와 요세의 어머니 마리아가 예수 둔 곳을 보더라","때에 막달라 마리아와 요세의 어머니 마리아가 예수 둔 곳을 보더라","막달라 마리아와 요세의 어머니 마리아는 예수를 어디에 모셔 두는지를 지켜 보고 있었다.","Mary Magdalene and Mary the mother of Joses watched where he was laid.","And Mary Magdalene and Mary the mother of Joses beheld where he was laid.","Mary Magdalene and Mary the mother of Joses saw where he was laid.","Maria autem Magdalene et Maria Iosetis aspiciebant, ubi positus esset.","ומרים המגדלית ומרים אם יוסי היו ראות את המקום אשר הושם שמה׃"],["48","16","1","안식일이 지나자, 마리아 막달레나와 야고보의 어머니 마리아와 살로메는 무덤에 가서 예수님께 발라 드리려고 향료를 샀다.","안식일이 지나자 막달라 여자 마리아와 야고보의 어머니 마리아와 살로메는 무덤에 가서 예수의 몸에 발라드리려고 향료를 샀다.","안식일이 지나매 막달라 마리아와 야고보의 어머니 마리아와 또 살로메가 가서 예수께 바르기 위하여 향품을 사다 두었다가","안식일이 지나매 막달라 마리아와 야고보의 어머니 마리아와 또 살로메가 가서 예수께 바르기 위하여 향품을 사다 두었다가","다음날 저녁, 안식일이 지나자 막달라 마리아와 살로메와 야고보의 어머니 마리아는 나가서 시체에 바르는 향료를 샀다.","When the sabbath was over, Mary Magdalene, Mary, the mother of James, and Salome bought spices so that they might go and anoint him.","And when the sabbath was past, Mary Magdalene, and Mary the mother of James, and Salome, had bought sweet spices, that they might come and anoint him.","When the Sabbath was over, Mary Magdalene, Mary the mother of James, and Salome bought spices so that they might go to anoint Jesus' body.","Et cum transisset sabbatum, Maria Magdalene et Maria Iacobi et Salome emerunt aromata, ut venientes ungerent eum.","ויהי כאשר עבר יום השבת ותקנינה מרים המגגדלית ומרים אם יעקב ושלמית סמים לבוא ולסוך אתו בהם׃"],["48","16","2","그리고 주간 첫날 매우 이른 아침, 해가 떠오를 무렵에 무덤으로 갔다.","그리고 안식일 다음날 이른 아침 해가 뜨자 그들은 무덤으로 가면서","안식 후 첫날 매우 일찍이 해 돋을 때에 그 무덤으로 가며","안식 후 첫날 매우 일찌기 해 돋은 때에 그 무덤으로 가며","그리고 안식일 다음날 동틀 무렵에 향료를 가지고 무덤으로 갔다.","Very early when the sun had risen, on the first day of the week, they came to the tomb.","And very early in the morning the first day of the week, they came unto the sepulchre at the rising of the sun.","Very early on the first day of the week, just after sunrise, they were on their way to the tomb","Et valde mane, prima sabbatorum, veniunt ad monumentum, orto iam sole.","ובאחד בשבת בבקר השכם באו אל הקבר כזרוח השמש׃"],["48","16","3","그들은 “누가 그 돌을 무덤 입구에서 굴려 내 줄까요?” 하고 서로 말하였다.","\"그 무덤 입구를 막은 돌을 굴려내 줄 사람이 있을까요?\" 하고 말을 주고받았다.","서로 말하되 누가 우리를 위하여 무덤 문에서 돌을 굴려 주리요 하더니","서로 말하되 누가 우리를 위하여 무덤 문에서 돌을 굴려 주리요 하더니","그들은 걸어가면서 무덤 입구를 막은 큰 돌을 어떻게 굴려낼 수 있을까 걱정하였다.","They were saying to one another, “Who will roll back the stone for us from the entrance to the tomb?”","And they said among themselves, Who shall roll us away the stone from the door of the sepulchre?","and they asked each other, \"Who will roll the stone away from the entrance of the tomb?\"","Et dicebant ad invicem:  “Quis revolvet nobis lapidem ab ostio monumenti? “.","ותאמרנה אשה אל אחותה מי יגל לנו את האבן מעל פתח הקבר׃"],["48","16","4","그러고는 눈을 들어 바라보니 그 돌이 이미 굴려져 있었다. 그것은 매우 큰 돌이었다.","가서 보니 그렇게도 커다란 돌이 이미 굴러져 있었다.","눈을 들어본즉 벌써 돌이 굴려져 있는데 그 돌이 심히 크더라","눈을 들어본즉 돌이 벌써 굴려졌으니 그 돌이 심히 크더라","그런데 그들이 무덤에 가보니 무덤을 막고 있던 큰 들은 이미 옮겨져 무덤 입구가 열려 있었다.","When they looked up, they saw that the stone had been rolled back; it was very large.","And when they looked, they saw that the stone was rolled away: for it was very great.","But when they looked up, they saw that the stone, which was very large, had been rolled away.","Et respicientes vident revolutum lapidem; erat quippe magnus valde.","ובהביטן ראו והנה נגללה האבן כי היתה גדלה מאד׃"],["48","16","5","그들이 무덤에 들어가 보니, 웬 젊은이가 하얗고 긴 겉옷을 입고 오른쪽에 앉아 있었다. 그들은 깜짝 놀랐다.","그들이 무덤 안으로 들어갔더니 웬 젊은이가 흰옷을 입고 오른편에 앉아 있었다. 그들이 보고 질겁을 하자","무덤에 들어가서 흰 옷을 입은 한 청년이 우편에 앉은 것을 보고 놀라매","무덤에 들어가서 흰 옷을 입은 한 청년이 우편에 앉은 것을 보고 놀라매","무덤 안으로 들어간 여자들은 깜짝 놀랐다. 흰옷을 입은 한 청년이 오른편에 앉아 있었기 때문이다.","On entering the tomb they saw a young man sitting on the right side, clothed in a white robe, and they were utterly amazed.","And entering into the sepulchre, they saw a young man sitting on the right side, clothed in a long white garment; and they were affrighted.","As they entered the tomb, they saw a young man dressed in a white robe sitting on the right side, and they were alarmed.","Et introeuntes in monumentum viderunt iuvenem sedentem in dextris, coopertum stola candida, et obstupuerunt.","ותבאנה אל תוך הקבר ותראינה בחור אחד ישב מימין והוא עטה שמלה לבנה ותשתוממנה׃"],["48","16","6","젊은이가 그들에게 말하였다. “놀라지 마라. 너희가 십자가에 못 박히신 나자렛 사람 예수님을 찾고 있지만 그분께서는 되살아나셨다. 그래서 여기에 계시지 않는다. 보아라, 여기가 그분을 모셨던 곳이다.","젊은이는 그들에게 \"겁내지 마라. 너희는 십자가에 달리셨던 나자렛 사람 예수를 찾고 있지만 예수는 다시 살아나셨고 여기에는 계시지 않다. 보아라. 여기가 예수의 시체를 모셨던 곳이다.","청년이 이르되 놀라지 말라 너희가 십자가에 못 박히신 나사렛 예수를 찾는구나 그가 살아나셨고 여기 계시지 아니하니라 보라 그를 두었던 곳이니라","청년이 이르되 놀라지 말라 너희가 십자가에 못 박히신 나사렛 예수를 찾는구나 그가 살아나셨고 여기 계시지 아니하니라 보라 그를 두었던 곳이니라","그 청년이 말하였다. \"놀라지 말라. 너희는 십자가에 못박히신 나사렛 예수를 찾고 있느냐? 그분은 여기 계시지 않는다. 그분은 다시 살아나셨다. 보라, 여기가 그분의 시체를 모셨던 곳이다.","He said to them, “Do not be amazed! You seek Jesus of Nazareth, the crucified. He has been raised; he is not here. Behold the place where they laid him.","And he saith unto them, Be not affrighted: Ye seek Jesus of Nazareth, which was crucified: he is risen; he is not here: behold the place where they laid him.","\"Don't be alarmed,\" he said. \"You are looking for Jesus the Nazarene, who was crucified. He has risen! He is not here. See the place where they laid him.","Qui dicit illis:  “Nolite expavescere! Iesum quaeritis Nazarenum crucifixum. Surrexit, non est hic; ecce locus, ubi posuerunt eum.","ויאמר אליהן אל תשתוממנה את ישוע הנצרי אתן מבקשות את הנצלב הוא קם איננו פה הנה זה המקום אשר השכיבהו בו׃"],["48","16","7","그러니 가서 제자들과 베드로에게 이렇게 일러라. ‘예수님께서는 전에 여러분에게 말씀하신 대로 여러분보다 먼저 갈릴래아로 가실 터이니, 여러분은 그분을 거기에서 뵙게 될 것입니다.’”","자, 가서 제자들과 베드로에게 예수께서는 전에 말씀하신 대로 그들보다 먼저 갈릴래아로 가실 것이니 거기서 그분을 만나게 될 것이라고 전하여라.\" 하였다.","가서 그의 제자들과 베드로에게 이르기를 예수께서 너희보다 먼저 갈릴리로 가시나니 전에 너희에게 말씀하신 대로 너희가 거기서 뵈오리라 하라 하는지라","가서 그의 제자들과 베드로에게 이르기를 예수께서 너희보다 먼저 갈릴리로 가시나니 전에 너희에게 말씀하신대로 너희가 거기서 뵈오리라 하라 하는지라","이제 베드로와 제자들에게 가서 \"예수께서는 전에 말씀하신 대로 당신들보다 먼저 갈릴리로 가셔서 거기서 당신들을 만날 것이다\"라고 전하라.\"","But go and tell his disciples and Peter, ‘He is going before you to Galilee; there you will see him, as he told you.’”","But go your way, tell his disciples and Peter that he goeth before you into Galilee: there shall ye see him, as he said unto you.","But go, tell his disciples and Peter, 'He is going ahead of you into Galilee. There you will see him, just as he told you.'\"","Sed ite, dicite discipulis eius et Petro: “Praecedit vos in Galilaeam. Ibi eum videbitis, sicut dixit vobis “ “.","אך לכנה ואמרתן אל תלמידיו ואל פטרוס כי הולך הוא לפניכם הגלילה ושם תראהו כאשר אמר לכם׃"],["48","16","8","그들은 무덤에서 나와 달아났다. 덜덜 떨면서 겁에 질렸던 것이다. 그들은 두려워서 아무에게도 말을 하지 않았다.","여자들은 겁에 질려 덜덜 떨면서 무덤 밖으로 나와 도망쳐 버렸다. 그리고 너무도 무서워서 아무에게도 말을 못하였다.","여자들이 몹시 놀라 떨며 나와 무덤에서 도망하고 무서워하여 아무에게 아무 말도 하지 못하더라","여자들이 심히 놀라 떨며 나와 무덤에서 도망하고 무서워하여 아무에게 아무 말도 하지 못하더라","여자들은 겁에 질려 무덤에서 정신 없이 도망쳐 나왔으나 너무나 놀라서 아무에게도 말을 하지 못하였다.","Then they went out and fled from the tomb, seized with trembling and bewilderment. They said nothing to anyone, for they were afraid.","And they went out quickly, and fled from the sepulchre; for they trembled and were amazed: neither said they any thing to any man; for they were afraid.","Trembling and bewildered, the women went out and fled from the tomb. They said nothing to anyone, because they were afraid.","Et exeuntes fugerunt de monumento; invaserat enim eas tremor et pavor, et nemini quidquam dixerunt, timebant enim.","ותמהרנה לצאת ותברחנה מן הקבר כי אחזתן רעדה ותמהון ולא הגידו דבר לאיש כי יראו׃"],["48","16","9","예수님께서는 주간 첫날 새벽에 부활하신 뒤, 마리아 막달레나에게 처음으로 나타나셨다. 그는 예수님께서 일곱 마귀를 쫓아 주신 여자였다.","일요일 이른 아침, 예수께서는 부활하신 뒤 막달라 여자 마리아에게 처음으로 나타나셨는데 그는 예수께서 일찍이 일곱 마귀를 쫓아내어 주셨던 여자였다.","[예수께서 안식 후 첫날 이른 아침에 살아나신 후 전에 일곱 귀신을 쫓아내어 주신 막달라 마리아에게 먼저 보이시니","1)[예수께서 안식후 첫날 이른 아침에 살아나신 후 전에 일곱 귀신을 쫓아내어 주신 막달라 마리아에게 먼저 보이시니 어떤 사본에는, 9-20절까지 없음","다시 살아나신 예수께서는 그날 이른 아침에 제일 먼저 막달라 마리아에게 나타나셨다. 일찍이 예수께서는 이 여자에게서 일곱 귀신을 쫓아내 주신 일이 있었다.","When he had risen, early on the first day of the week, he appeared first to Mary Magdalene, out of whom he had driven seven demons.","Now when Jesus was risen early the first day of the week, he appeared first to Mary Magdalene, out of whom he had cast seven devils.","When Jesus rose early on the first day of the week, he appeared first to Mary Magdalene, out of whom he had driven seven demons.","Surgens autem mane, prima sabbati, apparuit primo Mariae Magdalenae, de qua eiecerat septem daemonia.","והוא כאשר קם מן המתים באחד בשבת נראה בראשונה אל מרים המגדלית אשר גרש ממנה שבעה שדים׃"],["48","16","10","그 여자는 예수님과 함께 지냈던 이들이 슬퍼하며 울고 있는 곳으로 가서, 그들에게 이 소식을 전하였다.","마리아는 예수를 따르던 사람들이 슬퍼하며 울고 있는 곳으로 찾아가 이 소식을 전해 주었다.","마리아가 가서 예수와 함께 하던 사람들이 슬퍼하며 울고 있는 중에 이 일을 알리매","마리아가 가서 예수와 함께하던 사람들의 슬퍼하며 울고 있는 중에 이 일을 고하매","마리아는 슬픔에 잠겨 눈물을 흘리고 있는 제자들을 찾아가 자기가 예수를 뵈었다는 것과 예수께서 살아 계시다는 것을 알렸다. 그러나 그들은 마리아가 전한 말을 믿지 않았다.","She went and told his companions who were mourning and weeping.","And she went and told them that had been with him, as they mourned and wept.","She went and told those who had been with him and who were mourning and weeping.","Illa vadens nuntiavit his, qui cum eo fuerant, lugentibus et flentibus;","ותלך ותגד לאנשים אשר היו עמו והם מתאבלים ובכים׃"],["48","16","11","그러나 그들은 예수님께서 살아 계시며 그 여자에게 나타나셨다는 말을 듣고도 믿지 않았다.","그러나 그들은 예수께서 살아 계시다는 것과 그 여자에게 나타나셨다는 말을 듣고도 믿으려 하지 않았다.","그들은 예수께서 살아나셨다는 것과 마리아에게 보이셨다는 것을 듣고도 믿지 아니하니라","그들은 예수의 살으셨다는 것과 마리아에게 보이셨다는 것을 듣고도 믿지 아니하니라","(10절에 포함되어 있음)","When they heard that he was alive and had been seen by her, they did not believe.","And they, when they had heard that he was alive, and had been seen of her, believed not.","When they heard that Jesus was alive and that she had seen him, they did not believe it.","et illi audientes quia viveret et visus esset ab ea, non crediderunt.","וכאשר שמעו כי חי ונראה אליה לא האמינו לה׃"],["48","16","12","그 뒤 그들 가운데 두 사람이 걸어서 시골로 가고 있을 때, 예수님께서 다른 모습으로 그들에게 나타나셨다.","그 뒤 제자들 가운데 두 사람이 시골로 가고 있을 때에 예수께서 다른 모습으로 그들에게 나타나셨다.","그 후에 그들 중 두 사람이 걸어서 시골로 갈 때에 예수께서 다른 모양으로 그들에게 나타나시니","그 후에 저희 중 두 사람이 걸어서 시골로 갈때에 예수께서 다른 모양으로 저희에게 나타나시니","그후 제자 두 사람이 예루살렘을 떠나 시골로 내려가고 있을 때 예수께서는 그들에게도 나타나셨다. 그러나 예수께서 다른 모습으로 나타나셨기 때문에 처음에는 예수를 알아보지 못하였다.","After this he appeared in another form to two of them walking along on their way to the country.","After that he appeared in another form unto two of them, as they walked, and went into the country.","Afterward Jesus appeared in a different form to two of them while they were walking in the country.","Post haec autem duobus ex eis ambulantibus ostensus est in alia effigie euntibus in villam;","ואחרי כן נראה בדמות אחרת לשנים מהם בהיתם מתהלכים בצאתם השדה׃"],["48","16","13","그래서 그들이 돌아가 다른 제자들에게 알렸지만 제자들은 그들의 말도 믿지 않았다.","그 두 사람도 돌아와서 다른 제자들에게 이 소식을 전했으나 그들은 그 말도 믿지 않았다.","두 사람이 가서 남은 제자들에게 알리었으되 역시 믿지 아니하니라","두 사람이 가서 남은 제자들에게 고하였으되 역시 믿지 아니하니라","마침내 그들이 예수를 알아보고 급히 예루살렘으로 되돌아가서 다른 제자들에게 알렸으나 아무도 그들의 말을 믿지 않았다.","They returned and told the others; but they did not believe them either.","And they went and told it unto the residue: neither believed they them.","These returned and reported it to the rest; but they did not believe them either.","et illi euntes nuntiaverunt ceteris, nec illis crediderunt.","והם הלכו ויגידו לאחרים וגם להם לא האמינו׃"],["48","16","14","마침내, 열한 제자가 식탁에 앉아 있을 때에 예수님께서 나타나셨다. 그리고 그들의 불신과 완고한 마음을 꾸짖으셨다. 되살아난 당신을 본 이들의 말을 그들이 믿지 않았기 때문이다.","그 뒤 열한 제자가 음식을 먹고 있을 때에 예수께서 나타나셔서 마음이 완고하여 도무지 믿으려 하지 않는 그들을 꾸짖으셨다. 그들은 예수께서 살아나신 것을 분명히 본 사람들의 말도 믿지 않았던 것이다.","그 후에 열한 제자가 음식 먹을 때에 예수께서 그들에게 나타나사 그들의 믿음 없는 것과 마음이 완악한 것을 꾸짖으시니 이는 자기가 살아난 것을 본 자들의 말을 믿지 아니함일러라","그 후에 열 한 제자가 2)음식 먹을 때에 예수께서 저희에게 나타나사 저희의 믿음 없는 것과 마음이 완악한 것을 꾸짖으시니 이는 자기의 살아난 것을 본 자들의 말을 믿지 아니함일러라 헬, 기대어 누워 (유대인의 음식 먹을 때에 가지는 자세)","그후 열한 제자가 함께 식사하고 있을 때 예수께서 그들 앞에 또 나타나서 그들의 믿음이 없는 것과 마음이 완악한 것을 꾸짖으셨다. 그들이 예수께서 죽은 자 가운데서 살아나신 것을 본 사람들의 말을 믿으려 하지 않았기 때문이다.","[But] later, as the eleven were at table, he appeared to them and rebuked them for their unbelief and hardness of heart because they had not believed those who saw him after he had been raised.","Afterward he appeared unto the eleven as they sat at meat, and upbraided them with their unbelief and hardness of heart, because they believed not them which had seen him after he was risen.","Later Jesus appeared to the Eleven as they were eating; he rebuked them for their lack of faith and their stubborn refusal to believe those who had seen him after he had risen.","Novissime recumbentibus illis Undecim apparuit, et exprobravit incredulitatem illorum et duritiam cordis, quia his, qui viderant eum resuscitatum, non crediderant.","ובאחרנה נראה לעשתי העשר בהיותם מסבים ויחרף חסרון אמונתם וקשי לבבם אשר לא האמינו לראים אתו נעור מן המתים׃"],["48","16","15","예수님께서는 이어서 그들에게 이르셨다. “너희는 온 세상에 가서 모든 피조물에게 복음을 선포하여라.","예수께서는 그들에게 이렇게 말씀하셨다. \"너희는 온 세상을 두루 다니며 모든 사람에게 이 복음을 선포하여라.","또 이르시되 너희는 온 천하에 다니며 만민에게 복음을 전파하라","또 가라사대 너희는 온 천하에 다니며 만민에게 복음을 전파하라","예수께서 그들에게 말씀하셨다. \"너희는 온 세상을 두루 다니며 모든 사람에게 복음을 전파하라.","He said to them, “Go into the whole world and proclaim the gospel to every creature.","And he said unto them, Go ye into all the world, and preach the gospel to every creature.","He said to them, \"Go into all the world and preach the good news to all creation.","Et dixit eis:  “Euntes in mundum universum praedicate evangelium omni creaturae.","ויאמר אליהם לכו אל כל העולם וקראו את הבשורה לכל הבריאה׃"],["48","16","16","믿고 세례를 받는 이는 구원을 받고 믿지 않는 자는 단죄를 받을 것이다.","믿고 세례를 받는 사람은 구원을 받겠지만 믿지 않는 사람은 단죄를 받을 것이다.","믿고 세례를 받는 사람은 구원을 얻을 것이요 믿지 않는 사람은 정죄를 받으리라","믿고 세례를 받는 사람은 구원을 얻을 것이요 믿지 않는 사람은 정죄를 받으리라","믿고 침례받는 사람은 구원을 얻을 것이나 믿지 않고 거부하는 사람은 죄인으로 선고받을 것이다.","Whoever believes and is baptized will be saved; whoever does not believe will be condemned.","He that believeth and is baptized shall be saved; but he that believeth not shall be damned.","Whoever believes and is baptized will be saved, but whoever does not believe will be condemned.","Qui crediderit et baptizatus fuerit, salvus erit; qui vero non crediderit, condemnabitur.","המאמין ונטבל הוא יושע ואשר לא יאמין יאשם׃"],["48","16","17","믿는 이들에게는 이러한 표징들이 따를 것이다. 곧 내 이름으로 마귀들을 쫓아내고 새로운 언어들을 말하며,","믿는 사람에게는 기적이 따르게 될 것인데 내 이름으로 마귀도 쫓아내고 여러 가지 기이한 언어로 말도 하고","믿는 자들에게는 이런 표적이 따르리니 곧 그들이 내 이름으로 귀신을 쫓아내며 새 방언을 말하며","믿는 자들에게는 이런 3)표적이 따르리니 곧 저희가 내 이름으로 귀신을 쫓아내며 새 방언을 말하며 혹 이적","믿는 사람들에게는 표적이 따를 것인데 내 이름으로 귀신을 쫓아내고 새 방언을 말하며","These signs will accompany those who believe: in my name they will drive out demons, they will speak new languages.","And these signs shall follow them that believe; In my name shall they cast out devils; they shall speak with new tongues;","And these signs will accompany those who believe: In my name they will drive out demons; they will speak in new tongues;","Signa autem eos, qui crediderint, haec sequentur: in nomine meo daemonia eicient, linguis loquentur novis,","ואלה האתות אשר ילוו אל המאמינים יגרשו שדים בשמי ובלשנות חדשות ידברו׃"],["48","16","18","손으로 뱀을 집어 들고 독을 마셔도 아무런 해도 입지 않으며, 또 병자들에게 손을 얹으면 병이 나을 것이다.”","뱀을 쥐거나 독을 마셔도 아무런 해도 입지 않을 것이며 또 병자에게 손을 얹으면 병이 나을 것이다.\"","뱀을 집어올리며 무슨 독을 마실지라도 해를 받지 아니하며 병든 사람에게 손을 얹은즉 나으리라 하시더라","뱀을 집으며 무슨 독을 마실찌라도 해를 받지 아니하며 병든 사람에게 손을 얹은즉 나으리라 하시더라","뱀을 만지거나 독을 마시더라도 해를 입지 않을 것이며 병자에게 손을 얹으면 그 병이 나을 것이다.\"","They will pick up serpents [with their hands], and if they drink any deadly thing, it will not harm them. They will lay hands on the sick, and they will recover.”","They shall take up serpents; and if they drink any deadly thing, it shall not hurt them; they shall lay hands on the sick, and they shall recover.","they will pick up snakes with their hands; and when they drink deadly poison, it will not hurt them at all; they will place their hands on sick people, and they will get well.\"","serpentes tollent, et, si mortiferum quid biberint, non eos nocebit, super aegrotos manus imponent, et bene habebunt “.","נחשים ישאו בידיהם ואם ישתו סם המות לא יזיקם על חולים ישימו את ידיהם וייטב להם׃"],["48","16","19","주 예수님께서는 제자들에게 말씀하신 다음 승천하시어 하느님 오른쪽에 앉으셨다.","주님이신 예수께서 제자들에게 말씀을 다 하시고 승천하셔서 1)하느님 오른편에 앉으셨다.시편 110:1.","주 예수께서 말씀을 마치신 후에 하늘로 올려지사 하나님 우편에 앉으시니라","주 예수께서 말씀을 마치신 후에 하늘로 올리우사 하나님 우편에 앉으시니라","주 예수께서는 제자들에게 말씀을 다 마치고 ㄱ) 하늘로 들려 올라가서 하나님 오른편에 앉으셨다. (ㄱ. 시110:1)","So then the Lord Jesus, after he spoke to them, was taken up into heaven and took his seat at the right hand of God.","So then after the Lord had spoken unto them, he was received up into heaven, and sat on the right hand of God.","After the Lord Jesus had spoken to them, he was taken up into heaven and he sat at the right hand of God.","Et Dominus quidem Iesus, postquam locutus est eis, assumptus est in caelum et sedit a dextris Dei.","ויהי אחרי אשר דבר אתם האדון וינשא השמימה וישב לימין האלהים׃"],["48","16","20","제자들은 떠나가서 곳곳에 복음을 선포하였다. 주님께서는 그들과 함께 일하시면서 표징들이 뒤따르게 하시어, 그들이 전하는 말씀을 확증해 주셨다. 그 여자들은 자기들에게 분부하신 모든 것을 베드로와 그 동료들에게 간추려서 이야기해 주었다. 그 뒤에 예수님께서도 친히 그들을 통하여 동쪽에서 서쪽에 이르기까지, 영원한 구원을 선포하는 거룩한 불멸의 말씀이 두루 퍼져 나가게 하셨다. 아멘.","제자들은 사방으로 나가 이 복음을 전하였다. 그리고 주께서는 그들과 함께 일하셨으며 여러 가지 기적을 행하게 하심으로써 그들이 전한 말씀이 참되다는 것을 증명해 주셨다. 2) [[그 여자들은 베드로와 그의 동료들에게 가서 그들이 들은 모든 것을 간추려 이야기해 주었다. 그 뒤 예수께서는 친히 제자들을 해가 뜨는 곳에서 해가 지는 곳까지 보내시어 영원한 구원을 선포하는 거룩한 불멸의 말씀을 전하게 하셨다. 아멘.]]마르코의 복음서의 짧은 끝맺음. 마르 16:9-20의 '긴 끝맺음' 대신에 '이 짧은 끝맺음'만 있는 사본들도 있다.","제자들이 나가 두루 전파할새 주께서 함께 역사하사 그 따르는 표적으로 말씀을 확실히 증언하시니라]","제자들이 나가 두루 전파할쌔 주께서 함께 역사하사 그 따르는 3)표적으로 말씀을 확실히 증거하시니라]혹 이적","ㄴ) 그리고 제자들은 온 세상을 두루 다니며 복음을 전하는데 주께서 늘 그들과 함께 하셔서 그들이 말씀을 전할 때마다 표적이 따르게 하셨다. 예수께서는 이렇게 하심으로써 제자들이 전하는 복음을 확실하게 증거해 주셨다. (ㄴ. 고대 사본에는 9,10절에 속하는 다음과 같은 말이 20절 끝에 첨가되어 있다. \"그 여자들은 베드로와 다른 제자들에게 가서 자기들이 보고 들은 것을 알려 주었다. 예수께서는 해 뜨는 곳에서부터 해 지는 곳까지 온 세상에 제자들을 보내셔서 구원을 선포하는 거룩하고 영원한 말씀을 전파하게 하셨다)","But they went forth and preached everywhere, while the Lord worked with them and confirmed the word through accompanying signs.] [And they reported all the instructions briefly to Peter’s companions. Afterwards Jesus himself, through them, sent forth from east to west the sacred and imperishable proclamation of eternal salvation. Amen.] The Freer Logion: Found after v  in a fourth-fifth century manuscript preserved in the Freer Gallery of Art, Washington, DC, this ending was known to Jerome in the fourth century. It reads: “And they excused themselves, saying, ‘This age of lawlessness and unbelief is under Satan, who does not allow the truth and power of God to prevail over the unclean things dominated by the spirits [or, does not allow the unclean things dominated by the spirits to grasp the truth and power of God]. Therefore reveal your righteousness now.’ They spoke to Christ. And Christ responded to them, ‘The limit of the years of Satan’s power is completed, but other terrible things draw near. And for those who sinned I was handed over to death, that they might return to the truth and no longer sin, in order that they might inherit the spiritual and incorruptible heavenly glory of righteousness. But….’”","And they went forth, and preached every where, the Lord working with them, and confirming the word with signs following. Amen.","Then the disciples went out and preached everywhere, and the Lord worked with them and confirmed his word by the signs that accompanied it.","Illi autem profecti praedicaverunt ubique, Domino cooperante et sermonem confirmante, sequentibus signis.","והמה יצאו ויקראו בכל המקמות והאדון עזרם ויחזק את הדבר באתות הבאות אחרי דברם אמן׃"],["49","1","1","우리 가운데에서 이루어진 일들에 관한 이야기를 엮는 작업에 많은 이가 손을 대었습니다.","존경하는 데오필로님,","우리 중에 이루어진 사실에 대하여","우리 중에 이루어진 사실에 대하여","존경하는 데오빌로님, 우리들 가운데서 있었던 일을 기록한 사람은 이미 여럿 있습니다. 그들은 모두 예수의 제자들과 또 예수께서 행하신 일을 직접 눈으로 본 사람들이 우리에게 전해 준 그대로를 써놓았습니다.","Since many have undertaken to compile a narrative of the events that have been fulfilled among us,","Forasmuch as many have taken in hand to set forth in order a declaration of those things which are most surely believed among us,","Many have undertaken to draw up an account of the things that have been fulfilled among us,","Quoniam quidem multi conati sunt ordinare narrationem, quae in nobis completae sunt, rerum,","אחרי אשר רבים הואילו לחבר ספור המעשים אשר נאמנו בשלמות בתוכנו׃"],["49","1","2","처음부터 목격자로서 말씀의 종이 된 이들이 우리에게 전해 준 것을 그대로 엮은 것입니다.","그들이 쓴 것은 처음부터 직접 눈으로 보고 말씀을 전파한 사람들이 우리에게 전해 준 사실 그대로입니다.","처음부터 목격자와 말씀의 일꾼 된 자들이 전하여 준 그대로 내력을 저술하려고 붓을 든 사람이 많은지라","처음부터 말씀의 목격자 되고 일군 된 자들의 전하여 준 그대로 내력을 저술하려고 붓을 든 사람이 많은지라","(1절에 포함되어 있음)","just as those who were eyewitnesses from the beginning and ministers of the word have handed them down to us,","Even as they delivered them unto us, which from the beginning were eyewitnesses, and ministers of the word;","just as they were handed down to us by those who from the first were eyewitnesses and servants of the word.","sicut tradiderunt nobis, qui ab initio ipsi viderunt et ministri fuerunt verbi,","כאשר מסרום לנו הראים אתם בעיניהם מתחלה ואשר היו משרתי הדבר׃"],["49","1","3","존귀하신 테오필로스 님, 이 모든 일을 처음부터 자세히 살펴본 저도 귀하께 순서대로 적어 드리는 것이 좋겠다고 생각하였습니다.","저 역시 이 모든 일들을 처음부터 자세히 조사해 둔 바 있으므로 그것을 순서대로 정리하여 각하께 써서 보내드리는 것이 좋겠다고 생각하였습니다.","그 모든 일을 근원부터 자세히 미루어 살핀 나도 데오빌로 각하에게 차례대로 써 보내는 것이 좋은 줄 알았노니","그 모든 일을 근원부터 자세히 미루어 살핀 나도 데오빌로 각하에게 차례대로 써 보내는 것이 좋은줄 알았노니","그런데 나도 이 모든 것을 처음부터 끝까지 세밀히 조사해 둔 것이 있기 때문에 이것을 순서대로 엮어서 당신에게 써보내는 것이 좋겠다고 생각하였습니다.","I too have decided, after investigating everything accurately anew, to write it down in an orderly sequence for you, most excellent Theophilus,","It seemed good to me also, having had perfect understanding of all things from the very first, to write unto thee in order, most excellent Theophilus,","Therefore, since I myself have carefully investigated everything from the beginning, it seemed good also to me to write an orderly account for you, most excellent Theophilus,","visum est et mihi, adsecuto a principio omnia, diligenter ex ordine tibi scribere, optime Theophile,","חשבתי לטוב גם אני החפש כל הדברים היטב מראשיתם לכתבם אליך בסדר תאופילוס האדיר׃"],["49","1","4","이는 귀하께서 배우신 것들이 진실임을 알게 해 드리려는 것입니다.","그러하오니 이 글을 보시고 이미 듣고 배우신 것들이 틀림없는 사실이라는 것을 알아주시기 바랍니다.","이는 각하가 알고 있는 바를 더 확실하게 하려 함이로라","이는 각하로 그 배운 바의 확실함을 알게 하려 함이로라","당신이 이미 듣고 계신 모든 사실이 참되다는 것을 다시 확증시켜 드리고 싶기 때문입니다.","so that you may realize the certainty of the teachings you have received.","That thou mightest know the certainty of those things, wherein thou hast been instructed.","so that you may know the certainty of the things you have been taught.","ut cognoscas eorum verborum, de quibus eruditus es, firmitatem.","למען תדע קשט האמרים אשר חנכת בם׃"],["49","1","5","유다 임금 헤로데 시대에 아비야 조에 속한 사제로서 즈카르야라는 사람이 있었다. 그의 아내는 아론의 자손으로서 이름은 엘리사벳이었다.","헤로데가 유다의 왕이었을 때에 아비야 조에 속하는 사제 한 사람이 있었는데 그 이름은 즈가리야였고 그의 아내는 사제 아론의 후예로서 이름은 엘리사벳이었다.","유대 왕 헤롯 때에 아비야 반열에 제사장 한 사람이 있었으니 이름은 사가랴요 그의 아내는 아론의 자손이니 이름은 엘리사벳이라","유대 왕 헤롯 때에 아비야 반열에 제사장 하나가 있으니 이름은 사가랴요 그 아내는 아론의 자손이니 이름은 엘리사벳이라","유대 왕 헤롯 때에 사가랴라는 사람이 있었다. 그는 성전 제사장단 중에 아비야 분단에 속하는 제사장이었다. 그의 아내 엘리사벳 역시 아론의 자손으로 제사장 가문 사람이었다.","In the days of Herod, King of Judea, there was a priest named Zechariah of the priestly division of Abijah; his wife was from the daughters of Aaron, and her name was Elizabeth.","THERE was in the days of Herod, the king of Judaea, a certain priest named Zacharias, of the course of Abia: and his wife was of the daughters of Aaron, and her name was Elisabeth.","In the time of Herod king of Judea there was a priest named Zechariah, who belonged to the priestly division of Abijah; his wife Elizabeth was also a descendant of Aaron.","Fuit in diebus Herodis regis Iudaeae sacerdos quidam nomine Zacharias de vice Abiae, et uxor illi de filiabus Aaron, et nomen eius Elisabeth.","כהן היה בימי הורדוס מלך יהודה זכריה שמו ממשמרת אביה ולו אשה מבנות אהרן ושמה אלישבע׃"],["49","1","6","이 둘은 하느님 앞에서 의로운 이들로, 주님의 모든 계명과 규정에 따라 흠 없이 살아가는 사람들이었다.","이 부부는 다 같이 주님의 모든 계명과 규율을 어김없이 지키며 하느님 앞에서 의롭게 살았다.","이 두 사람이 하나님 앞에 의인이니 주의 모든 계명과 규례대로 흠이 없이 행하더라","이 두 사람이 하나님 앞에 의인이니 주의 모든 계명과 규례대로 흠이 없이 행하더라","신앙심이 깊은 이들 부부는 하나님의 모든 계명과 규율을 어김없이 성실하게 지켰다.","Both were righteous in the eyes of God, observing all the commandments and ordinances of the Lord blamelessly.","And they were both righteous before God, walking in all the commandments and ordinances of the Lord blameless.","Both of them were upright in the sight of God, observing all the Lord's commandments and regulations blamelessly.","Erant autem iusti ambo ante Deum, incedentes in omnibus mandatis et iustificationibus Domini, irreprehensibiles.","ושניהם היו צדיקים לפני האלהים והלכי תם בכל מצות יהוה ובחקתיו׃"],["49","1","7","그런데 그들에게는 아이가 없었다. 엘리사벳이 아이를 못낳는 여자였기 때문이다. 게다가 둘 다 나이가 많았다.","그런데 그들에게는 아이가 없었다. 엘리사벳은 원래 아기를 낳지 못하는 여자인데다가 이제는 내외가 다 나이가 많았다.","엘리사벳이 잉태를 못하므로 그들에게 자식이 없고 두 사람의 나이가 많더라","엘리사벳이 수태를 못하므로 저희가 무자하고 두 사람의 나이 많더라","그러나 그들에게는 아이가 없었다. 엘리사벳이 임신을 하지 못하는 여인이었기 때문이다. 게다가 그들의 나이는 이미 노년에 접어들어 있었다.","But they had no child, because Elizabeth was barren and both were advanced in years.","And they had no child, because that Elisabeth was barren, and they both were now well stricken in years.","But they had no children, because Elizabeth was barren; and they were both well along in years.","Et non erat illis filius, eo quod esset Elisabeth sterilis, et ambo processissent in diebus suis.","ולא היה להם ילד כי אלישבע עקרה ושניהם באו בימים׃"],["49","1","8","즈카르야가 자기 조 차례가 되어 하느님 앞에서 사제 직무를 수행할 때의 일이다.","어느 날 즈가리야는 자기 조의 차례가 되어 하느님 앞에서 사제 직분을 이행하게 되었다.","마침 사가랴가 그 반열의 차례대로 하나님 앞에서 제사장의 직무를 행할새","마침 사가랴가 그 반열의 차례대로 제사장의 직무를 하나님 앞에 행할쌔","사가랴는 자기 분단의 차례가 되어 하나님 앞에서 제사장 일을 하게 되었다.","Once when he was serving as priest in his division’s turn before God,","And it came to pass, that while he executed the priest's office before God in the order of his course,","Once when Zechariah's division was on duty and he was serving as priest before God,","Factum est autem, cum sacerdotio fungeretur in ordine vicis suae ante Deum,","ויהי היום ויכהן לפני אלהים בסדר משמרתו׃"],["49","1","9","사제직의 관례에 따라 제비를 뽑았는데, 그가 주님의 성소에 들어가 분향하기로 결정되었다.","사제들의 관례에 따라 주님의 성소에 들어가 분향할 사람을 제비뽑아 정하였는데 즈가리야가 뽑혀 그 일을 맡게 되었다.","제사장의 전례를 따라 제비를 뽑아 주의 성전에 들어가 분향하고","제사장의 전례를 따라 제비를 뽑아 주의 성소에 들어가 분향하고","제사직의 관례에 따라 제비를 뽑았는데 그에게 성소에 들어가 주님 앞에 분향하는 임무가 돌아왔다.","according to the practice of the priestly service, he was chosen by lot to enter the sanctuary of the Lord to burn incense.","According to the custom of the priest's office, his lot was to burn incense when he went into the temple of the Lord.","he was chosen by lot, according to the custom of the priesthood, to go into the temple of the Lord and burn incense.","secundum consuetudinem sacerdotii sorte exiit, ut incensum poneret ingressus in templum Domini;","וכמשפט עבודת הכהנים יצא גורלו להקטיר קטרת ויבא אל היכל יהוה׃"],["49","1","10","그가 분향하는 동안에 밖에서는 온 백성의 무리가 기도하고 있었다.","안에서 즈가리야가 분향하고 있는 동안 밖에서는 많은 사람들이 모여 기도를 드리고 있었다.","모든 백성은 그 분향하는 시간에 밖에서 기도하더니","모든 백성은 그 분향하는 시간에 밖에서 기도하더니","그가 안에서 분향을 하는 동안 밖에서는 많은 군중이 성전뜰에 서서 기도를 드리고 있었다.","Then, when the whole assembly of the people was praying outside at the hour of the incense offering,","And the whole multitude of the people were praying without at the time of incense.","And when the time for the burning of incense came, all the assembled worshipers were praying outside.","et omnis multitudo erat populi orans foris hora incensi.","וכל קהל העם היו מתפללים בחוץ בעת הקטרת׃"],["49","1","11","그때에 주님의 천사가 즈카르야에게 나타나 분향 제단 오른쪽에 섰다.","그 때에 주님의 천사가 즈가리야에게 나타나 분향 제단 오른쪽에 서 있었다.","주의 사자가 그에게 나타나 향단 우편에 선지라","주의 사자가 저에게 나타나 향단 우편에 선지라","그런데 성소 안에 있는 사가랴 앞에 갑자기 한 천사가 나타나 분향단 오른편에 섰다. 사가랴는 너무나 놀라서 겁에 질렸다.","the angel of the Lord appeared to him, standing at the right of the altar of incense.","And there appeared unto him an angel of the Lord standing on the right side of the altar of incense.","Then an angel of the Lord appeared to him, standing at the right side of the altar of incense.","Apparuit autem illi angelus Domini stans a dextris altaris incensi;","וירא אליו מלאך יהוה עמד לימין מזבח הקטרת׃"],["49","1","12","즈카르야는 그 모습을 보고 놀라 두려움에 사로잡혔다.","이것을 본 즈가리야는 몹시 당황하여 두려움에 사로잡혔다.","사가랴가 보고 놀라며 무서워하니","사가랴가 보고 놀라며 무서워하니","(11절에 포함되어 있음)","Zechariah was troubled by what he saw, and fear came upon him.","And when Zacharias saw him, he was troubled, and fear fell upon him.","When Zechariah saw him, he was startled and was gripped with fear.","et Zacharias turbatus est videns, et timor irruit super eum.","ויבהל זכריה בראותו אתו ואימה נפלה עליו׃"],["49","1","13","천사가 그에게 말하였다. “두려워하지 마라, 즈카르야야. 너의 청원이 받아들여졌다. 네 아내 엘리사벳이 너에게 아들을 낳아 줄 터이니, 그 이름을 요한이라 하여라.","그 때에 천사가 이렇게 말하였다. \"두려워하지 마라, 즈가리야. 하느님께서 네 간구를 들어주셨다. 네 아내 엘리사벳이 아들을 낳을 터이니 아기의 이름을 요한이라 하여라.","천사가 그에게 이르되 사가랴여 무서워하지 말라 너의 간구함이 들린지라 네 아내 엘리사벳이 네게 아들을 낳아 주리니 그 이름을 요한이라 하라","천사가 일러 가로되 사가랴여 무서워 말라 너의 간구함이 들린지라 네 아내 엘리사벳이 네게 아들을 낳아 주리니 그 이름을 요한이라 하라","그때 천사가 말하였다. \"사가랴야, 두려워하지 말아라. 나는 하나님께서 네 기도를 들어 주셨다는 것을 알리려고 왔다. 네 아내 엘리사벳이 아들을 낳을 것이다. 너는 그의 이름을 요한이라고 하여라.","But the angel said to him, “Do not be afraid, Zechariah, because your prayer has been heard. Your wife Elizabeth will bear you a son, and you shall name him John.","But the angel said unto him, Fear not, Zacharias: for thy prayer is heard; and thy wife Elisabeth shall bear thee a son, and thou shalt call his name John.","But the angel said to him: \"Do not be afraid, Zechariah; your prayer has been heard. Your wife Elizabeth will bear you a son, and you are to give him the name John.","Ait autem ad illum angelus:  “Ne timeas, Zacharia, quoniam exaudita est deprecatio tua, et uxor tua Elisabeth pariet tibi filium, et vocabis nomen eius Ioannem.","ויאמר אליו המלאך אל תירא זכריהו כי נשמעה תפלתך ואלישבע אשתך תלד לך בן וקראת שמו יוחנן׃"],["49","1","14","너도 기뻐하고 즐거워할 터이지만 많은 이가 그의 출생을 기뻐할 것이다.","너도 기뻐하고 즐거워할 터이지만, 많은 사람이 또한 그의 탄생을 기뻐할 것이다.","너도 기뻐하고 즐거워할 것이요 많은 사람도 그의 태어남을 기뻐하리니","너도 기뻐하고 즐거워할 것이요 많은 사람도 그의 남을 기뻐하리니","너는 아들이 태어나서 큰 기쁨과 즐거움을 누리게 될 것이고 많은 사람들도 함께 기뻐할 것이다.","And you will have joy and gladness, and many will rejoice at his birth,","And thou shalt have joy and gladness; and many shall rejoice at his birth.","He will be a joy and delight to you, and many will rejoice because of his birth,","Et erit gaudium tibi et exsultatio, et multi in nativitate eius gaudebunt:","והיה לך לשמחה וגיל ורבים ישמחו בהולדו׃"],["49","1","15","그가 주님 앞에서 큰 인물이 될 것이기 때문이다. 그는 포도주도 독주도 마시지 않고 어머니 태중에서부터 성령으로 가득 찰 것이다.","그는 주님 보시기에 훌륭한 인물이 되겠기 때문이다. 그는 포도주나 그 밖의 어떤 술도 마시지 않겠고 어머니 태중에서부터 성령을 가득히 받을 것이며","이는 그가 주 앞에 큰 자가 되며 포도주나 독한 술을 마시지 아니하며 모태로부터 성령의 충만함을 받아","이는 저가 주 앞에 큰 자가 되며 포도주나 소주를 마시지 아니하며 모태로부터 성령의 충만함을 입어","그가 주님 앞에서 큰 인물이 될 것이기 때문이다. 그는 포도주나 독주를 입에 대지 않을 것이며 태중에 있을 때부터 성령으로 충만할 것이다.","for he will be great in the sight of [the] Lord. He will drink neither wine nor strong drink. He will be filled with the holy Spirit even from his mother’s womb,","For he shall be great in the sight of the Lord, and shall drink neither wine nor strong drink; and he shall be filled with the Holy Ghost, even from his mother's womb.","for he will be great in the sight of the Lord. He is never to take wine or other fermented drink, and he will be filled with the Holy Spirit even from birth.","erit enim magnus coram Domino et vinum et siceram non bibet et Spiritu Sancto replebitur adhuc ex utero matris suae","כי גדול יהיה לפני יהוה ויין ושכר לא ישתה ורוח הקדש ימלא בעודנו בבטן אמו׃"],["49","1","16","그리고 이스라엘 자손들 가운데에서 많은 사람을 그들의 하느님이신 주님께 돌아오게 할 것이다.","많은 이스라엘 백성을 그들의 주 하느님의 품으로 다시 데려올 것이다.","이스라엘 자손을 주 곧 그들의 하나님께로 많이 돌아오게 하겠음이라","이스라엘 자손을 주 곧 저희 하나님께로 많이 돌아오게 하겠음이니라","그리고 많은 유대인을 그들의 주 하나님께로 돌아오게 할 것이다.","and he will turn many of the children of Israel to the Lord their God.","And many of the children of Israel shall he turn to the Lord their God.","Many of the people of Israel will he bring back to the Lord their God.","et multos filiorum Israel convertet ad Dominum Deum ipsorum.","ורבים מבני ישראל ישיב אל יהוה אלהיהם׃"],["49","1","17","그는 또 엘리야의 영과 힘을 지니고 그분보다 먼저 와서, 부모의 마음을 자녀에게 돌리고, 순종하지 않는 자들은 의인들의 생각을 받아들이게 하여, 백성이 주님을 맞이할 준비를 갖추게 할 것이다.”","그가 바로 엘리야의 정신과 능력을 가지고 주님보다 먼저 올 사람이다. 1)그는 아비와 자식을 화해시키고 거역하는 자들에게 올바른 생각을 하게 하여 주님을 맞아들일 만한 백성이 되도록 준비할 것이다.\" 말라 3:23-24.","그가 또 엘리야의 심령과 능력으로 주 앞에 먼저 와서 아버지의 마음을 자식에게, 거스르는 자를 의인의 슬기에 돌아오게 하고 주를 위하여 세운 백성을 준비하리라","저가 또 엘리야의 심령과 능력으로 주 앞에 앞서 가서 아비의 마음을 자식에게, 거스리는 자를 의인의 슬기에 돌아오게 하고 주를 위하여 세운 백성을 예비하리라","그는 옛 예언자 엘리야의 심령과 능력을 가진 사람이다. 주님보다 먼저 와서 그분을 영접하도록 사람들을 준비시킬 것이다. 그는 ㄱ) 어른들의 마음을 어린아이의 마음처럼 부드럽게 하고 복종하지 않는 마음을 변화시켜 믿음의 지혜를 갖도록 만들 것이다. (ㄱ. 말4:5-6)","He will go before him in the spirit and power of Elijah to turn the hearts of fathers toward children and the disobedient to the understanding of the righteous, to prepare a people fit for the Lord.”","And he shall go before him in the spirit and power of Elias, to turn the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the disobedient to the wisdom of the just; to make ready a people prepared for the Lord.","And he will go on before the Lord, in the spirit and power of Elijah, to turn the hearts of the fathers to their children and the disobedient to the wisdom of the righteous--to make ready a people prepared for the Lord.\"","Et ipse praecedet ante illum in spiritu et virtute Eliae, ut convertat corda patrum in filios et incredibiles ad prudentiam iustorum, parare Domino plebem perfectam “.","והוא ילך לפניו ברוח אליהו ובגבורתו להשיב את לב אבות על בנים ואת הסוררים לתבונת הצדיקים להעמיד ליהוה עם מתקן׃"],["49","1","18","즈카르야가 천사에게, “제가 그것을 어떻게 알 수 있겠습니까? 저는 늙은이고 제 아내도 나이가 많습니다.” 하고 말하자,","이 말을 들은 즈가리야가 \"저는 늙은이입니다. 제 아내도 나이가 많습니다. 무엇을 보고 그런 일을 믿으라는 말씀입니까?\" 하고 말하자","사가랴가 천사에게 이르되 내가 이것을 어떻게 알리요 내가 늙고 아내도 나이가 많으니이다","사가랴가 천사에게 이르되 내가 이것을 어떻게 알리요 내가 늙고 아내도 나이 많으니이다","사가랴가 천사에게 말하였다. \"하지만 내가 늙고 아내도 나이가 많은데 어떻게 그 일이 가능하겠습니까?\"","Then Zechariah said to the angel, “How shall I know this? For I am an old man, and my wife is advanced in years.”","And Zacharias said unto the angel, Whereby shall I know this? for I am an old man, and my wife well stricken in years.","Zechariah asked the angel, \"How can I be sure of this? I am an old man and my wife is well along in years.\"","Et dixit Zacharias ad angelum:  “Unde hoc sciam? Ego enim sum senex, et uxor mea processit in diebus suis “.","ויאמר זכריה אל המלאך במה אדע זאת כי אני זקנתי ואשתי באה בימים׃"],["49","1","19","천사가 그에게 대답하였다. “나는 하느님을 모시는 가브리엘인데, 너에게 이야기하여 이 기쁜 소식을 전하라고 파견되었다.","천사는 이렇게 대답하였다. \"나는 하느님을 모시는 시종 가브리엘이다. 이 기쁜 소식을 전하라는 분부를 받들고 너에게 와 일러주었는데,","천사가 대답하여 이르되 나는 하나님 앞에 서 있는 가브리엘이라 이 좋은 소식을 전하여 네게 말하라고 보내심을 받았노라","천사가 대답하여 가로되 나는 하나님 앞에 섰는 가브리엘이라 이 좋은 소식을 전하여 네게 말하라고 보내심을 입었노라","그러자 천사가 말하였다. \"나는 하나님을 모시고 있는 가브리엘이다. 그리고 이 기쁜 소식을 네게 전하라고 나를 보내신 분은 바로 하나님이시다.","And the angel said to him in reply, “I am Gabriel, who stand before God. I was sent to speak to you and to announce to you this good news.","And the angel answering said unto him, I am Gabriel, that stand in the presence of God; and am sent to speak unto thee, and to shew thee these glad tidings.","The angel answered, \"I am Gabriel. I stand in the presence of God, and I have been sent to speak to you and to tell you this good news.","Et respondens angelus dixit ei:  “Ego sum Gabriel, qui adsto ante Deum, et missus sum loqui ad te et haec tibi evangelizare.","ויען המלאך ויאמר אליו אני גבריאל העומד לפני האלהים ושלוח אנכי לדבר אליך ולבשרך את זאת׃"],["49","1","20","보라, 때가 되면 이루어질 내 말을 믿지 않았으니, 이 일이 일어나는 날까지 너는 벙어리가 되어 말을 못하게 될 것이다.”","때가 오면 이루어질 내 말을 믿지 않았으니 이 일이 이루어지는 날까지 너는 벙어리가 되어 말을 못하게 될 것이다.\"","보라 이 일이 되는 날까지 네가 말 못하는 자가 되어 능히 말을 못하리니 이는 네가 내 말을 믿지 아니함이거니와 때가 이르면 내 말이 이루어지리라 하더라","보라 이 일의 되는 날까지 네가 벙어리가 되어 능히 말을 못하리니 이는 내 말을 네가 믿지 아니함이어니와 때가 이르면 내 말이 이루리라 하더라","그러나 네가 내 말을 믿지 않으니 너는 아들을 낳을 때까지 벙어리가 되어 말을 못하게 될 것이다. 때가 되면 내 말대로 다 이루어질 것이다.\"","But now you will be speechless and unable to talk until the day these things take place, because you did not believe my words, which will be fulfilled at their proper time.”","And, behold, thou shalt be dumb, and not able to speak, until the day that these things shall be performed, because thou believest not my words, which shall be fulfilled in their season.","And now you will be silent and not able to speak until the day this happens, because you did not believe my words, which will come true at their proper time.\"","Et ecce: eris tacens et non poteris loqui usque in diem, quo haec fiant, pro eo quod non credidisti verbis meis, quae implebuntur in tempore suo “.","והנה תאלם ולא תוכל לדבר עד היום אשר תהיה זאת תחת כי לא האמנת בדברי אשר ימלאו למועדם׃"],["49","1","21","한편 즈카르야를 기다리던 백성은 그가 성소 안에서 너무 지체하므로 이상하게 여겼다.","그러는 동안 사람들은 즈가리야가 나오기를 기다리고 있었는데 그가 성소 안에 오랫동안 머물고 있으므로 이상하게 여겼다.","백성들이 사가랴를 기다리며 그가 성전 안에서 지체함을 이상히 여기더라","백성들이 사가랴를 기다리며 그의 성소 안에서 지체함을 기이히 여기더니","한편 밖에서 사가랴가 나오기를 기다리고 있던 사람들은 그가 성소 안에서 너무 오래 있는 것을 이상히 여겼다.","Meanwhile the people were waiting for Zechariah and were amazed that he stayed so long in the sanctuary.","And the people waited for Zacharias, and marvelled that he tarried so long in the temple.","Meanwhile, the people were waiting for Zechariah and wondering why he stayed so long in the temple.","Et erat plebs exspectans Zachariam, et mirabantur quod tardaret ipse in templo.","והעם היה מחכה לזכריה ויתמהו כי אחר בהיכל׃"],["49","1","22","그런데 그가 밖으로 나와서 말도 하지 못하자, 사람들은 그가 성소 안에서 어떤 환시를 보았음을 알게 되었다. 그는 사람들에게 몸짓만 할 뿐 줄곧 벙어리로 지냈다.","드디어 그가 밖으로 나왔으나 말을 못하는 것을 보고 그들은 즈가리야가 성소에서 무슨 신비로운 것을 보았음을 알게 되었다. 벙어리가 된 즈가리야는 말을 못하고 손짓으로 시늉만 할 뿐이었다.","그가 나와서 그들에게 말을 못하니 백성들이 그가 성전 안에서 환상을 본 줄 알았더라 그가 몸짓으로 뜻을 표시하며 그냥 말 못하는 대로 있더니","그가 나와서 저희에게 말을 못하니 백성들이 그 성소 안에서 이상을 본줄 알았더라 그가 형용으로 뜻을 표시하며 그냥 벙어리대로 있더니","드디어 그가 밖으로 나왔으나 말을 하지 못했다. 사람들은 그가 하는 몸짓으로 보아 성소 안에서 신비로운 환상을 본 줄 알게 되었다.","But when he came out, he was unable to speak to them, and they realized that he had seen a vision in the sanctuary. He was gesturing to them but remained mute.","And when he came out, he could not speak unto them: and they perceived that he had seen a vision in the temple: for he beckoned unto them, and remained speechless.","When he came out, he could not speak to them. They realized he had seen a vision in the temple, for he kept making signs to them but remained unable to speak.","Egressus autem non poterat loqui ad illos, et cognoverunt quod visionem vidisset in templo; et ipse erat innuens illis et permansit mutus.","ויהי בצאתו לא יכל לדבר אליהם וידעו כי מראה ראה בהיכל וירמז להם ועודנו נאלם׃"],["49","1","23","그러다가 봉직 기간이 차자 집으로 돌아갔다.","즈가리야는 사제 당번의 기간이 끝나서 집으로 돌아왔다.","그 직무의 날이 다 되매 집으로 돌아가니라","그 직무의 날이 다 되매 집으로 돌아가니라","사가랴는 성소의 책임기간이 끝나자 집으로 돌아갔다.","Then, when his days of ministry were completed, he went home.","And it came to pass, that, as soon as the days of his ministration were accomplished, he departed to his own house.","When his time of service was completed, he returned home.","Et factum est, ut impleti sunt dies officii eius, abiit in domum suam.","ויהי כאשר מלאו ימי עבדתו וילך לו אל ביתו׃"],["49","1","24","그 뒤에 그의 아내 엘리사벳이 잉태하였다. 엘리사벳은 다섯 달 동안 숨어 지내며 이렇게 말하였다.","그 뒤에 그의 아내 엘리사벳은 아기를 가지게 되어 다섯 달 동안 들어앉아 있으면서","이 후에 그의 아내 엘리사벳이 잉태하고 다섯 달 동안 숨어 있으며 이르되","이 후에 그 아내 엘리사벳이 수태하고 다섯 달 동안 숨어 있으며 가로되","그후에 그의 아내 엘리사벳은 아기를 갖게 되어 다섯 달 동안 집안에만 있었다.","After this time his wife Elizabeth conceived, and she went into seclusion for five months, saying,","And after those days his wife Elisabeth conceived, and hid herself five months, saying,","After this his wife Elizabeth became pregnant and for five months remained in seclusion.","Post hos autem dies concepit Elisabeth uxor eius et occultabat se mensibus quinque dicens:","ויהי אחרי הימים האלה ותהר אלישבע אשתו ותתחבא חמשה חדשים ותאמר׃"],["49","1","25","“내가 사람들 사이에서 겪어야 했던 치욕을 없애 주시려고 주님께서 굽어보시어 나에게 이 일을 해 주셨구나.”","\"마침내 주님께서 나를 이렇게 도와주셔서 나도 이제는 사람들 앞에 부끄럽지 않게 되었구나.\" 하고 생각하였다.","주께서 나를 돌보시는 날에 사람들 앞에서 내 부끄러움을 없게 하시려고 이렇게 행하심이라 하더라","주께서 나를 돌아 보시는 날에 인간에 내 부끄러움을 없게 하시려고 이렇게 행하심이라 하더라","엘리사벳은 \"이제 아기를 낳지 못하던 내 수치를 벗겨 주시니 주님은 얼마나 은혜로우신 분인가!\" 하고 말하였다.","“So has the Lord done for me at a time when he has seen fit to take away my disgrace before others.”","Thus hath the Lord dealt with me in the days wherein he looked on me, to take away my reproach among men.","\"The Lord has done this for me,\" she said. \"In these days he has shown his favor and taken away my disgrace among the people.\"","Sic mihi fecit Dominus in diebus, quibus respexit auferre opprobrium meum inter homines.","ככה עשה לי יהוה בימי פקדו אותי לאסף את חרפתי בתוך בני אדם׃"],["49","1","26","여섯째 달에 하느님께서는 가브리엘 천사를 갈릴래아 지방 나자렛이라는 고을로 보내시어,","엘리사벳이 아기를 가진 지 여섯 달이 되었을 때에 하느님께서는 천사 가브리엘을 갈릴래아 지방 나자렛이라는 동네로 보내시어","여섯째 달에 천사 가브리엘이 하나님의 보내심을 받아 갈릴리 나사렛이란 동네에 가서","여섯째 달에 천사 가브리엘이 하나님의 보내심을 받들어 갈릴리 나사렛이란 동네에 가서","엘리사벳이 아기를 가진 지 여섯 달 되었을 때였다. 하나님께서는 천사 가브리엘을 갈릴리의 나사렛이라는 동네로 보내셔서","In the sixth month, the angel Gabriel was sent from God to a town of Galilee called Nazareth,","And in the sixth month the angel Gabriel was sent from God unto a city of Galilee, named Nazareth,","In the sixth month, God sent the angel Gabriel to Nazareth, a town in Galilee,","In mense autem sexto missus est angelus Gabriel a Deo in civitatem Galilaeae, cui nomen Nazareth,","ויהי בחדש הששי וישלח המלאך גבריאל מאת האלהים גלילה אל עיר אשר שמה נצרת׃"],["49","1","27","다윗 집안의 요셉이라는 사람과 약혼한 처녀를 찾아가게 하셨다. 그 처녀의 이름은 마리아였다.","다윗 가문의 요셉이라는 사람과 약혼한 처녀를 찾아가게 하셨다. 그 처녀의 이름은 마리아였다.","다윗의 자손 요셉이라 하는 사람과 약혼한 처녀에게 이르니 그 처녀의 이름은 마리아라","다윗의 자손 요셉이라 하는 사람과 정혼한 처녀에게 이르니 그 처녀의 이름은 마리아라","다윗왕의 가문에 속한 요셉이라는 사람과 약혼할 처녀 마리아를 찾아가도록 하셨다.","to a virgin betrothed to a man named Joseph, of the house of David, and the virgin’s name was Mary.","To a virgin espoused to a man whose name was Joseph, of the house of David; and the virgin's name was Mary.","to a virgin pledged to be married to a man named Joseph, a descendant of David. The virgin's name was Mary.","ad virginem desponsatam viro, cui nomen erat Ioseph de domo David, et nomen virginis Maria.","אל בתולה מארשה לאיש אשר שמו יוסף מבית דוד ושם הבתולה מרים׃"],["49","1","28","천사가 마리아의 집으로 들어가 말하였다. “은총이 가득한 이여, 기뻐하여라. 주님께서 너와 함께 계시다.”","천사는 마리아의 집으로 들어가, \"은총을 가득히 받은 이여, 기뻐하여라. 주께서 너와 함께 계신다.\" 하고 인사하였다.","그에게 들어가 이르되 은혜를 받은 자여 평안할지어다 주께서 너와 함께 하시도다 하니","그에게 들어가 가로되 은혜를 받은 자여 평안할찌어다 주께서 너와 함께하시도다 하니","가브리엘이 마리아에게 나타나 말하였다. \"기뻐하여라, 은혜를 입은 이여. 주께서 너와 함께 하신다.\"","And coming to her, he said, “Hail, favored one! The Lord is with you.”","And the angel came in unto her, and said, Hail, thou that art highly favoured, the Lord is with thee: blessed art thou among women.","The angel went to her and said, \"Greetings, you who are highly favored! The Lord is with you.\"","Et ingressus ad eam dixit:  “Ave, gratia plena, Dominus tecum “.","ויבא המלאך אליה החדרה ויאמר שלום לך אשת חן יהוה עמך ברוכה את בנשים׃"],["49","1","29","이 말에 마리아는 몹시 놀랐다. 그리고 이 인사말이 무슨 뜻인가 하고 곰곰이 생각하였다.","마리아는 몹시 당황하며 도대체 그 인사말이 무슨 뜻일까 하고 곰곰이 생각하였다.","처녀가 그 말을 듣고 놀라 이런 인사가 어찌함인가 생각하매","처녀가 그 말을 듣고 놀라 이런 인사가 어찌함인고 생각하매","놀라고 당황한 마리아는 천사의 말이 도대체 무슨 뜻일까 하고 생각하였다.","But she was greatly troubled at what was said and pondered what sort of greeting this might be.","And when she saw him, she was troubled at his saying, and cast in her mind what manner of salutation this should be.","Mary was greatly troubled at his words and wondered what kind of greeting this might be.","Ipsa autem turbata est in sermone eius et cogitabat qualis esset ista salutatio.","והיא בראותה נבהלה לדברו ותאמר בלבה מה היא הברכה הזאת׃"],["49","1","30","천사가 다시 마리아에게 말하였다. “두려워하지 마라, 마리아야. 너는 하느님의 총애를 받았다.","그러자 천사는 다시 \"두려워하지 마라, 마리아. 너는 하느님의 은총을 받았다.","천사가 이르되 마리아여 무서워하지 말라 네가 하나님께 은혜를 입었느니라","천사가 일러 가로되 마리아여 무서워 말라 네가 하나님께 은혜를 얻었느니라","천사가 말하였다. \"마리아여, 두려워하지 맡아라. 하나님께서 너에게 놀라운 은혜를 내리셨다.","Then the angel said to her, “Do not be afraid, Mary, for you have found favor with God.","And the angel said unto her, Fear not, Mary: for thou hast found favour with God.","But the angel said to her, \"Do not be afraid, Mary, you have found favor with God.","Et ait angelus ei:  “Ne timeas, Maria; invenisti enim gratiam apud Deum.","ויאמר לה המלאך אל תיראי מרים כי מצאת חן לפני האלהים׃"],["49","1","31","보라, 이제 네가 잉태하여 아들을 낳을 터이니 그 이름을 예수라 하여라.","이제 아기를 가져 아들을 낳을 터이니 이름을 예수라 하여라.","보라 네가 잉태하여 아들을 낳으리니 그 이름을 예수라 하라","보라 네가 수태하여 아들을 낳으리니 그 이름을 예수라 하라","너는 이제 곧 임신하여 아들을 낳게 될 것이니 그 아기의 이름을 예수라 하여라.","Behold, you will conceive in your womb and bear a son, and you shall name him Jesus.","And, behold, thou shalt conceive in thy womb, and bring forth a son, and shalt call his name JESUS.","You will be with child and give birth to a son, and you are to give him the name Jesus.","Et ecce concipies in utero et paries filium et vocabis nomen eius Iesum.",null],["49","1","32","그분께서는 큰 인물이 되시고 지극히 높으신 분의 아드님이라 불리실 것이다. 주 하느님께서 그분의 조상 다윗의 왕좌를 그분께 주시어,","그 아기는 위대한 분이 되어 지극히 높으신 하느님의 아들이라 불릴 것이다. 주 하느님께서 그에게 조상 다윗의 왕위를 주시어","그가 큰 자가 되고 지극히 높으신 이의 아들이라 일컬어질 것이요 주 하나님께서 그 조상 다윗의 왕위를 그에게 주시리니","저가 큰 자가 되고 지극히 높으신 이의 아들이라 일컬을 것이요 주 하나님께서 그 조상 다윗의 위를 저에게 주시리니","그는 위대한 분이 될 것이며 하나님의 아들이라 불릴 것이다. 주 하나님께서는 그에게 조상 다윗의 왕위를 주실 것이다.","He will be great and will be called Son of the Most High, and the Lord God will give him the throne of David his father,","He shall be great, and shall be called the Son of the Highest: and the Lord God shall give unto him the throne of his father David:","He will be great and will be called the Son of the Most High. The Lord God will give him the throne of his father David,","Hic erit magnus et Filius Altissimi vocabitur, et dabit illi Dominus Deus sedem David patris eius,",null],["49","1","33","그분께서 야곱 집안을 영원히 다스리시리니 그분의 나라는 끝이 없을 것이다.”","야곱의 후손을 영원히 다스리는 왕이 되겠고 그의 나라는 끝이 없을 것이다.\" 하고 일러주었다.","영원히 야곱의 집을 왕으로 다스리실 것이며 그 나라가 무궁하리라","영원히 야곱의 집에 왕노릇 하실 것이며 그 나라가 무궁하리라","그는 이스라엘을 영원히 다스리고 그의 나라는 끝이 없을 것이다.\"","and he will rule over the house of Jacob forever, and of his kingdom there will be no end.”","And he shall reign over the house of Jacob for ever; and of his kingdom there shall be no end.","and he will reign over the house of Jacob forever; his kingdom will never end.\"","et regnabit super domum Iacob in aeternum, et regni eius non erit finis “.",null],["49","1","34","마리아가 천사에게, “저는 남자를 알지 못하는데, 어떻게 그런 일이 있을 수 있겠습니까?” 하고 말하자,","이 말을 듣고 마리아가 \"이 몸은 처녀입니다. 어떻게 그런 일이 있을 수 있겠습니까?\" 하자","마리아가 천사에게 말하되 나는 남자를 알지 못하니 어찌 이 일이 있으리이까","마리아가 천사에게 말하되 나는 사내를 알지 못하니 어찌 이 일이 있으리이까","마리아가 천사에게 물었다. \"하지만 처녀인 내가 어떻게 아기를 가질 수 있겠습니까?\"","But Mary said to the angel, “How can this be, since I have no relations with a man?”","Then said Mary unto the angel, How shall this be, seeing I know not a man?","\"How will this be,\" Mary asked the angel, \"since I am a virgin?\"","Dixit autem Maria ad angelum:  “Quomodo fiet istud, quoniam virum non cognosco? “.",null],["49","1","35","천사가 마리아에게 대답하였다. “성령께서 너에게 내려오시고 지극히 높으신 분의 힘이 너를 덮을 것이다. 그러므로 태어날 아기는 거룩하신 분, 하느님의 아드님이라고 불릴 것이다.","천사는 이렇게 대답하였다. \"성령이 너에게 내려오시고 지극히 높으신 분의 힘이 감싸주실 것이다. 그러므로 태어나실 그 거룩한 아기를 하느님의 아들이라 부르게 될 것이다.","천사가 대답하여 이르되 성령이 네게 임하시고 지극히 높으신 이의 능력이 너를 덮으시리니 이러므로 나실 바 거룩한 이는 하나님의 아들이라 일컬어지리라","천사가 대답하여 가로되 성령이 네게 임하시고 지극히 높으신 이의 능력이 너를 덮으시리니 이러므로 나실바 거룩한 자는 하나님의 아들이라 일컬으리라","천사가 대답하였다. \"성령께서 네게 임하시고 하나님의 능력이 너를 감싸 주실 것이다. 그러므로 네게서 태어날 아기는 거룩한 분이며 하나님의 아들이시다.","And the angel said to her in reply, “The holy Spirit will come upon you, and the power of the Most High will overshadow you. Therefore the child to be born will be called holy, the Son of God.","And the angel answered and said unto her, The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power of the Highest shall overshadow thee: therefore also that holy thing which shall be born of thee shall be called the Son of God.","The angel answered, \"The Holy Spirit will come upon you, and the power of the Most High will overshadow you. So the holy one to be born will be called the Son of God.","Et respondens angelus dixit ei:  “Spiritus Sanctus superveniet in te, et virtus Altissimi obumbrabit tibi: ideoque et quod nascetur sanctum, vocabitur Filius Dei.",null],["49","1","36","네 친척 엘리사벳을 보아라. 그 늙은 나이에도 아들을 잉태하였다. 아이를 못낳는 여자라고 불리던 그가 임신한 지 여섯 달이 되었다.","네 친척 엘리사벳을 보아라. 아기를 낳지 못하는 여자라고들 하였지만, 그 늙은 나이에도 아기를 가진 지가 벌써 여섯 달이나 되었다.","보라 네 친족 엘리사벳도 늙어서 아들을 배었느니라 본래 임신하지 못한다고 알려진 이가 이미 여섯 달이 되었나니","보라 네 친족 엘리사벳도 늙어서 아들을 배었느니라 본래 수태하지 못한다 하던 이가 이미 여섯 달이 되었나니","네 친척 엘리사벳도 늙은 나이에 아기를 가졌다. 사람들은 아기를 낳지 못하는 여자라고 하였으나, 그가 임신한 지 이미 여섯 달이나 되었다.","And behold, Elizabeth, your relative, has also conceived a son in her old age, and this is the sixth month for her who was called barren;","And, behold, thy cousin Elisabeth, she hath also conceived a son in her old age: and this is the sixth month with her, who was called barren.","Even Elizabeth your relative is going to have a child in her old age, and she who was said to be barren is in her sixth month.","Et ecce Elisabeth cognata tua et ipsa concepit filium in senecta sua, et hic mensis est sextus illi, quae vocatur sterilis,",null],["49","1","37","하느님께는 불가능한 일이 없다.”","하느님께서 하시는 일은 안 되는 것이 없다.\"","대저 하나님의 모든 말씀은 능하지 못하심이 없느니라","대저 하나님의 모든 말씀은 능치 못하심이 없느니라","하나님께서 약속하신 것은 무엇이나 다 그대로 이루어진다.\"","for nothing will be impossible for God.”","For with God nothing shall be impossible.","For nothing is impossible with God.\"","quia non erit impossibile apud Deum omne verbum “.",null],["49","1","38","마리아가 말하였다. “보십시오, 저는 주님의 종입니다. 말씀하신 대로 저에게 이루어지기를 바랍니다.” 그러자 천사는 마리아에게서 떠나갔다.","이 말을 들은 마리아는 \"이 몸은 주님의 종입니다. 지금 말씀대로 저에게 이루어지기를 바랍니다.\" 하고 대답하였다. 그러자 천사는 마리아에게서 떠나갔다.","마리아가 이르되 주의 여종이오니 말씀대로 내게 이루어지이다 하매 천사가 떠나가니라","마리아가 가로되 주의 계집 종이오니 말씀대로 내게 이루어지이다 하매 천사가 떠나가니라","마리아가 말하였다. \"저는 주님의 종입니다. 주께서 원하시는 대로 기꺼이 따르겠습니다. 이 모든 말씀이 그대로 이루어지기를 바랍니다.\" 그러자 천사는 사라졌다.","Mary said, “Behold, I am the handmaid of the Lord. May it be done to me according to your word.” Then the angel departed from her.","And Mary said, Behold the handmaid of the Lord; be it unto me according to thy word. And the angel departed from her.","\"I am the Lord's servant,\" Mary answered. \"May it be to me as you have said.\" Then the angel left her.","Dixit autem Maria:  “Ecce ancilla Domini; fiat mihi secundum verbum tuum “. Et discessit ab illa angelus.",null],["49","1","39","그 무렵에 마리아는 길을 떠나, 서둘러 유다 산악 지방에 있는 한 고을로 갔다.","며칠 뒤에 마리아는 길을 떠나 걸음을 서둘러 유다 산골에 있는 한 동네를 찾아가서","이 때에 마리아가 일어나 빨리 산골로 가서 유대 한 동네에 이르러","이 때에 마리아가 일어나 빨리 산중에 가서 유대 한 동네에 이르러","며칠 뒤에 마리아는 발길을 서둘러 사가랴가 사는 유대 산간 동네로 엘리사벳을 찾아갔다.","During those days Mary set out and traveled to the hill country in haste to a town of Judah,","And Mary arose in those days, and went into the hill country with haste, into a city of Juda;","At that time Mary got ready and hurried to a town in the hill country of Judea,","Exsurgens autem Maria in diebus illis abiit in montana cum festinatione in civitatem Iudae",null],["49","1","40","그리고 즈카르야의 집에 들어가 엘리사벳에게 인사하였다.","즈가리야의 집에 들어가 엘리사벳에게 문안을 드렸다.","사가랴의 집에 들어가 엘리사벳에게 문안하니","사가랴의 집에 들어가 엘리사벳에게 문안하니","(39절에 포함되어 있음)","where she entered the house of Zechariah and greeted Elizabeth.","And entered into the house of Zacharias, and saluted Elisabeth.","where she entered Zechariah's home and greeted Elizabeth.","et intravit in domum Zachariae et salutavit Elisabeth.",null],["49","1","41","엘리사벳이 마리아의 인사말을 들을 때 그의 태 안에서 아기가 뛰놀았다. 엘리사벳은 성령으로 가득 차","엘리사벳이 마리아의 문안을 받았을 때에 그의 뱃속에 든 아기가 뛰놀았다. 엘리사벳은 성령을 가득히 받아","엘리사벳이 마리아가 문안함을 들으매 아이가 복중에서 뛰노는지라 엘리사벳이 성령의 충만함을 받아","엘리사벳이 마리아의 문안함을 들으매 아이가 복중에서 뛰노는지라 엘리사벳이 성령의 충만함을 입어","마리아의 문안 인사를 받을 때에 엘리사벳의 태중에 있는 아기가 뛰놀았고 엘리사벳은 성령이 충만하였다.","When Elizabeth heard Mary’s greeting, the infant leaped in her womb, and Elizabeth, filled with the holy Spirit,","And it came to pass, that, when Elisabeth heard the salutation of Mary, the babe leaped in her womb; and Elisabeth was filled with the Holy Ghost:","When Elizabeth heard Mary's greeting, the baby leaped in her womb, and Elizabeth was filled with the Holy Spirit.","Et factum est, ut audivit salutationem Mariae Elisabeth, exsultavit infans in utero eius, et repleta est Spiritu Sancto Elisabeth",null],["49","1","42","큰 소리로 외쳤다. “당신은 여인들 가운데에서 가장 복되시며 당신 태중의 아기도 복되십니다.","큰소리로 외쳤다. \"모든 여자들 가운데 가장 복되시며 태중의 아드님 또한 복되십니다.","큰 소리로 불러 이르되 여자 중에 네가 복이 있으며 네 태중의 아이도 복이 있도다","큰 소리로 불러 가로되 여자 중에 네가 복이 있으며 네 태중의 아이도 복이 있도다","엘리사벳이 큰소리로 말하였다. \"마리아는 모든 여자들 가운데서 가장 큰 복을 받았고 태중에 있는 아기도 복받은 분이다.","cried out in a loud voice and said, “Most blessed are you among women, and blessed is the fruit of your womb.","And she spake out with a loud voice, and said, Blessed art thou among women, and blessed is the fruit of thy womb.","In a loud voice she exclaimed: \"Blessed are you among women, and blessed is the child you will bear!","et exclamavit voce magna et dixit:  “Benedicta tu inter mulieres, et benedictus fructus ventris tui.",null],["49","1","43","내 주님의 어머니께서 저에게 오시다니 어찌 된 일입니까?","주님의 어머니께서 나를 찾아주시다니 어찌된 일입니까?","내 주의 어머니가 내게 나아오니 이 어찌 된 일인가","내 주의 모친이 내게 나아오니 이 어찌 된 일인고","내 주님의 어머니가 나를 찾아 주다니 이 얼마나 영광스러운 일인가!","And how does this happen to me, that the mother of my Lord should come to me?","And whence is this to me, that the mother of my Lord should come to me?","But why am I so favored, that the mother of my Lord should come to me?","Et unde hoc mihi, ut veniat mater Domini mei ad me?",null],["49","1","44","보십시오, 당신의 인사말 소리가 제 귀에 들리자 저의 태 안에서 아기가 즐거워 뛰놀았습니다.","문안의 말씀이 내 귀를 울렸을 때에 내 태중의 아기도 기뻐하며 뛰놀았습니다.","보라 네 문안하는 소리가 내 귀에 들릴 때에 아이가 내 복중에서 기쁨으로 뛰놀았도다","보라 네 문안하는 소리가 내 귀에 들릴 때에 아이가 내 복중에서 기쁨으로 뛰놀았도다","마리아의 인사하는 소리를 들을 때 내 태중의 아기가 기뻐서 뛰놀았다.","For at the moment the sound of your greeting reached my ears, the infant in my womb leaped for joy.","For, lo, as soon as the voice of thy salutation sounded in mine ears, the babe leaped in my womb for joy.","As soon as the sound of your greeting reached my ears, the baby in my womb leaped for joy.","Ecce enim ut facta est vox salutationis tuae in auribus meis, exsultavit in gaudio infans in utero meo.",null],["49","1","45","행복하십니다, 주님께서 하신 말씀이 이루어지리라고 믿으신 분!”","주님께서 약속하신 말씀이 꼭 이루어지리라 믿으셨으니 정녕 복되십니다.\"","주께서 하신 말씀이 반드시 이루어지리라고 믿은 그 여자에게 복이 있도다","믿은 여자에게 복이 있도다 주께서 그에게 하신 말씀이 반드시 이루리라","하나님이 이루겠다고 말씀하신 것을 믿은 마리아는 참으로 복된 여인이다.\"","Blessed are you who believed that what was spoken to you by the Lord would be fulfilled.”","And blessed is she that believed: for there shall be a performance of those things which were told her from the Lord.","Blessed is she who has believed that what the Lord has said to her will be accomplished!\"","Et beata, quae credidit, quoniam perficientur ea, quae dicta sunt ei a Domino “.",null],["49","1","46","그러자 마리아가 말하였다. “내 영혼이 주님을 찬송하고","이 말을 듣고 마리아는 이렇게 노래를 불렀다. \"내 영혼이 주님을 찬양하며","마리아가 이르되 내 영혼이 주를 찬양하며","마리아가 가로되 내 영혼이 주를 찬양하며","마리아가 노래하였다. \"오, 이 몸이 주님을 찬양하며","And Mary said: “My soul proclaims the greatness of the Lord;","And Mary said, My soul doth magnify the Lord,","And Mary said: \"My soul glorifies the Lord","Et ait Maria:  “Magnificat anima mea Dominum,",null],["49","1","47","내 마음이 나의 구원자 하느님 안에서 기뻐 뛰니","내 구세주 하느님을 생각하는 기쁨에 이 마음 설렙니다.","내 마음이 하나님 내 구주를 기뻐하였음은","내 마음이 하나님 내 구주를 기뻐하였음은","내 구주 하나님을 기뻐함은","my spirit rejoices in God my savior.","And my spirit hath rejoiced in God my Saviour.","and my spirit rejoices in God my Savior,","et exsultavit spiritus meus in Deo salvatore meo,",null],["49","1","48","그분께서 당신 종의 비천함을 굽어보셨기 때문입니다. 이제부터 과연 모든 세대가 나를 행복하다 하리니","2)주께서 여종의 비천한 신세를 돌보셨습니다. 이제부터는 온 백성이 나를 복되다 하리니 칠십인역 1사무 1:11.","그의 여종의 비천함을 돌보셨음이라 보라 이제 후로는 만세에 나를 복이 있다 일컬으리로다","그 계집종의 비천함을 돌아 보셨음이라 보라 이제 후로는 만세에 나를 복이 있다 일컬으리로다","주님이 비천한 계집종을 돌보셨음이라. 이제부터는 모든 세대가 나를 하나님의 복을 받은 자라 하리니","For he has looked upon his handmaid’s lowliness; behold, from now on will all ages call me blessed.","For he hath regarded the low estate of his handmaiden: for, behold, from henceforth all generations shall call me blessed.","for he has been mindful of the humble state of his servant. From now on all generations will call me blessed,","quia respexit humilitatem ancillae suae. Ecce enim ex hoc beatam me dicent omnes generationes,",null],["49","1","49","전능하신 분께서 나에게 큰일을 하셨기 때문입니다. 그분의 이름은 거룩하고","전능하신 분께서 나에게 큰일을 해주신 덕분입니다. 주님은 거룩하신 분,","능하신 이가 큰 일을 내게 행하셨으니 그 이름이 거룩하시며","능하신 이가 큰 일을 내게 행하셨으니 그 이름이 거룩하시며","전능하시고 거룩하신 그분이 내게 큰일을 하셨음이라.","The Mighty One has done great things for me, and holy is his name.","For he that is mighty hath done to me great things; and holy is his name.","for the Mighty One has done great things for me--holy is his name.","quia fecit mihi magna, qui potens est, et sanctum nomen eius,",null],["49","1","50","그분의 자비는 대대로 당신을 경외하는 이들에게 미칩니다.","3)주님을 두려워하는 이들에게는 대대로 자비를 베푸십니다. 시편 103:13, 17.","긍휼하심이 두려워하는 자에게 대대로 이르는도다","긍휼하심이 두려워하는 자에게 대대로 이르는도다","그분의 자비는 그분을 경외하는 자들에게 대대로 있으리로다.","His mercy is from age to age to those who fear him.","And his mercy is on them that fear him from generation to generation.","His mercy extends to those who fear him, from generation to generation.","et misericordia eius in progenies et progenies timentibus eum.",null],["49","1","51","그분께서는 당신 팔로 권능을 떨치시어 마음속 생각이 교만한 자들을 흩으셨습니다.","주님은 전능하신 팔을 펼치시어 마음이 교만한 자들을 흩으셨습니다.","그의 팔로 힘을 보이사 마음의 생각이 교만한 자들을 흩으셨고","그의 팔로 힘을 보이사 마음의 생각이 교만한 자들을 흩으셨고","그분의 팔이 능력을 베푸심이여! 교만한 자들을 흩으셨도다!","He has shown might with his arm, dispersed the arrogant of mind and heart.","He hath shewed strength with his arm; he hath scattered the proud in the imagination of their hearts.","He has performed mighty deeds with his arm; he has scattered those who are proud in their inmost thoughts.","Fecit potentiam in brachio suo, dispersit superbos mente cordis sui;",null],["49","1","52","통치자들을 왕좌에서 끌어내리시고 비천한 이들을 들어 높이셨으며","권세 있는 자들을 그 자리에서 내치시고 보잘것없는 이들을 높이셨으며","권세 있는 자를 그 위에서 내리치셨으며 비천한 자를 높이셨고","권세 있는 자를 그 위에서 내리치셨으며 비천한 자를 높이셨고","그분은 왕들을 그들의 왕좌에서 쫓아내시고 천한 자들을 높이셨도다.","He has thrown down the rulers from their thrones but lifted up the lowly.","He hath put down the mighty from their seats, and exalted them of low degree.","He has brought down rulers from their thrones but has lifted up the humble.","deposuit potentes de sede et exaltavit humiles;",null],["49","1","53","굶주린 이들을 좋은 것으로 배불리시고 부유한 자들을 빈손으로 내치셨습니다.","배고픈 사람은 좋은 것으로 배불리시고 부요한 사람은 빈손으로 돌려보내셨습니다.","주리는 자를 좋은 것으로 배불리셨으며 부자는 빈 손으로 보내셨도다","주리는 자를 좋은 것으로 배불리셨으며 부자를 공수로 보내셨도다","그분은 마음이 갈급한 자들을 만족하게 하시고 부자를 빈손으로 돌려보냈도다.","The hungry he has filled with good things; the rich he has sent away empty.","He hath filled the hungry with good things; and the rich he hath sent empty away.","He has filled the hungry with good things but has sent the rich away empty.","esurientes implevit bonis et divites dimisit inanes.",null],["49","1","54","당신의 자비를 기억하시어 당신 종 이스라엘을 거두어 주셨으니","주님은 약속하신 자비를 기억하시어 당신의 종 이스라엘을 도우셨습니다.","그 종 이스라엘을 도우사 긍휼히 여기시고 기억하시되","그 종 이스라엘을 도우사 긍휼히 여기시고 기억하시되","그분의 종 이스라엘을 도우심이여! 자비를 베푸시마 하신 약속을 잊지 않으셨도다.","He has helped Israel his servant, remembering his mercy,","He hath holpen his servant Israel, in remembrance of his mercy;","He has helped his servant Israel, remembering to be merciful","Suscepit Israel puerum suum, recordatus misericordiae,",null],["49","1","55","우리 조상들에게 말씀하신 대로 그 자비가 아브라함과 그 후손에게 영원히 미칠 것입니다.”","우리 조상들에게 약속하신 대로 그 자비를 아브라함과 그 후손에게 영원토록 베푸실 것입니다.\"","우리 조상에게 말씀하신 것과 같이 아브라함과 그 자손에게 영원히 하시리로다 하니라","우리 조상에게 말씀하신 것과 같이 아브라함과 및 그 자손에게 영원히 하시리로다 하니라","우리 조상 아브라함과 그 후손에게 약속하신 대로 그분의 자비는 영원히 있으리로다.\"","according to his promise to our fathers, to Abraham and to his descendants forever.”","As he spake to our fathers, to Abraham, and to his seed for ever.","to Abraham and his descendants forever, even as he said to our fathers.\"","sicut locutus est ad patres nostros, Abraham et semini eius in saecula “.",null],["49","1","56","마리아는 석 달가량 엘리사벳과 함께 지내다가 자기 집으로 돌아갔다.","마리아는 엘리사벳의 집에서 석 달 가량 함께 지내고 자기 집으로 돌아갔다.","마리아가 석 달쯤 함께 있다가 집으로 돌아가니라","마리아가 석 달쯤 함께 있다가 집으로 돌아가니라","마리아는 석 달쯤 엘리사벳과 같이 지낸 뒤에 자기 집으로 돌아갔다.","Mary remained with her about three months and then returned to her home.","And Mary abode with her about three months, and returned to her own house.","Mary stayed with Elizabeth for about three months and then returned home.","Mansit autem Maria cum illa quasi mensibus tribus et reversa est in domum suam.",null],["49","1","57","엘리사벳은 해산달이 차서 아들을 낳았다.","엘리사벳은 달이 차서 아들을 낳았다.","엘리사벳이 해산할 기한이 차서 아들을 낳으니","엘리사벳이 해산할 기한이 차서 아들을 낳으니","엘리사벳은 달이 차서 아들을 낳았다.","When the time arrived for Elizabeth to have her child she gave birth to a son.","Now Elisabeth's full time came that she should be delivered; and she brought forth a son.","When it was time for Elizabeth to have her baby, she gave birth to a son.","Elisabeth autem impletum est tempus pariendi, et peperit filium.",null],["49","1","58","이웃과 친척들은 주님께서 엘리사벳에게 큰 자비를 베푸셨다는 것을 듣고, 그와 함께 기뻐하였다.","이웃과 친척들은 주께서 엘리사벳에게 놀라운 자비를 베푸셨다는 소식을 듣고 엘리사벳과 함께 기뻐하였다.","이웃과 친족이 주께서 그를 크게 긍휼히 여기심을 듣고 함께 즐거워하더라","이웃과 친족이 주께서 저를 크게 긍휼히 여기심을 듣고 함께 즐거워하더라","그 소문은 이웃과 친척들에게 금방 퍼져 나갔고, 주님이 그 여자에게 베푸신 은혜를 다함께 기뻐하였다.","Her neighbors and relatives heard that the Lord had shown his great mercy toward her, and they rejoiced with her.","And her neighbours and her cousins heard how the Lord had shewed great mercy upon her; and they rejoiced with her.","Her neighbors and relatives heard that the Lord had shown her great mercy, and they shared her joy.","Et audierunt vicini et cognati eius quia magnificavit Dominus misericordiam suam cum illa, et congratulabantur ei.",null],["49","1","59","여드레째 되는 날, 그들은 아기의 할례식에 갔다가 아버지의 이름을 따서 아기를 즈카르야라고 부르려 하였다.","아기가 태어난 지 여드레가 되던 날, 그들은 아기의 할례식에 왔다. 그리고 아버지의 이름을 따서 아기를 즈가리야라고 부르려 하였다.","팔 일이 되매 아이를 할례하러 와서 그 아버지의 이름을 따라 사가랴라 하고자 하더니","팔일이 되매 아이를 할례하러 와서 그 부친의 이름을 따라 사가랴라 하고자 하더니","아기가 태어난 지 여드레째 되던 날, 모든 친척과 이웃들이 할례의식을 치르러 모였다. 그들은 아기의 이름을 그의 아버지를 따라 사가랴라고 부르려 하였다.","When they came on the eighth day to circumcise the child, they were going to call him Zechariah after his father,","And it came to pass, that on the eighth day they came to circumcise the child; and they called him Zacharias, after the name of his father.","On the eighth day they came to circumcise the child, and they were going to name him after his father Zechariah,","Et factum est, in die octavo venerunt circumcidere puerum et vocabant eum nomine patris eius, Zachariam.",null],["49","1","60","그러나 아기 어머니는 “안 됩니다. 요한이라고 불러야 합니다.” 하고 말하였다.","그러나 아기 어머니가 나서서 \"안됩니다. 이 아이의 이름은 요한이라고 해야 합니다.\" 하였다.","그 어머니가 대답하여 이르되 아니라 요한이라 할 것이라 하매","그 모친이 대답하여 가로되 아니라 요한이라 할 것이라 하매","그러나 엘리사벳이 \"안 됩니다. 요한이라고 불러야 합니다\" 하고 말하자","but his mother said in reply, “No. He will be called John.”","And his mother answered and said, Not so; but he shall be called John.","but his mother spoke up and said, \"No! He is to be called John.\"","Et respondens mater eius dixit:  “Nequaquam, sed vocabitur Ioannes “.",null],["49","1","61","그들은 “당신의 친척 가운데에는 그런 이름을 가진 이가 없습니다.” 하며,","사람들은 \"당신 집안에는 그런 이름을 가진 사람이 없지 않습니까?\" 하며","그들이 이르되 네 친족 중에 이 이름으로 이름한 이가 없다 하고","저희가 가로되 네 친족 중에 이 이름으로 이름한 이가 없다 하고","사람들은 \"뭐라구요? 당신의 집안에는 그런 이름을 가진 사람이 아무도 없지 않소?\" 하였다.","But they answered her, “There is no one among your relatives who has this name.”","And they said unto her, There is none of thy kindred that is called by this name.","They said to her, \"There is no one among your relatives who has that name.\"","Et dixerunt ad illam:  “Nemo est in cognatione tua, qui vocetur hoc nomine “.",null],["49","1","62","그 아버지에게 아기의 이름을 무엇이라 하겠느냐고 손짓으로 물었다.","아기 아버지에게 아기의 이름을 무엇이라 하겠느냐고 손짓으로 물었다.","그의 아버지께 몸짓하여 무엇으로 이름을 지으려 하는가 물으니","그 부친께 형용하여 무엇으로 이름하려 하는가 물으니","그래서 그들은 아기 아버지에게 손짓으로 물어 보았다.","So they made signs, asking his father what he wished him to be called.","And they made signs to his father, how he would have him called.","Then they made signs to his father, to find out what he would like to name the child.","Innuebant autem patri eius quem vellet vocari eum.",null],["49","1","63","즈카르야는 글 쓰는 판을 달라고 하여 ‘그의 이름은 요한’이라고 썼다. 그러자 모두 놀라워하였다.","즈가리야는 작은 서판을 달라 하여 \"아기 이름은 요한.\"이라고 썼다. 이것을 보고 사람들이 모두 이상하게 생각하였다.","그가 서판을 달라 하여 그 이름을 요한이라 쓰매 다 놀랍게 여기더라","저가 서판을 달라 하여 그 이름은 요한이라 쓰매 다 기이히 여기더라","사가랴가 손짓으로 서판을 달라고 하여 \"그의 이름은 요한이다\"라고 쓰자 모두 놀랐다.","He asked for a tablet and wrote, “John is his name,” and all were amazed.","And he asked for a writing table, and wrote, saying, His name is John. And they marvelled all.","He asked for a writing tablet, and to everyone's astonishment he wrote, \"His name is John.\"","Et postulans pugillarem scripsit dicens:  “Ioannes est nomen eius “. Et mirati sunt universi.",null],["49","1","64","그때에 즈카르야는 즉시 입이 열리고 혀가 풀려 말을 하기 시작하면서 하느님을 찬미하였다.","바로 그 순간에 즈가리야는 입이 열리고 혀가 풀려서 말을 하게 되어 하느님을 찬미하였다.","이에 그 입이 곧 열리고 혀가 풀리며 말을 하여 하나님을 찬송하니","이에 그 입이 곧 열리고 혀가 풀리며 말을 하여 하나님을 찬송하니","그 순간에 사가랴는 다시 말을 할 수 있게 되어 하나님을 찬양하였다.","Immediately his mouth was opened, his tongue freed, and he spoke blessing God.","And his mouth was opened immediately, and his tongue loosed, and he spake, and praised God.","Immediately his mouth was opened and his tongue was loosed, and he began to speak, praising God.","Apertum est autem ilico os eius et lingua eius, et loquebatur benedicens Deum.",null],["49","1","65","그리하여 이웃이 모두 두려움에 휩싸였다. 그리고 이 모든 일이 유다의 온 산악 지방에서 화제가 되었다.","모든 이웃 사람들은 무서운 생각마저 들었다. 이 일은 유다 산골에 두루 퍼져 이야깃거리가 되었고","그 근처에 사는 자가 다 두려워하고 이 모든 말이 온 유대 산골에 두루 퍼지매","그 근처에 사는 자가 다 두려워하고 이 모든 말이 온 유대 산중에 두루 퍼지매","이웃 사람들은 모두 신기해하였다. 이 소문은 유대 온 산골짜기에 퍼져 나갔다.","Then fear came upon all their neighbors, and all these matters were discussed throughout the hill country of Judea.","And fear came on all that dwelt round about them: and all these sayings were noised abroad throughout all the hill country of Judaea.","The neighbors were all filled with awe, and throughout the hill country of Judea people were talking about all these things.","Et factus est timor super omnes vicinos eorum, et super omnia montana Iudaeae divulgabantur omnia verba haec.",null],["49","1","66","소문을 들은 이들은 모두 그것을 마음에 새기며, “이 아기가 대체 무엇이 될 것인가?” 하고 말하였다. 정녕 주님의 손길이 그를 보살피고 계셨던 것이다.","이 말을 들은 사람들은 모두 이것을 마음에 새기고 \"이 아기가 장차 어떤 사람이 될까?\" 하고 말하였다. 주님의 손길이 그 아기를 보살피고 계신 것이 분명했기 때문이다.","듣는 사람이 다 이 말을 마음에 두며 이르되 이 아이가 장차 어찌 될까 하니 이는 주의 손이 그와 함께 하심이러라","듣는 사람이 다 이 말을 마음에 두며 가로되 이 아이가 장차 어찌 될꼬 하니 이는 주의 손이 저와 함께하심이러라","이 소문을 들은 사람들은 모두 이것을 마음에 새겨 두고 \"이 아기가 장차 어떤 사람이 될까?\" 하고 말하였다. 주의 능력이 그 아기와 함께 하였기 때문이다.","All who heard these things took them to heart, saying, “What, then, will this child be?” For surely the hand of the Lord was with him.","And all they that heard them laid them up in their hearts, saying, What manner of child shall this be! And the hand of the Lord was with him.","Everyone who heard this wondered about it, asking, \"What then is this child going to be?\" For the Lord's hand was with him.","Et posuerunt omnes, qui audierant, in corde suo dicentes:  “Quid putas puer iste erit? “. Etenim manus Domini erat cum illo.",null],["49","1","67","아기의 아버지 즈카르야는 성령으로 가득 차 이렇게 예언하였다.","아기 아버지 즈가리야는 성령을 가득히 받아 예언의 노래를 불렀다.","그 부친 사가랴가 성령의 충만함을 받아 예언하여 이르되","그 부친 사가랴가 성령의 충만함을 입어 예언하여 가로되","그때에 요한의 아버지 사가랴가 성령이 충만하여 이렇게 예언하였다.","Then Zechariah his father, filled with the holy Spirit, prophesied, saying:","And his father Zacharias was filled with the Holy Ghost, and prophesied, saying,","His father Zechariah was filled with the Holy Spirit and prophesied:","Et Zacharias pater eius impletus est Spiritu Sancto et prophetavit dicens:",null],["49","1","68","“주 이스라엘의 하느님께서는 찬미받으소서. 그분께서는 당신 백성을 찾아와 속량하시고","\"찬미하여라, 이스라엘의 주 하느님을! 당신의 백성을 찾아와 해방시키셨으며,","찬송하리로다 주 이스라엘의 하나님이여 그 백성을 돌보사 속량하시며","찬송하리로다 주 이스라엘의 하나님이여 그 백성을 돌아보사 속량하시며","\"주 이스라엘의 하나님을 찬양하여라! 당신의 백성을 찾아오셔서 해방시키셨도다.","“Blessed be the Lord, the God of Israel, for he has visited and brought redemption to his people.","Blessed be the Lord God of Israel; for he hath visited and redeemed his people,","\"Praise be to the Lord, the God of Israel, because he has come and has redeemed his people.","Benedictus Dominus, Deus Israel, quia visitavit et fecit redemptionem plebi suae",null],["49","1","69","당신 종 다윗 집안에서 우리를 위하여 힘센 구원자를 일으키셨습니다.","우리를 구원하실 능력 있는 구세주를 당신의 종 다윗의 가문에서 일으키셨다.","우리를 위하여 구원의 뿔을 그 종 다윗의 집에 일으키셨으니","우리를 위하여 구원의 뿔을 그 종 다윗의 집에 일으키셨으니","위대한 구세주를 당신의 종 다윗의 가문에서 일으켜 우리에게 보내 주셨도다.","He has raised up a horn for our salvation within the house of David his servant,","And hath raised up an horn of salvation for us in the house of his servant David;","He has raised up a horn of salvation for us in the house of his servant David","et erexit cornu salutis nobis in domo David pueri sui,",null],["49","1","70","당신의 거룩한 예언자들의 입을 통하여 예로부터 말씀하신 대로","예로부터 거룩한 예언자들의 입을 빌려 주님께서 말씀하신 대로","이것은 주께서 예로부터 거룩한 선지자의 입으로 말씀하신 바와 같이","이것은 주께서 예로부터 거룩한 선지자의 입으로 말씀하신 바와 같이","오래 전에 당신의 거룩한 예언자들을 통하여 약속하신 그대로","even as he promised through the mouth of his holy prophets from of old:","As he spake by the mouth of his holy prophets, which have been since the world began:","(as he said through his holy prophets of long ago),","sicut locutus est per os sanctorum, qui a saeculo sunt, prophetarum eius,",null],["49","1","71","우리 원수들에게서, 우리를 미워하는 모든 자의 손에서 우리를 구원하시려는 것입니다.","원수들의 손아귀에서 또 우리를 미워하는 모든 사람들의 손에서 우리를 구해 주려 하심이요,","우리 원수에게서와 우리를 미워하는 모든 자의 손에서 구원하시는 일이라","우리 원수에게서와 우리를 미워하는 모든 자의 손에서 구원하시는 구원이라","우리를 원수들에게서 구원하시고 우리를 미워하는 모든 사람에게서 건져내셨도다.","salvation from our enemies and from the hand of all who hate us,","That we should be saved from our enemies, and from the hand of all that hate us;","salvation from our enemies and from the hand of all who hate us--","salutem ex inimicis nostris et de manu omnium, qui oderunt nos;",null],["49","1","72","그분께서는 우리 조상들에게 자비를 베푸시고 당신의 거룩한 계약을 기억하셨습니다.","우리 조상들에게 자비를 베푸시며 당신의 거룩한 계약을 기억하시고","우리 조상을 긍휼히 여기시며 그 거룩한 언약을 기억하셨으니","우리 조상을 긍휼히 여기시며 그 거룩한 언약을 기억하셨으니","우리 조상 아브라함에게 자비를 베푸시고 그에게 주신 거룩한 약속을 기억하셨도다.","to show mercy to our fathers and to be mindful of his holy covenant","To perform the mercy promised to our fathers, and to remember his holy covenant;","to show mercy to our fathers and to remember his holy covenant,","ad faciendam misericordiam cum patribus nostris et memorari testamenti sui sancti,",null],["49","1","73","이 계약은 우리 조상 아브라함에게 하신 맹세로","우리 조상 아브라함에게 맹세하신 대로","곧 우리 조상 아브라함에게 하신 맹세라","곧 우리 조상 아브라함에게 맹세하신 맹세라","(72절에 포함되어 있음)","and of the oath he swore to Abraham our father, and to grant us that,","The oath which he sware to our father Abraham,","the oath he swore to our father Abraham:","iusiurandum, quod iuravit ad Abraham patrem nostrum, daturum se nobis,",null],["49","1","74","원수들 손에서 구원된 우리가 두려움 없이","우리를 원수들의 손아귀에서 구해 내시어","우리가 원수의 손에서 건지심을 받고","우리로 원수의 손에서 건지심을 입고","우리를 원수들에게서 건져 주시고 두려움 없이 하나님을 섬기게 하시며","rescued from the hand of enemies, without fear we might worship him","That he would grant unto us, that we being delivered out of the hand of our enemies might serve him without fear,","to rescue us from the hand of our enemies, and to enable us to serve him without fear","ut sine timore, de manu inimicorum liberati, serviamus illi",null],["49","1","75","한평생 당신 앞에서 거룩하고 의롭게 당신을 섬기도록 해 주시려는 것입니다.","떳떳하게 주님을 섬기며 주님 앞에 한 평생을 거룩하고 올바르게 살게 하심이라.","종신토록 주의 앞에서 성결과 의로 두려움이 없이 섬기게 하리라 하셨도다","종신토록 주의 앞에서 성결과 의로 두려움이 없이 섬기게 하리라 하셨도다","우리를 깨끗하고 올바르게 만드셔서 영원히 그 앞에서 섬기게 하셨도다.","in holiness and righteousness before him all our days.","In holiness and righteousness before him, all the days of our life.","in holiness and righteousness before him all our days.","in sanctitate et iustitia coram ipso omnibus diebus nostris.",null],["49","1","76","아기야, 너는 지극히 높으신 분의 예언자라 불리고 주님을 앞서 가 그분의 길을 준비하리니","아가야, 너는 지극히 높으신 하느님의 예언자 되어 4)주님보다 앞서 와서 그의 길을 닦으며 이사 40:3; 말라 3:1.","이 아이여 네가 지극히 높으신 이의 선지자라 일컬음을 받고 주 앞에 앞서 가서 그 길을 준비하여","이 아이여 네가 지극히 높으신 이의 선지자라 일컬음을 받고 주 앞에 앞서 가서 그 길을 예비하여","내 어린 아들아, 너는 영광스러운 하나님의 예언자라 불리게 되리니 너는 주를 위해 길을 예비하겠음이라.","And you, child, will be called prophet of the Most High, for you will go before the Lord to prepare his ways,","And thou, child, shalt be called the prophet of the Highest: for thou shalt go before the face of the Lord to prepare his ways;","And you, my child, will be called a prophet of the Most High; for you will go on before the Lord to prepare the way for him,","Et tu, puer, propheta Altissimi vocaberis: praeibis enim ante faciem Domini parare vias eius,",null],["49","1","77","죄를 용서받아 구원됨을 주님의 백성에게 깨우쳐 주려는 것이다.","죄를 용서받고 구원받는 길을 주의 백성들에게 알리게 되리니","주의 백성에게 그 죄 사함으로 말미암는 구원을 알게 하리니","주의 백성에게 그 죄 사함으로 말미암는 구원을 알게 하리니","너는 그분의 백성들에게 죄사함을 받고 구원 얻는 길을 알게 할 것이라.","to give his people knowledge of salvation through the forgiveness of their sins,","To give knowledge of salvation unto his people by the remission of their sins,","to give his people the knowledge of salvation through the forgiveness of their sins,","ad dandam scientiam salutis plebi eius in remissionem peccatorum eorum,",null],["49","1","78","우리 하느님의 크신 자비로 높은 곳에서 별이 우리를 찾아오시어","이것은 우리 하느님의 지극한 자비의 덕분이라. 하늘 높은 곳에 구원의 태양을 뜨게 하시어","이는 우리 하나님의 긍휼로 인함이라 이로써 돋는 해가 위로부터 우리에게 임하여","이는 우리 하나님의 긍휼을 인함이라 이로써 돋는 해가 위로부터 우리에게 임하여","이것은 우리 하나님의 자비로운 마음에서 온 것이라. 그분은 아침 해를 높이 떠올려","because of the tender mercy of our God by which the daybreak from on high will visit us","Through the tender mercy of our God; whereby the dayspring from on high hath visited us,","because of the tender mercy of our God, by which the rising sun will come to us from heaven","per viscera misericordiae Dei nostri, in quibus visitabit nos oriens ex alto,",null],["49","1","79","어둠과 죽음의 그늘에 앉아 있는 이들을 비추시고 우리 발을 평화의 길로 이끌어 주실 것이다.”","5)죽음의 그늘 밑 어둠 속에 사는 우리에게 빛을 비추어주시고 우리의 발걸음을 평화의 길로 이끌어주시리라.\"이사 9:2, 58:8, 60:1-2.","어둠과 죽음의 그늘에 앉은 자에게 비치고 우리 발을 평강의 길로 인도하시리로다 하니라","어두움과 죽음의 그늘에 앉은 자에게 비취고 우리 발을 평강의 길로 인도하시리로다 하니라","어둠과 죽음의 그늘에 앉은 자들에게 빛을 비추게 하시고 우리의 발을 평안한 길로 인도하시리로다.\"","to shine on those who sit in darkness and death’s shadow, to guide our feet into the path of peace.”","To give light to them that sit in darkness and in the shadow of death, to guide our feet into the way of peace.","to shine on those living in darkness and in the shadow of death, to guide our feet into the path of peace.\"","illuminare his, qui in tenebris et in umbra mortis sedent, ad dirigendos pedes nostros in viam pacis “.",null],["49","1","80","아기는 자라면서 정신도 굳세어졌다. 그리고 그는 이스라엘 백성 앞에 나타날 때까지 광야에서 살았다.","아기는 날로 몸과 마음이 굳세게 자라났으며 이스라엘 백성들 앞에 나타날 때까지 광야에서 살았다.","아이가 자라며 심령이 강하여지며 이스라엘에게 나타나는 날까지 빈 들에 있으니라","아이가 자라며 심령이 강하여지며 이스라엘에게 나타나는 날까지 빈 들에 있으니라","아기는 하나님의 극진한 사랑을 받으면서 자랐고 이스라엘 사람들 앞에 나타날 때까지 광야에서 살았다.","The child grew and became strong in spirit, and he was in the desert until the day of his manifestation to Israel.","And the child grew, and waxed strong in spirit, and was in the deserts till the day of his shewing unto Israel.","And the child grew and became strong in spirit; and he lived in the desert until he appeared publicly to Israel.","Puer autem crescebat et confortabatur spiritu et erat in deserto usque in diem ostensionis suae ad Israel.",null],["49","2","1","그 무렵 아우구스투스 황제에게서 칙령이 내려, 온 세상이 호적 등록을 하게 되었다.","그 무렵에 로마 황제 아우구스토가 온 천하에 호구 조사령을 내렸다.","그 때에 가이사 아구스도가 영을 내려 천하로 다 호적하라 하였으니","이때에 가이사 아구스도가 영을 내려 천하로 다 호적하라 하였으니","이 무렵에 로마 황제 가이사 아구스도는 전국에 호구조사를 하라는 칙령을 내렸다.","In those days a decree went out from Caesar Augustus that the whole world should be enrolled.","And it came to pass in those days, that there went out a decree from Caesar Augustus that all the world should be taxed.","In those days Caesar Augustus issued a decree that a census should be taken of the entire Roman world.","Factum est autem, in diebus il lis exiit edictum a Caesare Au gusto, ut describeretur universus orbis.","ויהי בימים ההם ותצא דת מאת הקיסר אוגוסטוס לספר את כל ישבי תבל׃"],["49","2","2","이 첫 번째 호적 등록은 퀴리니우스가 시리아 총독으로 있을 때에 실시되었다.","이 첫 번째 호구 조사를 하던 때 시리아에는 퀴리노라는 사람이 총독으로 있었다.","이 호적은 구레뇨가 수리아 총독이 되었을 때에 처음 한 것이라","이 호적은 구레뇨가 수리아 총독 되었을 때에 첫번 한것이라","이 조사는 구레뇨가 수리아 총독으로 있을 때 처음으로 시행한 것이다.","This was the first enrollment, when Quirinius was governor of Syria.","(And this taxing was first made when Cyrenius was governor of Syria.)","(This was the first census that took place while Quirinius was governor of Syria.)","Haec descriptio prima facta est praeside Syriae Quirino.","וזה המפקד היה הראשון בהיות קוריניוס שליט בסוריא׃"],["49","2","3","그래서 모두 호적 등록을 하러 저마다 자기 본향으로 갔다.","그래서 사람들은 등록을 하러 저마다 본고장을 찾아 길을 떠나게 되었다.","모든 사람이 호적하러 각각 고향으로 돌아가매","모든 사람이 호적하러 각각 고향으로 돌아가매","이 칙령에 의하면 모든 사람은 자기 본적지에 가서 등록하도록 되어 있었다.","So all went to be enrolled, each to his own town.","And all went to be taxed, every one into his own city.","And everyone went to his own town to register.","Et ibant omnes, ut profiterentur, singuli in suam civitatem.","וילכו כלם להתפקד איש לעירו׃"],["49","2","4","요셉도 갈릴래아 지방 나자렛 고을을 떠나 유다 지방, 베들레헴이라고 불리는 다윗 고을로 올라갔다. 그가 다윗 집안의 자손이었기 때문이다.","요셉도 갈릴래아 지방의 나자렛 동네를 떠나 유다 지방에 있는 베들레헴이라는 곳으로 갔다. 베들레헴은 다윗 왕이 난 고을이며 요셉은 다윗의 후손이었기 때문이다.","요셉도 다윗의 집 족속이므로 갈릴리 나사렛 동네에서 유대를 향하여 베들레헴이라 하는 다윗의 동네로","요셉도 다윗의 집 족속인 고로 갈릴리 나사렛 동네에서 유대를 향하여 베들레헴이라 하는 다윗의 동네로","그래서 다윗의 후손인 요셉도 다윗왕의 고향인 유대 베들레헴으로 가야 했다. 그는 갈릴리의 나사렛을 떠나 그곳까지 가는 여행길에","And Joseph too went up from Galilee from the town of Nazareth to Judea, to the city of David that is called Bethlehem, because he was of the house and family of David,","And Joseph also went up from Galilee, out of the city of Nazareth, into Judaea, unto the city of David, which is called Bethlehem; (because he was of the house and lineage of David:)","So Joseph also went up from the town of Nazareth in Galilee to Judea, to Bethlehem the town of David, because he belonged to the house and line of David.","Ascendit autem et Ioseph a Galilaea de civitate Nazareth in Iudaeam in civitatem David, quae vocatur Bethlehem, eo quod esset de domo et familia David,","ויעל גם יוסף מן הגליל מעיר נצרת אל יהודה לעיר דוד הנקראה בית לחם כי היה מבית דוד וממשפחתו׃"],["49","2","5","그는 자기와 약혼한 마리아와 함께 호적 등록을 하러 갔는데, 마리아는 임신 중이었다.","요셉은 자기와 약혼한 마리아와 함께 등록하러 갔는데 그 때 마리아는 임신 중이었다.","그 약혼한 마리아와 함께 호적하러 올라가니 마리아가 이미 잉태하였더라","그 정혼한 마리아와 함께 호적하러 올라가니 마리아가 이미 잉태되었더라","이미 만삭이 된 자기 약혼녀 마리아를 데리고 갔다.","to be enrolled with Mary, his betrothed, who was with child.","To be taxed with Mary his espoused wife, being great with child.","He went there to register with Mary, who was pledged to be married to him and was expecting a child.","ut profiteretur cum Maria desponsata sibi, uxore praegnante.","להתפקד עם מרים המארשה לו והיא הרה׃"],["49","2","6","그들이 거기에 머무르는 동안 마리아는 해산 날이 되어,","그들이 베들레헴에 가 머물러 있는 동안 마리아는 달이 차서","거기 있을 그 때에 해산할 날이 차서","거기 있을 그 때에 해산할 날이 차서","그들이 베들레헴에 있는 동안 마리아는 달이 차서","While they were there, the time came for her to have her child,","And so it was, that, while they were there, the days were accomplished that she should be delivered.","While they were there, the time came for the baby to be born,","Factum est autem, cum essent ibi, impleti sunt dies, ut pareret,","ויהי בהיותם שם וימלאו ימיה ללדת׃"],["49","2","7","첫아들을 낳았다. 그들은 아기를 포대기에 싸서 구유에 뉘었다. 여관에는 그들이 들어갈 자리가 없었던 것이다.","드디어 첫아들을 낳았다. 여관에는 그들이 머무를 방이 없었기 때문에 아기는 포대기에 싸서 말구유에 눕혔다.","첫아들을 낳아 강보로 싸서 구유에 뉘었으니 이는 여관에 있을 곳이 없음이러라","맏아들을 낳아 강보로 싸서 구유에 뉘었으니 이는 사관에 있을 곳이 없음이러라","첫아들을 낳았고 강보로 싸서 구유에 뉘었다. 동네 여관이 다 차서 그들이 들어갈 방이 없었기 때문이었다.","and she gave birth to her firstborn son. She wrapped him in swaddling clothes and laid him in a manger, because there was no room for them in the inn.","And she brought forth her firstborn son, and wrapped him in swaddling clothes, and laid him in a manger; because there was no room for them in the inn.","and she gave birth to her firstborn, a son. She wrapped him in cloths and placed him in a manger, because there was no room for them in the inn.","et peperit filium suum primogenitum; et pannis eum involvit et reclinavit eum in praesepio, quia non erat eis locus in deversorio.","ותלד את בנה הבכור ותחתלהו ותשכיבהו באבוס כי לא היה להם מקום במלון׃"],["49","2","8","그 고장에는 들에 살면서 밤에도 양 떼를 지키는 목자들이 있었다.","그 근방 들에는 목자들이 밤을 새워가며 양떼를 지키고 있었다.","그 지역에 목자들이 밤에 밖에서 자기 양 떼를 지키더니","그 지경에 목자들이 밖에서 밤에 자기 양떼를 지키더니","그날밤 동네 밖에 있는 들판에서는 목자들이 양을 지키고 있었다.","Now there were shepherds in that region living in the fields and keeping the night watch over their flock.","And there were in the same country shepherds abiding in the field, keeping watch over their flock by night.","And there were shepherds living out in the fields nearby, keeping watch over their flocks at night.","Et pastores erant in regione eadem vigilantes et custodientes vigilias noctis supra gregem suum.","ורעים היו בארץ ההיא לנים בשדה ושמרים את משמרות הלילה בעדרם׃"],["49","2","9","그런데 주님의 천사가 다가오고 주님의 영광이 그 목자들의 둘레를 비추었다. 그들은 몹시 두려워하였다.","그런데 주님의 영광의 빛이 그들에게 두루 비치면서 주님의 천사가 나타났다. 목자들이 겁에 질려 떠는 것을 보고","주의 사자가 곁에 서고 주의 영광이 그들을 두루 비추매 크게 무서워하는지라","주의 사자가 곁에 서고 주의 영광이 저희를 두루 비취매 크게 무서워하는지라","그런데 갑자기 주님의 영광이 그들을 두루 비추더니 천사가 그들 가운데 나타났다. 그들이 몹시 두려워 하자","The angel of the Lord appeared to them and the glory of the Lord shone around them, and they were struck with great fear.","And, lo, the angel of the Lord came upon them, and the glory of the Lord shone round about them: and they were sore afraid.","An angel of the Lord appeared to them, and the glory of the Lord shone around them, and they were terrified.","Et angelus Domini stetit iuxta illos, et claritas Domini circumfulsit illos, et timuerunt timore magno.","והנה מלאך יהוה נצב עליהם וכבוד יהוה הופיע עליהם מסביב וייראו יראה גדולה׃"],["49","2","10","그러자 천사가 그들에게 말하였다. “두려워하지 마라. 보라, 나는 온 백성에게 큰 기쁨이 될 소식을 너희에게 전한다.","천사는 \"두려워하지 마라. 나는 너희에게 기쁜 소식을 전하러 왔다. 모든 백성들에게 큰 기쁨이 될 소식이다.","천사가 이르되 무서워하지 말라 보라 내가 온 백성에게 미칠 큰 기쁨의 좋은 소식을 너희에게 전하노라","천사가 이르되 무서워 말라 보라 내가 온 백성에게 미칠 큰 기쁨의 좋은 소식을 너희에게 전하노라","천사가 말하였다. \"두려워하지 말아라. 나는 지금까지 너희가 들어 보지 못할 가장 기쁜 소식을 전하러 왔다. 이 소식은 모든 백성에게 큰 기쁨이 될 것이다.","The angel said to them, “Do not be afraid; for behold, I proclaim to you good news of great joy that will be for all the people.","And the angel said unto them, Fear not: for, behold, I bring you good tidings of great joy, which shall be to all people.","But the angel said to them, \"Do not be afraid. I bring you good news of great joy that will be for all the people.","Et dixit illis angelus:  “Nolite timere; ecce enim evangelizo vobis gaudium magnum, quod erit omni populo,","ויאמר אליהם המלאך אל תיראו כי הנני מבשר אתכם שמחה גדולה אשר תהיה לכל העם׃"],["49","2","11","오늘 너희를 위하여 다윗 고을에서 구원자가 태어나셨으니, 주 그리스도이시다.","오늘 밤 너희의 구세주께서 다윗의 고을에 나셨다. 그분은 바로 주님이신 그리스도이시다.","오늘 다윗의 동네에 너희를 위하여 구주가 나셨으니 곧 그리스도 주시니라","오늘날 다윗의 동네에 너희를 위하여 구주가 나셨으니 곧 그리스도 주시니라","오늘밤 베들레헴에서 너희 구주가 나셨다. 그분은 그리스도요, 주님이시다.","For today in the city of David a savior has been born for you who is Messiah and Lord.","For unto you is born this day in the city of David a Saviour, which is Christ the Lord.","Today in the town of David a Savior has been born to you; he is Christ the Lord.","quia natus est vobis hodie Salvator, qui est Christus Dominus, in civitate David.","כי היום ילד לכם בעיר דוד מושיע אשר הוא המשיח האדון׃"],["49","2","12","너희는 포대기에 싸여 구유에 누워 있는 아기를 보게 될 터인데, 그것이 너희를 위한 표징이다.”","너희는 한 갓난 아이가 포대기에 싸여 구유에 누워 있는 것을 보게 될 터인데 그것이 바로 그분을 알아보는 표이다.\" 하고 말하였다.","너희가 가서 강보에 싸여 구유에 뉘어 있는 아기를 보리니 이것이 너희에게 표적이니라 하더니","너희가 가서 강보에 싸여 구유에 누인 아기를 보리니 이것이 너희에게 표적이니라 하더니","\"너희가 어떻게 그분을 알아보겠는가? 강보에 싸여 구유에 누인 아기, 그분이 너희가 뵙게 될 주님이시다.\"","And this will be a sign for you: you will find an infant wrapped in swaddling clothes and lying in a manger.”","And this shall be a sign unto you; Ye shall find the babe wrapped in swaddling clothes, lying in a manger.","This will be a sign to you: You will find a baby wrapped in cloths and lying in a manger.\"","Et hoc vobis signum: invenietis infantem pannis involutum et positum in praesepio “.","וזה לכם האות תמצאון ילד מחתל ומנח באבוס׃"],["49","2","13","그때에 갑자기 그 천사 곁에 수많은 하늘의 군대가 나타나 하느님을 이렇게 찬미하였다.","이 때에 갑자기 수많은 하늘의 군대가 나타나 그 천사와 함께 하느님을 찬양하였다.","홀연히 수많은 천군이 그 천사와 함께 하나님을 찬송하여 이르되","홀연히 허다한 천군이 그 천사와 함께 있어 하나님을 찬송하여 가로되","갑자기 많은 천군이 나타나 그 천사와 함께 하나님을 찬양하였다.","And suddenly there was a multitude of the heavenly host with the angel, praising God and saying:","And suddenly there was with the angel a multitude of the heavenly host praising God, and saying,","Suddenly a great company of the heavenly host appeared with the angel, praising God and saying,","Et subito facta est cum angelo multitudo militiae caelestis laudantium Deum et dicentium:","ויהי פתאם אצל המלאך המון צבא השמים והם משבחים את האלהים ואמרים׃"],["49","2","14","“지극히 높은 곳에서는 하느님께 영광 땅에서는 그분 마음에 드는 사람들에게 평화!”","\"하늘 높은 곳에는 하느님께 영광, 땅에서는 그가 사랑하시는 사람들에게 평화!\"","지극히 높은 곳에서는 하나님께 영광이요 땅에서는 하나님이 기뻐하신 사람들 중에 평화로다 하니라","지극히 높은 곳에서는 하나님께 영광이요 땅에서는 기뻐하심을 입은 사람들 중에 평화로다 하니라","\"지극히 높은 곳에서는 하나님께 영광이요 땅에서는 주님이 기뻐하시는 사람들에게 평화로다.\"","“Glory to God in the highest and on earth peace to those on whom his favor rests.”","Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace, good will toward men.","\"Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace to men on whom his favor rests.\"","Gloria in altissimis Deo, et super terram pax in hominibus bonae voluntatis.","כבוד במרומים לאלהים ובארץ שלום בבני אדם רצונו׃"],["49","2","15","천사들이 하늘로 떠나가자 목자들은 서로 말하였다. “베들레헴으로 가서 주님께서 우리에게 알려 주신 그 일, 그곳에서 일어난 일을 봅시다.”","천사들이 목자들을 떠나 하늘로 돌아간 뒤에 목자들은 서로 \"어서 베들레헴으로 가서 주님께서 우리에게 알려주신 그 사실을 보자.\" 하면서","천사들이 떠나 하늘로 올라가니 목자가 서로 말하되 이제 베들레헴으로 가서 주께서 우리에게 알리신 바 이 이루어진 일을 보자 하고","천사들이 떠나 하늘로 올라가니 목자가 서로 말하되 이제 베들레헴까지 가서 주께서 우리에게 알리신바 이 이루어진 일을 보자 하고","그 많은 천군 천사들이 하늘로 되돌아가자 목자들이 말하였다. \"자, 어서 베들레헴으로 갑시다. 가서 주님이 우리에게 일러주신 그 놀라운 일이 일어난 것을 봅시다.\"","When the angels went away from them to heaven, the shepherds said to one another, “Let us go, then, to Bethlehem to see this thing that has taken place, which the Lord has made known to us.”","And it came to pass, as the angels were gone away from them into heaven, the shepherds said one to another, Let us now go even unto Bethlehem, and see this thing which is come to pass, which the Lord hath made known unto us.","When the angels had left them and gone into heaven, the shepherds said to one another, \"Let's go to Bethlehem and see this thing that has happened, which the Lord has told us about.\"","Et factum est, ut discesserunt ab eis angeli in caelum, pastores loquebantur ad invicem:  “Transeamus usque Bethlehem et videamus hoc verbum, quod factum est, quod Dominus ostendit nobis “.","ויהי כאשר עלו מעליהם המלאכים השמימה ויאמרו הרעים איש אל רעהו נעברה נא עד בית לחם ונראה המעשה הזה אשר הודיענו יהוה׃"],["49","2","16","그리고 서둘러 가서, 마리아와 요셉과 구유에 누운 아기를 찾아냈다.","곧 달려가 보았더니 마리아와 요셉이 있었고 과연 그 아기는 구유에 누워 있었다.","빨리 가서 마리아와 요셉과 구유에 누인 아기를 찾아서","빨리 가서 마리아와 요셉과 구유에 누인 아기를 찾아서","그들은 서둘러 동네로 달려갔다. 그리고 마리아와 요셉을 찾아냈다. 과연 아기는 구유 안에 누워 있었다.","So they went in haste and found Mary and Joseph, and the infant lying in the manger.","And they came with haste, and found Mary, and Joseph, and the babe lying in a manger.","So they hurried off and found Mary and Joseph, and the baby, who was lying in the manger.","Et venerunt festinantes et invenerunt Mariam et Ioseph et infantem positum in praesepio.","וימהרו לבוא וימצאו את מרים ואת יוסף ואת הילד שכב באבוס׃"],["49","2","17","목자들은 아기를 보고 나서, 그 아기에 관하여 들은 말을 알려 주었다.","아기를 본 목자들이 사람들에게 아기에 관하여 들은 말을 이야기하였더니","보고 천사가 자기들에게 이 아기에 대하여 말한 것을 전하니","보고 천사가 자기들에게 이 아기에 대하여 말한 것을 고하니","목자들은 자기들에게 있었던 일과 천사가 이 아기에 대해서 말한 모든 것을 사람들에게 알렸다.","When they saw this, they made known the message that had been told them about this child.","And when they had seen it, they made known abroad the saying which was told them concerning this child.","When they had seen him, they spread the word concerning what had been told them about this child,","Videntes autem notum fecerunt verbum, quod dictum erat illis de puero hoc.","ויראו וישמיעו את הדבר הנאמר אליהם על הגער הזה׃"],["49","2","18","그것을 들은 이들은 모두 목자들이 자기들에게 전한 말에 놀라워하였다.","목자들의 말을 들은 사람들은 모두 그 일을 신기하게 생각하였다.","듣는 자가 다 목자들이 그들에게 말한 것들을 놀랍게 여기되","듣는 자가 다 목자의 말하는 일을 기이히 여기되","목자들의 이야기를 들은 사람들은 모두 깜짝 놀랐다.","All who heard it were amazed by what had been told them by the shepherds.","And all they that heard it wondered at those things which were told them by the shepherds.","and all who heard it were amazed at what the shepherds said to them.","Et omnes, qui audierunt, mirati sunt de his, quae dicta erant a pastoribus ad ipsos.","וכל השמעים תמהו על הדברים אשר דברו אליהם הרעים׃"],["49","2","19","그러나 마리아는 이 모든 일을 마음속에 간직하고 곰곰이 되새겼다.","마리아는 이 모든 일을 마음속 깊이 새겨 오래 간직하였다.","마리아는 이 모든 말을 마음에 새기어 생각하니라","마리아는 이 모든 말을 마음에 지키어 생각하니라","그러나 마리아는 조용히 이것을 마음속에 담아 두었다.","And Mary kept all these things, reflecting on them in her heart.","But Mary kept all these things, and pondered them in her heart.","But Mary treasured up all these things and pondered them in her heart.","Maria autem conservabat omnia verba haec conferens in corde suo.","ומרים שמרה את הדברים האלה ותחשבם בלבה׃"],["49","2","20","목자들은 천사가 자기들에게 말한 대로 듣고 본 모든 것에 대하여 하느님을 찬양하고 찬미하며 돌아갔다.","목자들은 자기들이 듣고 보고 한 것이 천사들에게 들은 바와 같았기 때문에 하느님의 영광을 찬양하며 돌아갔다.","목자들은 자기들에게 이르던 바와 같이 듣고 본 그 모든 것으로 인하여 하나님께 영광을 돌리고 찬송하며 돌아가니라","목자가 자기들에게 이르던 바와 같이 듣고 본 그 모든 것을 인하여 하나님께 영광을 돌리고 찬송하며 돌아가니라","목자들은 천사가 일러준 사실과 자기들이 듣고 본 것이 모두 같았기 때문에 찬양으로 하나님께 영광을 돌리며 돌아갔다.","Then the shepherds returned, glorifying and praising God for all they had heard and seen, just as it had been told to them.","And the shepherds returned, glorifying and praising God for all the things that they had heard and seen, as it was told unto them.","The shepherds returned, glorifying and praising God for all the things they had heard and seen, which were just as they had been told.","Et reversi sunt pastores glorificantes et laudantes Deum in omnibus, quae audierant et viderant, sicut dictum est ad illos.","וישובו הרעים מהללים ומשבחים את האלהים על כל אשר שמעו וראו כפי אשר נאמר אליהם׃"],["49","2","21","여드레가 차서 아기에게 할례를 베풀게 되자 그 이름을 예수라고 하였다. 그것은 아기가 잉태되기 전에 천사가 일러 준 이름이었다.","여드레째 되는 날은 아기에게 할례를 베푸는 날이었다. 그 날이 되자 아기가 잉태되기 전에 천사가 일러준 대로 그 이름을 예수라고 하였다.","할례할 팔 일이 되매 그 이름을 예수라 하니 곧 잉태하기 전에 천사가 일컬은 바러라","할례할 팔일이 되매 그 이름을 예수라 하니 곧 수태하기 전에 천사의 일컬은 바러라","여드레가 되는 날 아기에게 할례의식을 치렀다. 그리고 아기가 잉태되기 전에 천사가 일러준 대로 예수라고 이름 지었다.","When eight days were completed for his circumcision, he was named Jesus, the name given him by the angel before he was conceived in the womb.","And when eight days were accomplished for the circumcising of the child, his name was called JESUS, which was so named of the angel before he was conceived in the womb.","On the eighth day, when it was time to circumcise him, he was named Jesus, the name the angel had given him before he had been conceived.","Et postquam consummati sunt dies octo, ut circumcideretur, vocatum est nomen eius Iesus, quod vocatum est ab angelo, priusquam in utero conciperetur.","ויהי במלאת לנער שמנה ימים וימול ויקרא שמו ישוע כשם אשר קרא לו המלאך בטרם הרה בבטן׃"],["49","2","22","모세의 율법에 따라 정결례를 거행할 날이 되자, 그들은 아기를 예루살렘으로 데리고 올라가 주님께 바쳤다.","그리고 모세가 정한 법대로 정결 예식을 치르는 날이 되자 부모는 아기를 데리고 예루살렘으로 올라갔다.","ㄱ)모세의 법대로 정결예식의 날이 차매 아기를 데리고 예루살렘에 올라가니","ㄱ)모세의 법대로 결례의 날이 차매 아기를 데리고 예루살렘에 올라가니 레 12:2-6","아기를 낳은 후에 지켜야 하는 모세의 율법에 따라 마리아가 성전에서 정결 예물을 드릴 때가 되자 아기의 부모는 아기를 주께 드리려고 예루살렘으로 데리고 올라갔다.","When the days were completed for their purification according to the law of Moses, they took him up to Jerusalem to present him to the Lord,","And when the days of her purification according to the law of Moses were accomplished, they brought him to Jerusalem, to present him to the Lord;","When the time of their purification according to the Law of Moses had been completed, Joseph and Mary took him to Jerusalem to present him to the Lord","Et postquam impleti sunt dies purgationis eorum secundum legem Moysis, tulerunt illum in Hierosolymam, ut sisterent Domino,","וימלאו ימי טהרה לפי תורת משה ויעלהו לירושלים להעמידו לפני יהוה׃"],["49","2","23","주님의 율법에 “태를 열고 나온 사내아이는 모두 주님께 봉헌해야 한다.”고 기록된 대로 한 것이다.","그것은 \"1)누구든지 첫아들을 주님께 바쳐야 한다.\"는 주님의 율법에 따라 아기를 주님께 봉헌하려는 것이었고출애 13:2(13:12, 15 참조).","이는 주의 율법에 쓴 바 ㄴ)첫 태에 처음 난 남자마다 주의 거룩한 자라 하리라 한 대로 아기를 주께 드리고","이는 주의 율법에 쓴바 ㄴ)첫 태에 처음 난 남자마다 주의 거룩한 자라 하리라 한대로 아기를 주께 드리고 출 13:2, 12","하나님께서는 ㄱ) \"이스라엘 사람들 가운데에서 어미의 태를 열고 처음 나온 맏아들은 모두 거룩하게 구별하여 나에게 바치라\"고 율법에서 말씀하셨기 때문이다. (ㄱ. 출13:2(참조,출13:12,15))","just as it is written in the law of the Lord, “Every male that opens the womb shall be consecrated to the Lord,”","(As it is written in the law of the LORD, Every male that openeth the womb shall be called holy to the Lord;)","(as it is written in the Law of the Lord, \"Every firstborn male is to be consecrated to the Lord\"),","sicut scriptum est in lege Domini:  “Omne masculinum adaperiens vulvam sanctum Domino vocabitur “,","כאשר כתוב בתורת יהוה כל זכר פטר רחם יקרא קדש ליהוה׃"],["49","2","24","그들은 또한 주님의 율법에서 “산비둘기 한 쌍이나 어린 집비둘기 두 마리를” 바치라고 명령한 대로 제물을 바쳤다.","또 주님의 율법대로 2)산비둘기 한 쌍이나 집비둘기 새끼 두 마리를 정결례의 제물로 바치려는 것이었다.레위 5:7, 12:8.","또 주의 율법에 말씀하신 대로 ㄷ)산비둘기 한 쌍이나 혹은 어린 집비둘기 둘로 제사하려 함이더라","또 주의 율법에 말씀하신대로 ㄷ)비둘기 한 쌍이나 혹 어린 반구 둘로 제사하려함이더라 레 12:8, 5:11","그들은 또 예수의 정결 예식을 위한 희생제물로 \"산비둘기 한 쌍이나 어린 집비둘기 두 마리를 드리라\"는 율법의 규정을 따랐다.","and to offer the sacrifice of “a pair of turtledoves or two young pigeons,” in accordance with the dictate in the law of the Lord.","And to offer a sacrifice according to that which is said in the law of the Lord, A pair of turtledoves, or two young pigeons.","and to offer a sacrifice in keeping with what is said in the Law of the Lord: \"a pair of doves or two young pigeons.\"","et ut darent hostiam secundum quod dictum est in lege Domini: par turturum aut duos pullos columbarum.","ולתת קרבן כאמור בתורת יהוה שתי תרים או שני בני יונה׃"],["49","2","25","그런데 예루살렘에 시메온이라는 사람이 있었다. 이 사람은 의롭고 독실하며 이스라엘이 위로받을 때를 기다리는 이였는데, 성령께서 그 위에 머물러 계셨다.","그런데 예루살렘에는 시므온이라는 사람이 살고 있었다. 이 사람은 의롭고 경건하게 살면서 이스라엘의 구원을 기다리고 있었다. 그에게는 성령이 머물러 계셨는데","예루살렘에 시므온이라 하는 사람이 있으니 이 사람은 의롭고 경건하여 이스라엘의 위로를 기다리는 자라 성령이 그 위에 계시더라","예루살렘에 시므온이라 하는 사람이 있으니 이 사람이 의롭고 경건하여 이스라엘의 위로를 기다리는 자라 성령이 그 위에 계시더라","그날 성전에는 예루살렘에 사는 시므온이라는 사람이 와 있었다. 그는 바르고 경건한 사람으로서 성령이 충만하여, 메시야가 곧 오실 것이라고 늘 기다리고 있었다.","Now there was a man in Jerusalem whose name was Simeon. This man was righteous and devout, awaiting the consolation of Israel, and the holy Spirit was upon him.","And, behold, there was a man in Jerusalem, whose name was Simeon; and the same man was just and devout, waiting for the consolation of Israel: and the Holy Ghost was upon him.","Now there was a man in Jerusalem called Simeon, who was righteous and devout. He was waiting for the consolation of Israel, and the Holy Spirit was upon him.","Et ecce homo erat in Ierusalem, cui nomen Simeon, et homo iste iustus et timoratus, exspectans consolationem Israel, et Spiritus Sanctus erat super eum;","והנה איש היה בירושלים ושמו שמעון והוא איש צדיק וחסיד מחכה לנחמת ישראל ורוח הקדש היה עליו׃"],["49","2","26","성령께서는 그에게 주님의 그리스도를 뵙기 전에는 죽지 않으리라고 알려 주셨다.","성령은 그에게 주님께서 약속하신 그리스도를 죽기 전에 꼭 보게 되리라고 알려주셨던 것이다.","그가 주의 그리스도를 보기 전에는 죽지 아니하리라 하는 성령의 지시를 받았더니","저가 주의 그리스도를 보기 전에 죽지 아니하리라 하는 성령의 지시를 받았더니","그는 하나님이 기름을 부으신 왕을 보기 전에는 죽지 않을 것이라는 성령의 계시를 받은 일이 있었다.","It had been revealed to him by the holy Spirit that he should not see death before he had seen the Messiah of the Lord.","And it was revealed unto him by the Holy Ghost, that he should not see death, before he had seen the Lord's Christ.","It had been revealed to him by the Holy Spirit that he would not die before he had seen the Lord's Christ.","et responsum acceperat ab Spiritu Sancto non visurum se mortem nisi prius videret Christum Domini.","ולו נגלה ברוח הקדש כי לא יראה מות עד ראותו את משיח יהוה׃"],["49","2","27","그가 성령에 이끌려 성전으로 들어갔다. 그리고 아기에 관한 율법의 관례를 준수하려고 부모가 아기 예수님을 데리고 들어오자,","마침내 시므온이 성령의 인도를 받아 성전에 들어갔더니 마침 예수의 부모가 첫아들에 대한 율법의 규정을 지키려고 어린 아기 예수를 성전에 데리고 왔다.","성령의 감동으로 성전에 들어가매 마침 부모가 율법의 관례대로 행하고자 하여 그 아기 예수를 데리고 오는지라","성령의 감동으로 성전에 들어가매 마침 부모가 율법의 전례대로 행하고자 하여 그 아기 예수를 데리고 오는지라","그날도 그는 성령의 인도로 성전에 가게 되었는데 그때 마침 마리아와 요셉이 율법이 정한 대로 아기 예수를 주께 드리려고 들어왔다.","He came in the Spirit into the temple; and when the parents brought in the child Jesus to perform the custom of the law in regard to him,","And he came by the Spirit into the temple: and when the parents brought in the child Jesus, to do for him after the custom of the law,","Moved by the Spirit, he went into the temple courts. When the parents brought in the child Jesus to do for him what the custom of the Law required,","Et venit in Spiritu in templum. Et cum inducerent puerum Iesum parentes eius, ut facerent secundum consuetudinem legis pro eo,","ויבא ברוח אל המקדש ויהי כאשר הביאו הוריו את הנער ישוע לעשות עליו כמשפט התורה׃"],["49","2","28","그는 아기를 두 팔에 받아 안고 이렇게 하느님을 찬미하였다.","그래서 시므온은 그 아기를 두 팔에 받아 안고 하느님을 찬양하였다.","시므온이 아기를 안고 하나님을 찬송하여 이르되","시므온이 아기를 안고 하나님을 찬송하여 가로되","시므온은 아기를 품에 안고 하나님을 찬양하였다.","he took him into his arms and blessed God, saying:","Then took he him up in his arms, and blessed God, and said,","Simeon took him in his arms and praised God, saying:","et ipse accepit eum in ulnas suas et benedixit Deum et dixit:","ויקחהו על זרעותיו ויברך את האלהים ויאמר׃"],["49","2","29","“주님, 이제야 말씀하신 대로 당신 종을 평화로이 떠나게 해 주셨습니다.","\"주여, 이제는 말씀하신 대로 이 종은 평안히 눈감게 되었습니다.","주재여 이제는 말씀하신 대로 종을 평안히 놓아 주시는도다","주재여 이제는 말씀하신대로 종을 평안히 놓아 주시는도다","\"주여, 주께서 제게 약속하신 대로 이 종은 평안히 눈감게 되었습니다.","“Now, Master, you may let your servant go in peace, according to your word,","Lord, now lettest thou thy servant depart in peace, according to thy word:","\"Sovereign Lord, as you have promised, you now dismiss your servant in peace.","Nunc dimittis servum tuum, Domine, secundum verbum tuum in pace,","עתה תפטר את עבדך כדברך אדני בשלום׃"],["49","2","30","제 눈이 당신의 구원을 본 것입니다.","주님의 구원을 제 눈으로 보았습니다.","내 눈이 주의 구원을 보았사오니","내 눈이 주의 구원을 보았사오니","주께서 세상을 위하여 보내 주신 구주를 내 눈으로 보았습니다.","for my eyes have seen your salvation,","For mine eyes have seen thy salvation,","For my eyes have seen your salvation,","quia viderunt oculi mei salutare tuum,","כי ראו עיני את ישועתך׃"],["49","2","31","이는 당신께서 모든 민족들 앞에서 마련하신 것으로","만민에게 베푸신 구원을 보았습니다.","이는 만민 앞에 예비하신 것이요","이는 만민 앞에 예비하신 것이요","이분은 모든 나라를 비추는 빛이시며","which you prepared in sight of all the peoples,","Which thou hast prepared before the face of all people;","which you have prepared in the sight of all people,","quod parasti ante faciem omnium populorum,","אשר הכינות לפני כל העמים׃"],["49","2","32","다른 민족들에게는 계시의 빛이며 당신 백성 이스라엘에게는 영광입니다.”","그 구원은 이방인들에게는 주의 길을 밝히는 빛이 되고 주의 백성 이스라엘에게는 영광이 됩니다.\"","이방을 비추는 빛이요 주의 백성 이스라엘의 영광이니이다 하니","이방을 비추는 빛이요 주의 백성 이스라엘의 영광이니이다 하니","주의 백성 이스라엘의 영광이십니다.\"","a light for revelation to the Gentiles, and glory for your people Israel.”","A light to lighten the Gentiles, and the glory of thy people Israel.","a light for revelation to the Gentiles and for glory to your people Israel.\"","lumen ad revelationem gentium et gloriam plebis tuae Israel “.","אור לגלות עיני הגוים ותפארת ישראל עמך׃"],["49","2","33","아기의 아버지와 어머니는 아기를 두고 하는 이 말에 놀라워하였다.","아기의 부모는 아기를 두고 하는 이 말을 듣고 감격하였다.","그의 부모가 그에 대한 말들을 놀랍게 여기더라","그 부모가 그 아기에 대한 말들을 기이히 여기더라","곁에 서서 이 말을 들은 요셉과 마리아는 놀랄뿐이었다.","The child’s father and mother were amazed at what was said about him;","And Joseph and his mother marvelled at those things which were spoken of him.","The child's father and mother marveled at what was said about him.","Et erat pater eius et mater mirantes super his, quae dicebantur de illo.","ויוסף ואמו תמהים על הדברים הנאמרים עליו׃"],["49","2","34","시메온은 그들을 축복하고 나서 아기 어머니 마리아에게 말하였다. “보십시오, 이 아기는 이스라엘에서 많은 사람을 쓰러지게도 하고 일어나게도 하며, 또 반대를 받는 표징이 되도록 정해졌습니다.","시므온은 그들을 축복하고 나서 아기 어머니 마리아에게 이렇게 말하였다. \"이 아기는 수많은 이스라엘 백성을 넘어뜨리기도 하고 일으키기도 할 분이십니다. 이 아기는 많은 사람들의 반대를 받는 표적이 되어","시므온이 그들에게 축복하고 그의 어머니 마리아에게 말하여 이르되 보라 이는 이스라엘 중 많은 사람을 패하거나 흥하게 하며 비방을 받는 표적이 되기 위하여 세움을 받았고","시므온이 저희에게 축복하고 그 모친 마리아에게 일러 가로되 보라 이 아이는 이스라엘 중 많은 사람의 패하고 흥함을 위하며 비방을 받는 표적 되기 위하여 세움을 입었고","시므온은 그들을 축복한 후에 마리아에게 말하였다. \"당신의 마음은 예리한 칼에 찔리듯 아플 것입니다. 이 아기는 많은 이스라엘 사람들의 배척을 받을 것이기 때문입니다. 그러한 배척은 그들을 파멸에 이르게 하는 원인이 될 뿐입니다. 그러나 이분은 많은 사람들에게 큰 기쁨이 될 것입니다. 또한 그들의 마음속 가장 깊은 생각들을 드러내게 할 것입니다.\"","and Simeon blessed them and said to Mary his mother, “Behold, this child is destined for the fall and rise of many in Israel, and to be a sign that will be contradicted","And Simeon blessed them, and said unto Mary his mother, Behold, this child is set for the fall and rising again of many in Israel; and for a sign which shall be spoken against;","Then Simeon blessed them and said to Mary, his mother: \"This child is destined to cause the falling and rising of many in Israel, and to be a sign that will be spoken against,","Et benedixit illis Simeon et dixit ad Mariam matrem eius:  “Ecce positus est hic in ruinam et resurrectionem multorum in Israel et in signum, cui contradicetur","ויברך אותם שמעון ויאמר אל מרים אמו הנה זה מוסד לנפילה ולתקומה לרבים בישראל ולאות מריבה׃"],["49","2","35","그리하여 당신의 영혼이 칼에 꿰찔리는 가운데, 많은 사람의 마음속 생각이 드러날 것입니다.”","당신의 마음은 예리한 칼에 찔리듯 아플 것입니다. 그러나 그는 반대자들의 숨은 생각을 드러나게 할 것입니다.\"","또 칼이 네 마음을 찌르듯 하리니 이는 여러 사람의 마음의 생각을 드러내려 함이니라 하더라","또 칼이 네 마음을 찌르듯 하리라 이는 여러 사람의 마음의 생각을 드러내려 함이니라 하더라","(34절에 포함되어 있음)","(and you yourself a sword will pierce) so that the thoughts of many hearts may be revealed.”","(Yea, a sword shall pierce through thy own soul also,) that the thoughts of many hearts may be revealed.","so that the thoughts of many hearts will be revealed. And a sword will pierce your own soul too.\"","- et tuam ipsius animam pertransiet gladius - ut revelentur ex multis cordibus cogitationes “.","וגם בנפשך תחתר חרב למען תגלינה מחשבות לבב רבים׃"],["49","2","36","한나라는 예언자도 있었는데, 프누엘의 딸로서 아세르 지파 출신이었다. 나이가 매우 많은 이 여자는 혼인하여 남편과 일곱 해를 살고서는,","또한 파누엘의 딸로서 아셀 지파의 혈통을 이어받은 안나라는 나이 많은 여자 예언자가 있었다. 그는 결혼하여 남편과 일곱 해를 같이 살다가","또 아셀 지파 바누엘의 딸 안나라 하는 선지자가 있어 나이가 매우 많았더라 그가 결혼한 후 일곱 해 동안 남편과 함께 살다가","또 아셀 지파 바누엘의 딸 안나라 하는 선지자가 있어 나이 매우 늙었더라 그가 출가한 후 일곱 해 동안 남편과 함께 살다가","여자 예언자 안나도 그날 성전에 있었다. 그 여자는 아셀 지파에 속하는 바누엘의 딸로 나이가 매우 많았다. 결혼한 지 일곱 해 만에 남편이 죽었으나 그후 여든네 살이 되도록 과부로 살았다. 그 여자는 성전을 떠나지 않고 밤낮으로 기도하며 때로는 금식하면서 하나님을 섬겨 왔다.","There was also a prophetess, Anna, the daughter of Phanuel, of the tribe of Asher. She was advanced in years, having lived seven years with her husband after her marriage,","And there was one Anna, a prophetess, the daughter of Phanuel, of the tribe of Aser: she was of a great age, and had lived with an husband seven years from her virginity;","There was also a prophetess, Anna, the daughter of Phanuel, of the tribe of Asher. She was very old; she had lived with her husband seven years after her marriage,","Et erat Anna prophetissa, filia Phanuel, de tribu Aser. Haec processerat in diebus multis et vixerat cum viro annis septem a virginitate sua;","ותהי שם חנה אשה נביאה בת פנואל משבט אשר והיא באה בימים וחיתה עם בעלה שבע שנים אחרי בתוליה׃"],["49","2","37","여든네 살이 되도록 과부로 지냈다. 그리고 성전을 떠나는 일 없이 단식하고 기도하며 밤낮으로 하느님을 섬겼다.","과부가 되어 여든네 살이 되도록 성전을 떠나지 않고 밤낮없이 단식과 기도로써 하느님을 섬겨왔다.","과부가 되고 팔십사 세가 되었더라 이 사람이 성전을 떠나지 아니하고 주야로 금식하며 기도함으로 섬기더니","과부 된지 팔십 사년이라 이 사람이 성전을 떠나지 아니하고 주야에 금식하며 기도함으로 섬기더니","(36절에 포함되어 있음)","and then as a widow until she was eighty-four. She never left the temple, but worshiped night and day with fasting and prayer.","And she was a widow of about fourscore and four years, which departed not from the temple, but served God with fastings and prayers night and day.","and then was a widow until she was eighty-four. She never left the temple but worshiped night and day, fasting and praying.","et haec vidua usque ad annos octoginta quattuor, quae non discedebat de templo, ieiuniis et obsecrationibus serviens nocte ac die.","והיא אלמנה כארבע ושמנים שנה ולא משה מן המקדש ובצום ובתחנונים עבדה את האלהים לילה ויום׃"],["49","2","38","그런데 이 한나도 같은 때에 나아와 하느님께 감사드리며, 예루살렘의 속량을 기다리는 모든 이에게 그 아기에 대하여 이야기하였다.","이 여자는 예식이 진행되고 있을 때에 바로 그 자리에 왔다가 하느님께 감사를 드리고 예루살렘이 구원될 날을 기다리던 모든 사람에게 이 아기의 이야기를 하였다.","마침 이 때에 나아와서 하나님께 감사하고 예루살렘의 속량을 바라는 모든 사람에게 그에 대하여 말하니라","마침 이 때에 나아와서 하나님께 감사하고 예루살렘의 구속됨을 바라는 모든 사람에게 이 아기에 대하여 말하니라","그 예언자는 마침 들어오다가 시므온이 마리아와 요셉에게 하는 말을 듣고 하나님께 감사를 드린 후 구주를 기다리는 예루살렘의 모든 사람에게 메시야가 드디어 오셨음을 알렸다.","And coming forward at that very time, she gave thanks to God and spoke about the child to all who were awaiting the redemption of Jerusalem.","And she coming in that instant gave thanks likewise unto the Lord, and spake of him to all them that looked for redemption in Jerusalem.","Coming up to them at that very moment, she gave thanks to God and spoke about the child to all who were looking forward to the redemption of Jerusalem.","Et haec ipsa hora superveniens confitebatur Deo et loquebatur de illo omnibus, qui exspectabant redemptionem Ierusalem.","ותקם בשעה ההיא ותגש להדות ליהוה ותדבר עליו באזני כל המחכים לגאלה בירושלים׃"],["49","2","39","주님의 법에 따라 모든 일을 마치고 나서, 그들은 갈릴래아에 있는 고향 나자렛으로 돌아갔다.","아기의 부모는 주님의 율법을 따라 모든 일을 다 마치고 자기 고향 갈릴래아 지방 나자렛으로 돌아갔다.","주의 율법을 따라 모든 일을 마치고 갈릴리로 돌아가 본 동네 나사렛에 이르니라","주의 율법을 좇아 모든 일을 필하고 갈릴리로 돌아가 본 동네 나사렛에 이르니라","예수의 부모는 하나님의 율법이 요구하는 모든 일을 다 마치고 갈릴리 나사렛으로 돌아 왔다.","When they had fulfilled all the prescriptions of the law of the Lord, they returned to Galilee, to their own town of Nazareth.","And when they had performed all things according to the law of the Lord, they returned into Galilee, to their own city Nazareth.","When Joseph and Mary had done everything required by the Law of the Lord, they returned to Galilee to their own town of Nazareth.","Et ut perfecerunt omnia secundum legem Domini, reversi sunt in Galilaeam in civitatem suam Nazareth.","ויכלו את הכל כפי תורת יהוה וישובו הגלילה אל נצרת עירם׃"],["49","2","40","아기는 자라면서 튼튼해지고 지혜가 충만해졌으며, 하느님의 총애를 받았다.","아기는 날로 튼튼하게 자라면서 지혜가 풍부해지고 하느님의 은총을 받고 있었다.","아기가 자라며 강하여지고 지혜가 충만하며 하나님의 은혜가 그의 위에 있더라","아기가 자라며 강하여지고 지혜가 충족하며 하나님의 은혜가 그 위에 있더라","아기는 날로 건강하고 튼튼하게 자랐으며 지혜가 뛰어났다. 하나님께서 늘 보살피신 까닭이다.","The child grew and became strong, filled with wisdom; and the favor of God was upon him.","And the child grew, and waxed strong in spirit, filled with wisdom: and the grace of God was upon him.","And the child grew and became strong; he was filled with wisdom, and the grace of God was upon him.","Puer autem crescebat et confortabatur plenus sapientia; et gratia Dei erat super illum.","ויגדל הנער ויחזק ברוח וימלא חכמה וחסד אלהים עמו׃"],["49","2","41","예수님의 부모는 해마다 파스카 축제 때면 예루살렘으로 가곤 하였다.","해마다 과월절이 되면 예수의 부모는 명절을 지내러 예루살렘으로 가곤 하였는데","그의 부모가 해마다 유월절이 되면 예루살렘으로 가더니","그 부모가 해마다 유월절을 당하면 예루살렘으로 가더니","예수께서는 열두 살 되던 해에 부모를 따라 유월절 잔치에 참석하러 예루살렘에 가셨다.","Each year his parents went to Jerusalem for the feast of Passover,","Now his parents went to Jerusalem every year at the feast of the passover.","Every year his parents went to Jerusalem for the Feast of the Passover.","Et ibant parentes eius per omnes annos in Ierusalem in die festo Paschae.","ועלו הוריו ירושלים שנה בשנה לחג הפסח׃"],["49","2","42","예수님이 열두 살 되던 해에도 이 축제 관습에 따라 그리로 올라갔다.","예수가 열두 살이 되던 해에도 예년과 마찬가지로 예루살렘으로 올라갔다.","예수께서 열두 살 되었을 때에 그들이 이 절기의 관례를 따라 올라갔다가","예수께서 열 두살 될 때에 저희가 이 절기의 전례를 좇아 올라갔다가","(41절에 포함되어 있음)","and when he was twelve years old, they went up according to festival custom.","And when he was twelve years old, they went up to Jerusalem after the custom of the feast.","When he was twelve years old, they went up to the Feast, according to the custom.","Et cum factus esset annorum duodecim, ascendentibus illis secundum consuetudinem diei festi,","ויהי בהיותו בן שתים עשרה שנה ויעלו ירושלים כמשפט החג׃"],["49","2","43","그런데 축제 기간이 끝나고 돌아갈 때에 소년 예수님은 예루살렘에 그대로 남았다. 그의 부모는 그것도 모르고,","그런데 명절의 기간이 다 끝나 집으로 돌아올 때에 어린 예수는 예루살렘에 그대로 남아 있었다. 그런 줄도 모르고 그의 부모는","그 날들을 마치고 돌아갈 때에 아이 예수는 예루살렘에 머무셨더라 그 부모는 이를 알지 못하고","그 날들을 마치고 돌아갈 때에 아이 예수는 예루살렘에 머무셨더라 그 부모는 이를 알지 못하고","그런데 잔치가 끝나고 나사렛으로 돌아갈 때 예수께서는 아무에게도 알리지 않고 예루살렘에 머물러 계셨다. 예수의 부모는 첫날에는 예수를 찾지 않았다.","After they had completed its days, as they were returning, the boy Jesus remained behind in Jerusalem, but his parents did not know it.","And when they had fulfilled the days, as they returned, the child Jesus tarried behind in Jerusalem; and Joseph and his mother knew not of it.","After the Feast was over, while his parents were returning home, the boy Jesus stayed behind in Jerusalem, but they were unaware of it.","consummatisque diebus, cum redirent, remansit puer Iesus in Ierusalem, et non cognoverunt parentes eius.","וימלאו את הימים וישובו ויותר ישוע הנער בירושלים ויוסף ואמו לא ידעו׃"],["49","2","44","일행 가운데에 있으려니 여기며 하룻길을 갔다. 그런 다음에야 친척들과 친지들 사이에서 찾아보았지만,","아들이 일행 중에 끼여 있으려니 하고 하룻길을 갔다. 그제야 생각이 나서 친척들과 친지들 가운데서 찾아보았으나","동행 중에 있는 줄로 생각하고 하룻길을 간 후 친족과 아는 자 중에서 찾되","동행 중에 있는 줄로 생각하고 하룻길을 간 후 친족과 아는 자 중에서 찾되","일행 중에 섞여서 친구들과 같이 오려니 생각했기 때문이었다. 그러나 저녁까지도 예수께서 보이지 않자 친척들과 친구들을 찾아다니며 예수의 행방을 물었다.","Thinking that he was in the caravan, they journeyed for a day and looked for him among their relatives and acquaintances,","But they, supposing him to have been in the company, went a day's journey; and they sought him among their kinsfolk and acquaintance.","Thinking he was in their company, they traveled on for a day. Then they began looking for him among their relatives and friends.","Existimantes autem illum esse in comitatu, venerunt iter diei et requirebant eum inter cognatos et notos;","ויחשבו כי עם חבל הארחים הוא וילכו כדרך יום ויבקשהו בין הקרובים והמידעים׃"],["49","2","45","찾아내지 못하였다. 그래서 예루살렘으로 돌아가 그를 찾아다녔다.","보이지 않으므로 줄곧 찾아 헤매면서 예루살렘까지 되돌아갔다.","만나지 못하매 찾으면서 예루살렘에 돌아갔더니","만나지 못하매 찾으면서 예루살렘에 돌아갔더니","그러나 아무데서도 찾지 못하자 그들은 예루살렘으로 되돌아갔다.","but not finding him, they returned to Jerusalem to look for him.","And when they found him not, they turned back again to Jerusalem, seeking him.","When they did not find him, they went back to Jerusalem to look for him.","et non invenientes regressi sunt in Ierusalem requirentes eum.","ולא מצאהו וישבו ירושלים לבקשו׃"],["49","2","46","사흘 뒤에야 성전에서 그를 찾아냈는데, 그는 율법 교사들 가운데에 앉아 그들의 말을 듣기도 하고 그들에게 묻기도 하고 있었다.","사흘 만에 성전에서 그를 찾아냈는데 거기서 예수는 학자들과 한자리에 앉아 그들의 말을 듣기도 하고 그들에게 묻기도 하는 중이었다.","사흘 후에 성전에서 만난즉 그가 선생들 중에 앉으사 그들에게 듣기도 하시며 묻기도 하시니","사흘 후에 성전에서 만난즉 그가 선생들 중에 앉으사 저희에게 듣기도 하시며 묻기도 하시니","사흘후에야 그들은 예수를 성전 안에서 찾아냈다. 예수께서는 율법교사들과 함께 앉아서 율법 문제를 토론하고 계셨다. 그리고 듣는 사람 모두가 예수의 슬기로운 대답에 경탄하고 있었다.","After three days they found him in the temple, sitting in the midst of the teachers, listening to them and asking them questions,","And it came to pass, that after three days they found him in the temple, sitting in the midst of the doctors, both hearing them, and asking them questions.","After three days they found him in the temple courts, sitting among the teachers, listening to them and asking them questions.","Et factum est, post triduum invenerunt illum in templo sedentem in medio doctorum, audientem illos et interrogantem eos;","ויהי אחרי שלשת ימים וימצאהו במקדש ישב בתוך המורים שמע אליהם ושאל אתם׃"],["49","2","47","그의 말을 듣는 이들은 모두 그의 슬기로운 답변에 경탄하였다.","그리고 듣고 있던 사람들은 모두 그의 지능과 대답하는 품에 경탄하고 있었다.","듣는 자가 다 그 지혜와 대답을 놀랍게 여기더라","듣는 자가 다 그 지혜와 대답을 기이히 여기더라","(46절에 포함되어 있음)","and all who heard him were astounded at his understanding and his answers.","And all that heard him were astonished at his understanding and answers.","Everyone who heard him was amazed at his understanding and his answers.","stupebant autem omnes, qui eum audiebant, super prudentia et responsis eius.","וכל השמעים אליו השתוממו על שכלו ועל תשובתיו׃"],["49","2","48","예수님의 부모는 그를 보고 무척 놀랐다. 예수님의 어머니가 “얘야, 우리에게 왜 이렇게 하였느냐? 네 아버지와 내가 너를 애타게 찾았단다.” 하자,","그의 부모는 그를 보고 깜짝 놀랐다. 어머니는 예수를 보고 \"얘야, 왜 이렇게 우리를 애태우느냐? 너를 찾느라고 아버지와 내가 얼마나 고생했는지 모른다.\" 하고 말하였다.","그의 부모가 보고 놀라며 그의 어머니는 이르되 아이야 어찌하여 우리에게 이렇게 하였느냐 보라 네 아버지와 내가 근심하여 너를 찾았노라","그 부모가 보고 놀라며 그 모친은 가로되 아이야 어찌하여 우리에게 이렇게 하였느냐 보라 네 아버지와 내가 근심하여 너를 찾았노라","예수의 부모 역시 그 일을 보고 깜짝 놀랐다. 어머니가 예수께 말하였다. \"얘야, 왜 이렇게 우리를 애태우느냐? 네 아버지와 내가 너를 찾느라고 곳곳을 찾아 헤맸단다.\"","When his parents saw him, they were astonished, and his mother said to him, “Son, why have you done this to us? Your father and I have been looking for you with great anxiety.”","And when they saw him, they were amazed: and his mother said unto him, Son, why hast thou thus dealt with us? behold, thy father and I have sought thee sorrowing.","When his parents saw him, they were astonished. His mother said to him, \"Son, why have you treated us like this? Your father and I have been anxiously searching for you.\"","Et videntes eum admirati sunt, et dixit Mater eius ad illum:  “Fili, quid fecisti nobis sic? Ecce pater tuus et ego dolentes quaerebamus te “.","ויהי כראותם אתו ויחרדו ותאמר אליו אמו בני מדוע ככה עשית לנו הנה אביך ואנכי בעצבת לב בקשנוך׃"],["49","2","49","그가 부모에게 말하였다. “왜 저를 찾으셨습니까? 저는 제 아버지의 집에 있어야 하는 줄을 모르셨습니까?”","그러자 예수는 \"왜, 나를 찾으셨습니까? 내가 내 아버지의 집에 있어야 할 줄을 모르셨습니까?\" 하고 대답하였다.","예수께서 이르시되 어찌하여 나를 찾으셨나이까 내가 내 아버지 집에 있어야 될 줄을 알지 못하셨나이까 하시니","예수께서 가라사대 어찌하여 나를 찾으셨나이까 내가 1)내 아버지 집에 있어야 될 줄을 알지 못하셨나이까 하시니 혹 내 아버지의 일에 관계하여야","예수께서 말씀하셨다. \"왜 나를 그렇게 찾아 다니셨습니까? 내가 내 아버지 집인 성전에 있으리라는 것을 알지 못하셨습니까?\"","And he said to them, “Why were you looking for me? Did you not know that I must be in my Father’s house?”","And he said unto them, How is it that ye sought me? wist ye not that I must be about my Father's business?","\"Why were you searching for me?\" he asked. \"Didn't you know I had to be in my Father's house?\"","Et ait ad illos:  “Quid est quod me quaerebatis? Nesciebatis quia in his, quae Patris mei sunt, oportet me esse? “.","ויאמר אליהם למה זה בקשתם אתי הלא ידעתם כי עלי להיות באשר לאבי׃"],["49","2","50","그러나 그들은 예수님이 한 말을 알아듣지 못하였다.","그러나 부모는 아들이 한 말이 무슨 뜻인지 알아듣지 못하였다.","그 부모가 그가 하신 말씀을 깨닫지 못하더라","양친이 그 하신 말씀을 깨닫지 못하더라","그러나 부모는 그 말씀이 무슨 뜻인지 알아듣지 못하였다.","But they did not understand what he said to them.","And they understood not the saying which he spake unto them.","But they did not understand what he was saying to them.","Et ipsi non intellexerunt verbum, quod locutus est ad illos.","והם לא הבינו את הדבר אשר דבר אליהם׃"],["49","2","51","예수님은 부모와 함께 나자렛으로 내려가, 그들에게 순종하며 지냈다. 그의 어머니는 이 모든 일을 마음속에 간직하였다.","예수는 부모를 따라 나자렛으로 돌아와 부모에게 순종하며 살았다. 그 어머니는 이 모든 일을 마음속에 간직하였다.","예수께서 함께 내려가사 나사렛에 이르러 순종하여 받드시더라 그 어머니는 이 모든 말을 마음에 두니라","예수께서 한가지로 내려가사 나사렛에 이르러 순종하여 받드시더라 그 모친은 이 모든 2)말을 마음에 두니라 혹 일을","예수께서는 부모를 따라 나사렛으로 돌아와 그들을 섬기며 지내셨다. 예수의 어머니는 이 모든 일을 마음속에 간직하였다.","He went down with them and came to Nazareth, and was obedient to them; and his mother kept all these things in her heart.","And he went down with them, and came to Nazareth, and was subject unto them: but his mother kept all these sayings in her heart.","Then he went down to Nazareth with them and was obedient to them. But his mother treasured all these things in her heart.","Et descendit cum eis et venit Nazareth et erat subditus illis. Et mater eius conservabat omnia verba in corde suo.","וירד אתם ויבא אל נצרת ויכנע להם ואמו שמרה בלבה את כל הדברים האלה׃"],["49","2","52","예수님은 지혜와 키가 자랐고 하느님과 사람들의 총애도 더하여 갔다.","3)예수는 몸과 지혜가 날로 자라면서 하느님과 사람의 총애를 더욱 많이 받게 되었다.1사무 2:26.","예수는 지혜와 키가 자라가며 하나님과 사람에게 더욱 사랑스러워 가시더라","예수는 그 지혜와 그 키가 자라가며 하나님과 사람에게 더 사랑스러워 가시더라","ㄱ) 예수께서는 키와 지혜가 자라고 하나님과 사람들에게 더욱 사랑을 받으셨다. (ㄱ. 삼상2:26)","And Jesus advanced [in] wisdom and age and favor before God and man.","And Jesus increased in wisdom and stature, and in favour with God and man.","And Jesus grew in wisdom and stature, and in favor with God and men.","Et Iesus proficiebat sapientia et aetate et gratia apud Deum et homines.","וישוע הלך וגדל בחכמה ומקומה ובחן עם אלהים ועם אנשים׃"],["49","3","1","티베리우스 황제의 치세 제십오년, 본시오 빌라도가 유다 총독으로, 헤로데가 갈릴래아의 영주로, 그의 동생 필리포스가 이투래아와 트라코니티스 지방의 영주로, 리사니아스가 아빌레네의 영주로 있을 때,","로마 황제 티베리오가 다스린 지 십오 년째 되던 해에 본티오 빌라도가 유다 총독으로 있었다. 그리고 갈릴래아 지방의 영주는 헤로데였고 이두래아와 트라코니티스 지방의 영주는 헤로데의 동생 필립보였으며 아빌레네 지방의 영주는 리사니아였다.","디베료 황제가 통치한 지 열다섯 해 곧 본디오 빌라도가 유대의 총독으로, 헤롯이 갈릴리의 분봉 왕으로, 그 동생 빌립이 이두래와 드라고닛 지방의 분봉 왕으로, 루사니아가 아빌레네의 분봉 왕으로,","디베료 가이사가 위에 있은지 열 다섯 해 곧 본디오 빌라도가 유대의 총독으로, 헤롯이 갈릴리의 분봉왕으로, 그 동생 빌립이 이두래와 드라고닛 지방의 분봉왕으로, 루사니아가 아빌레네의 분봉왕으로,","디베료 황제가 다스린 지 15년째 되던 해에 하나님의 말씀이 광야에 살고 있는 사가랴의 아들 요한에게 임했다. 그 당시는 빌라도가 유대의 총독으로, 헤롯이 갈릴리의 분봉왕으로, 그의 동생 빌립이 이두래와 드라고닛 지방의 분봉왕으로, 루사니아가 아빌레네의 분봉왕으로 있을 때였다. 그리고 대제사장직은 안나스와 가야바가 맡고 있었다.","In the fifteenth year of the reign of Tiberius Caesar, when Pontius Pilate was governor of Judea, and Herod was tetrarch of Galilee, and his brother Philip tetrarch of the region of Ituraea and Trachonitis, and Lysanias was tetrarch of Abilene,","Now in the fifteenth year of the reign of Tiberius Caesar, Pontius Pilate being governor of Judaea, and Herod being tetrarch of Galilee, and his brother Philip tetrarch of Ituraea and of the region of Trachonitis, and Lysanias the tetrarch of Abilene,","In the fifteenth year of the reign of Tiberius Caesar--when Pontius Pilate was governor of Judea, Herod tetrarch of Galilee, his brother Philip tetrarch of Iturea and Traconitis, and Lysanias tetrarch of Abilene--","Anno autem quinto decimo im perii Tiberii Caesaris, procu rante Pontio Pilato Iudaeam, tetrarcha autem Galilaeae Herode, Philippo autem fratre eius tetrarcha Ituraeae et Trachonitidis regionis, et Lysania Abilinae tetrarcha,","בשנת חמש עשרה למלכות הקיסר טיבריוס בהיות פונטיוס פילטוס הגמון ביהודה והורדוס שר רבע על הגליל ואחיו פילפוס שר רבע על מדינות יטור וטרכונה ולוסניס שר רבע על אבילין׃"],["49","3","2","또 한나스와 카야파가 대사제로 있을 때, 하느님의 말씀이 광야에 있는 즈카르야의 아들 요한에게 내렸다.","그리고 당시의 대사제는 안나스와 가야파였다. 바로 그 무렵에 즈가리야의 아들 요한은 광야에서 하느님의 말씀을 들었다.","안나스와 가야바가 대제사장으로 있을 때에 하나님의 말씀이 빈 들에서 사가랴의 아들 요한에게 임한지라","안나스와 가야바가 대제사장으로 있을 때에 하나님의 말씀이 빈 들에서 사가랴의 아들 요한에게 임한지라","(1절에 포함되어 있음)","during the high priesthood of Annas and Caiaphas, the word of God came to John the son of Zechariah in the desert.","Annas and Caiaphas being the high priests, the word of God came unto John the son of Zacharias in the wilderness.","during the high priesthood of Annas and Caiaphas, the word of God came to John son of Zechariah in the desert.","sub principe sacerdotum Anna et Caipha, factum est verbum Dei super Ioannem Zachariae filium in deserto.","בימי הכהנים הגדולים חנן וקיפא היה דבר אלהים אל יוחנן בן זכריה במדבר׃"],["49","3","3","그리하여 요한은 요르단 부근의 모든 지방을 다니며, 죄의 용서를 위한 회개의 세례를 선포하였다.","그리고는 요르단 강 부근의 모든 지방을 두루 다니며 \"회개하고 세례를 받아라. 그러면 죄를 용서받을 것이다.\" 하고 선포하였다.","요한이 요단 강 부근 각처에 와서 죄 사함을 받게 하는 회개의 세례를 전파하니","요한이 요단강 부근 각처에 와서 죄 사함을 얻게 하는 회개의 세례를 전파하니","요한은 요단강 부근에 있는 온 동네를 돌아다니며 회개하고 하나님께로 돌아올 것을 호소하였다. 그리고 하나님께로 돌아온 증거로 침례를 받아야 한다고 설교하였다.","He went throughout [the] whole region of the Jordan, proclaiming a baptism of repentance for the forgiveness of sins,","And he came into all the country about Jordan, preaching the baptism of repentance for the remission of sins;","He went into all the country around the Jordan, preaching a baptism of repentance for the forgiveness of sins.","Et venit in omnem regionem circa Iordanem praedicans baptismum paenitentiae in remissionem peccatorum,","ויבא אל כל ככר הירדן ויקרא טבילת התשובה לסליחת החטאים׃"],["49","3","4","이는 이사야 예언자가 선포한 말씀의 책에 기록된 그대로이다. “광야에서 외치는 이의 소리. ‘너희는 주님의 길을 마련하여라. 그분의 길을 곧게 내어라.","이것은 예언자 이사야의 책에 기록된 말씀대로였다. \"1)광야에서 외치는 이의 소리, '너희는 주의 길을 닦고 그의 길을 고르게 하여라. 칠십인역 이사 40:3-5.","선지자 이사야의 책에 쓴 바 ㄱ)광야에서 외치는 자의 소리가 있어 이르되 너희는 주의 길을 준비하라 그의 오실 길을 곧게 하라","선지자 이사야의 책에 쓴바 ㄱ)광야에 외치는 자의 소리가 있어 가로되 너희는 주의 길을 예비하라 그의 첩경을 평탄케 하라 사 40:3 이하","예언자 이사야의 말대로 요한은 \"광야에서 외치는 소리\"였다. ㄱ) \"너희는 여호와께서 예루살렘의 성전으로 가실 길을 광야에 뚫어 놓아라. 거친 사막을 평평하게 다듬어서 우리 하나님이 통과하실 큰길을 닦아 놓아라. (ㄱ. 70인역 사40:3-5)","as it is written in the book of the words of the prophet Isaiah: “A voice of one crying out in the desert: ‘Prepare the way of the Lord, make straight his paths.","As it is written in the book of the words of Esaias the prophet, saying, The voice of one crying in the wilderness, Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make his paths straight.","As is written in the book of the words of Isaiah the prophet: \"A voice of one calling in the desert, 'Prepare the way for the Lord, make straight paths for him.","sicut scriptum est in libro sermonum Isaiae prophetae:  “Vox clamantis in deserto:  “Parate viam Domini, rectas facite semitas eius.","ככתוב בספר דברי ישעיהו הנביא קול קורא במדבר פנו דרך יהוה ישרו מסלותיו׃"],["49","3","5","골짜기는 모두 메워지고 산과 언덕은 모두 낮아져라. 굽은 데는 곧아지고 거친 길은 평탄하게 되어라.","모든 골짜기는 메워지고 높은 산과 작은 언덕은 눕혀져 굽은 길이 곧아지며 험한 길이 고르게 되는 날,","모든 골짜기가 메워지고 모든 산과 작은 산이 낮아지고 굽은 것이 곧아지고 험한 길이 평탄하여질 것이요","모든 골짜기가 메워지고 모든 산과 작은 산이 낮아지고 굽은 것이 곧아지고 험한 길이 평탄하여질 것이요","깊은 골짜기마다 흙을 채워서 평지로 돋워 올리고 산과 언덕들을 모두 깍아 내려 낮게 만들어서 결국 높은 곳들이 평평한 곳으로 바뀌고 울퉁불퉁한 산봉우리들이 드넓은 평원으로 바뀌게 하여라.","Every valley shall be filled and every mountain and hill shall be made low. The winding roads shall be made straight, and the rough ways made smooth,","Every valley shall be filled, and every mountain and hill shall be brought low; and the crooked shall be made straight, and the rough ways shall be made smooth;","Every valley shall be filled in, every mountain and hill made low. The crooked roads shall become straight, the rough ways smooth.","Omnis vallis implebitur, et omnis mons et collis humiliabitur; et erunt prava in directa, et aspera in vias planas:","כל גיא ינשא וכל הר וגבעה ישפלו והיה העקב למישור והרכסים לבקעה׃"],["49","3","6","그리하여 모든 사람이 하느님의 구원을 보리라.’”","모든 사람이 하느님의 구원을 보리라.'\"","모든 육체가 하나님의 구원하심을 보리라 함과 같으니라","모든 육체가 하나님의 구원하심을 보리라 함과 같으니라","그 길로 여호와께서 영광스럽게 오실 것이니 모는 인간이 그분을 바라볼 것이다.\"","and all flesh shall see the salvation of God.’”","And all flesh shall see the salvation of God.","And all mankind will see God's salvation.'\"","et videbit omnis caro salutare Dei “ “.","וראו כל בשר את ישועת אלהים׃"],["49","3","7","요한은 자기에게 세례를 받으러 오는 군중에게 말하였다. “독사의 자식들아, 다가오는 진노를 피하라고 누가 너희에게 일러 주더냐?","요한은 자기에게 세례를 받으러 나오는 사람들에게 이렇게 말하였다. \"이 독사의 족속들아, 닥쳐올 징벌을 피하라고 누가 일러주더냐?","요한이 세례 받으러 나아오는 무리에게 이르되 독사의 자식들아 누가 너희에게 일러 장차 올 진노를 피하라 하더냐","요한이 세례 받으러 나오는 무리에게 이르되 독사의 자식들아 누가 너희를 가르쳐 장차 올 진노를 피하라 하더냐","요한은 침례를 받으러 온 군중에게 이렇게 설교하였다. \"독사의 자식들아! 너희는 진심으로 하나님께 돌아오려 하지 않고 지옥만을 피하려 하고 있다! 그게 바로 너희가 침례를 받으려는 이유가 아니냐?","He said to the crowds who came out to be baptized by him, “You brood of vipers! Who warned you to flee from the coming wrath?","Then said he to the multitude that came forth to be baptized of him, O generation of vipers, who hath warned you to flee from the wrath to come?","John said to the crowds coming out to be baptized by him, \"You brood of vipers! Who warned you to flee from the coming wrath?","Dicebat ergo ad turbas, quae exibant, ut baptizarentur ab ipso:  “Genimina viperarum, quis ostendit vobis fugere a ventura ira?","ויאמר אל המון העם היצאים להטבל על ידו אתם ילדי הצפעונים מי הורה אתכם להמלט מפני הקצף הבא׃"],["49","3","8","회개에 합당한 열매를 맺어라. 그리고 ‘우리는 아브라함을 조상으로 모시고 있다.’는 말은 아예 혼잣말로라도 꺼내지 마라. 내가 너희에게 말하는데, 하느님께서는 이 돌들로도 아브라함의 자녀들을 만드실 수 있다.","너희는 회개했다는 증거를 행실로 보여라. 그리고 '아브라함이 우리의 조상이다.' 하는 말은 아예 하지도 마라. 사실 하느님은 이 돌들로도 아브라함의 자녀를 만드실 수 있다.","그러므로 회개에 합당한 열매를 맺고 속으로 아브라함이 우리 조상이라 말하지 말라 내가 너희에게 이르노니 하나님이 능히 이 돌들로도 아브라함의 자손이 되게 하시리라","그러므로 회개에 합당한 열매를 맺고 속으로 아브라함이 우리 조상이라 말하지 말라 내가 너희에게 이르노니 하나님이 능히 이 돌들로도 아브라함의 자손이 되게 하시리라","그러나 먼저 가서 너희가 참으로 회개했다는 것을 생활로 증명해 보여라. 너희가 아브라함의 후손이기 때문에 안전하다는 생각을 하지 말라. 그것은 아무러한 도움도 되지 않는다. 하나님께서는 이 광야에 있는 돌을 가지고도 아브라함의 자녀를 만드실 수 있기 때문이다.","Produce good fruits as evidence of your repentance; and do not begin to say to yourselves, ‘We have Abraham as our father,’ for I tell you, God can raise up children to Abraham from these stones.","Bring forth therefore fruits worthy of repentance, and begin not to say within yourselves, We have Abraham to our father: for I say unto you, That God is able of these stones to raise up children unto Abraham.","Produce fruit in keeping with repentance. And do not begin to say to yourselves, 'We have Abraham as our father.' For I tell you that out of these stones God can raise up children for Abraham.","Facite ergo fructus dignos paenitentiae et ne coeperitis dicere in vobis ipsis:  “Patrem habemus Abraham “; dico enim vobis quia potest Deus de lapidibus istis suscitare Abrahae filios.","לכן עשו פרי הראוי לתשובה ואל תדמו בנפשכם לאמר אברהם הוא אבינו כי אני אמר לכם כי מן האבנים האלה יכל האלהים להקים בנים לאברהם׃"],["49","3","9","도끼가 이미 나무뿌리에 닿아 있다. 좋은 열매를 맺지 않는 나무는 모두 찍혀서 불 속에 던져진다.”","도끼가 이미 나무 뿌리에 닿았으니 좋은 열매를 맺지 않는 나무는 다 찍혀 불 속에 던져질 것이다.\"","이미 도끼가 나무 뿌리에 놓였으니 좋은 열매 맺지 아니하는 나무마다 찍혀 불에 던져지리라","이미 도끼가 나무 뿌리에 놓였으니 좋은 열매 맺지 아니하는 나무마다 찍혀 불에 던지우리라","하나님의 심판의 도끼가 너희 위에 놓여 있다. 너희를 뿌리째 찍어 넘길 준비가 되어 있다. 그러니 좋은 열매를 맺지 않는 나무는 다 찍혀 불에 던져질 것이다.\"","Even now the ax lies at the root of the trees. Therefore every tree that does not produce good fruit will be cut down and thrown into the fire.”","And now also the axe is laid unto the root of the trees: every tree therefore which bringeth not forth good fruit is hewn down, and cast into the fire.","The ax is already at the root of the trees, and every tree that does not produce good fruit will be cut down and thrown into the fire.\"","Iam enim et securis ad radicem arborum posita est; omnis ergo arbor non faciens fructum bonum exciditur et in ignem mittitur “.","וכבר הושם הגרזן על שרש העצים והנה כל עץ אשר איננו עשה פרי טוב יגדע והשלך באש׃"],["49","3","10","군중이 그에게 물었다. “그러면 저희가 어떻게 해야 합니까?”","군중은 요한에게 \"그러면 우리는 어떻게 해야 하겠습니까?\" 하고 물었다.","무리가 물어 이르되 그러면 우리가 무엇을 하리이까","무리가 물어 가로되 그러하면 우리가 무엇을 하리이까","군중이 요한에게 물었다. \"그러면 우리는 어떻게 해야 합니까?\"","And the crowds asked him, “What then should we do?”","And the people asked him, saying, What shall we do then?","\"What should we do then?\" the crowd asked.","Et interrogabant eum turbae dicentes:  “Quid ergo faciemus? “.","וישאלהו המון העם לאמר מה אפוא נעשה׃"],["49","3","11","요한이 그들에게 대답하였다. “옷을 두 벌 가진 사람은 못 가진 이에게 나누어 주어라. 먹을 것을 가진 사람도 그렇게 하여라.”","요한은 \"속옷 두 벌을 가진 사람은 한 벌을 없는 사람에게 주고 먹을 것이 있는 사람도 이와 같이 남과 나누어 먹어야 한다.\" 하고 대답하였다.","대답하여 이르되 옷 두 벌 있는 자는 옷 없는 자에게 나눠 줄 것이요 먹을 것이 있는 자도 그렇게 할 것이니라 하고","대답하여 가로되 옷 두 벌 있는 자는 옷 없는 자에게 나눠줄 것이요 먹을 것이 있는 자도 그렇게 할것이니라 하고","요한이 대답하였다. \"옷 두 벌을 가지고 있거든 한 벌을 가난한 사람에게 주어라. 먹을 것이 있거든 배고픈 사람과 나누어 먹어라.\"","He said to them in reply, “Whoever has two tunics should share with the person who has none. And whoever has food should do likewise.”","He answereth and saith unto them, He that hath two coats, let him impart to him that hath none; and he that hath meat, let him do likewise.","John answered, \"The man with two tunics should share with him who has none, and the one who has food should do the same.\"","Respondens autem dicebat illis:  “Qui habet duas tunicas, det non habenti; et, qui habet escas, similiter faciat “.","ויען ויאמר אליהם מי אשר לו כתנות שתים הוא יחלק לאשר אין לו ומי אשר לו מזון ככה יעשה גם הוא׃"],["49","3","12","세리들도 세례를 받으러 와서 그에게, “스승님, 저희는 어떻게 해야 합니까?” 하자,","세리들도 와서 세례를 받고 \"선생님, 우리는 어떻게 했으면 좋겠습니까?\" 하고 물었다.","세리들도 세례를 받고자 하여 와서 이르되 선생이여 우리는 무엇을 하리이까 하매","세리들도 세례를 받고자하여 와서 가로되 선생이여 우리는 무엇을 하리이까 하매","부패했다고 소문이 난 세리들도 침례받으러 와서 물었다. \"우리는 많은 죄를 지었으니 어떻게 하면 좋겠습니까?\"","Even tax collectors came to be baptized and they said to him, “Teacher, what should we do?”","Then came also publicans to be baptized, and said unto him, Master, what shall we do?","Tax collectors also came to be baptized. \"Teacher,\" they asked, \"what should we do?\"","Venerunt autem et publicani, ut baptizarentur, et dixerunt ad illum:  “Magister, quid faciemus? “.","ויבאו גם מוכסים להטבל ויאמרו אליו רבי מה נעשה׃"],["49","3","13","요한은 그들에게 “정해진 것보다 더 요구하지 마라.” 하고 일렀다.","요한은 \"정한 대로만 받고 그 이상은 받아내지 마라.\" 하였다.","이르되 부과된 것 외에는 거두지 말라 하고","가로되 정한 세 외에는 늑징치 말라하고","요한이 대답하였다. \"정직하게 살아라. 로마 정부가 정한 것 이상으로 세금을 징수하지 말아라.\"","He answered them, “Stop collecting more than what is prescribed.”","And he said unto them, Exact no more than that which is appointed you.","\"Don't collect any more than you are required to,\" he told them.","At ille dixit ad eos:  “Nihil amplius quam constitutum est vobis, faciatis “.","ויאמר אליהם אל תגבו יותר מחקכם׃"],["49","3","14","군사들도 그에게 “저희는 또 어떻게 해야 합니까?” 하고 묻자, 요한은 그들에게 “아무도 강탈하거나 갈취하지 말고 너희 봉급으로 만족하여라.” 하고 일렀다.","군인들도 \"저희는 또 어떻게 해야 합니까?\" 하고 물었다. 요한은 \"협박하거나 속임수를 써서 남의 물건을 착취하지 말고 자기가 받는 봉급으로 만족하여라.\" 하고 일러주었다.","군인들도 물어 이르되 우리는 무엇을 하리이까 하매 이르되 사람에게서 강탈하지 말며 거짓으로 고발하지 말고 받는 급료를 족한 줄로 알라 하니라","군병들도 물어 가로되 우리는 무엇을 하리이까 하매 가로되 사람에게 강포하지 말며 무소하지 말고 받는 요를 족한 줄로 알라 하니라","군인들이 와서 물었다. \"우리는 어떻게 해야 합니까?\" 요한이 대답하였다. \"남을 위협하거나 폭력을 써서 돈을 빼앗지 말아라. 남이 하지 않은 줄 뻔히 알면서 고발하는 일을 하지 말고 또 너희들이 받는 봉급으로 만족해하여라!\"","Soldiers also asked him, “And what is it that we should do?” He told them, “Do not practice extortion, do not falsely accuse anyone, and be satisfied with your wages.”","And the soldiers likewise demanded of him, saying, And what shall we do? And he said unto them, Do violence to no man, neither accuse any falsely; and be content with your wages.","Then some soldiers asked him, \"And what should we do?\" He replied, \"Don't extort money and don't accuse people falsely--be content with your pay.\"","Interrogabant autem eum et milites dicentes:  “Quid faciemus et nos? “. Et ait illis:  “Neminem concutiatis neque calumniam faciatis et contenti estote stipendiis vestris “.","וישאלהו גם אנשי הצבא לאמר ואנחנו מה נעשה ויאמר אליהם איש אל תזעזעו ואל תלשינו איש ויהי די לכם בשכרכם׃"],["49","3","15","백성은 기대에 차 있었으므로, 모두 마음속으로 요한이 메시아가 아닐까 하고 생각하였다.","백성들은 그리스도를 기다리고 있던 터였으므로 요한을 보고 모두들 속으로 그가 혹시 그리스도가 아닐까 하고 생각하였다.","백성들이 바라고 기다리므로 모든 사람들이 요한을 혹 그리스도신가 심중에 생각하니","백성들이 바라고 기다리므로 모든 사람들이 요한을 혹 그리스도신가 심중에 의논하니","그리스도가 곧 오시리라고 기대하고 있던 모든 사람들은 요한이 혹시 그분일지도 모른다고 생각하였다. 그래서 그 사실 여부를 묻는 질문이 사방에서 쏟아져 나왔다.","Now the people were filled with expectation, and all were asking in their hearts whether John might be the Messiah.","And as the people were in expectation, and all men mused in their hearts of John, whether he were the Christ, or not;","The people were waiting expectantly and were all wondering in their hearts if John might possibly be the Christ.","Existimante autem populo et cogitantibus omnibus in cordibus suis de Ioanne, ne forte ipse esset Christus,","ויהי כאשר חכה העם וכלם חשבים בלבם לאמר אולי יוחנן הוא המשיח׃"],["49","3","16","그래서 요한은 모든 사람에게 말하였다. “나는 너희에게 물로 세례를 준다. 그러나 나보다 더 큰 능력을 지니신 분이 오신다. 나는 그분의 신발 끈을 풀어 드릴 자격조차 없다. 그분께서는 너희에게 성령과 불로 세례를 주실 것이다.","그러나 요한은 모든 사람에게 이렇게 말하였다. \"나는 너희에게 물로 세례를 베풀지만 이제 머지않아 성령과 불로 세례를 베푸실 분이 오신다. 그분은 나보다 더 훌륭한 분이어서 나는 그분의 신발끈을 풀어드릴 자격조차 없다.","요한이 모든 사람에게 대답하여 이르되 나는 물로 너희에게 세례를 베풀거니와 나보다 능력이 많으신 이가 오시나니 나는 그의 신발끈을 풀기도 감당하지 못하겠노라 그는 성령과 불로 너희에게 세례를 베푸실 것이요","요한이 모든 사람에게 대답하여 가로되 나는 물로 너희에게 세례를 주거니와 나보다 능력이 많으신 이가 오시나니 나는 그 신들메를 풀기도 감당치 못하겠노라 그는 성령과 불로 너희에게 세례를 주실 것이요","그러자 요한은 이렇게 대답하였다. \"나는 다만 물로 침례를 주지만 나보다 훨씬 더 능력 있는 분이 곧 오신다. 나는 그분의 신발끈을 풀어 드릴만한 자격도 없다. 그뿐은 너희에게 불과 성령으로 침례를 주실 것이다.","John answered them all, saying, “I am baptizing you with water, but one mightier than I is coming. I am not worthy to loosen the thongs of his sandals. He will baptize you with the holy Spirit and fire.","John answered, saying unto them all, I indeed baptize you with water; but one mightier than I cometh, the latchet of whose shoes I am not worthy to unloose: he shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost and with fire:","John answered them all, \"I baptize you with water. But one more powerful than I will come, the thongs of whose sandals I am not worthy to untie. He will baptize you with the Holy Spirit and with fire.","respondit Ioannes dicens omnibus:  “Ego quidem aqua baptizo vos. Venit autem fortior me, cuius non sum dignus solvere corrigiam calceamentorum eius: ipse vos baptizabit in Spiritu Sancto et igni;","ויען יוחנן ויאמר לכלם הן אני טובל אתכם במים אבל בוא יבוא החזק ממני אשר אינני כדי להתיר את שרוך נעליו הוא יטבל אתכם ברוח הקדש ובאש׃"],["49","3","17","또 손에 키를 드시고 당신의 타작마당을 깨끗이 치우시어, 알곡은 당신의 곳간에 모아들이시고 쭉정이는 꺼지지 않는 불에 태워 버리실 것이다.”","그분은 손에 키를 들고 타작 마당의 곡식을 깨끗이 가려 알곡은 모아 곳간에 들이고 쭉정이는 꺼지지 않는 불에 태우실 것이다.\"","손에 키를 들고 자기의 타작 마당을 정하게 하사 알곡은 모아 곳간에 들이고 쭉정이는 꺼지지 않는 불에 태우시리라","손에 키를 들고 자기의 타작마당을 정하게 하사 알곡은 모아 곡간에 들이고 쭉정이는 꺼지지 않는 불에 태우시리라","그분은 알곡과 쭉정이를 가려내어 쭉정이는 영원히 꺼지지 않는 불에 태우시고 알곡은 곳간에 모아 들이실 것이다.\"","His winnowing fan is in his hand to clear his threshing floor and to gather the wheat into his barn, but the chaff he will burn with unquenchable fire.”","Whose fan is in his hand, and he will throughly purge his floor, and will gather the wheat into his garner; but the chaff he will burn with fire unquenchable.","His winnowing fork is in his hand to clear his threshing floor and to gather the wheat into his barn, but he will burn up the chaff with unquenchable fire.\"","cuius ventilabrum in manu eius ad purgandam aream suam et ad congregandum triticum in horreum suum, paleas autem comburet igni inexstinguibili “.","אשר המזרה בידו להבר את גרנו ויאסף את דגנו אל אוצרו ואת המץ ישרפנו באש אשר לא תכבה׃"],["49","3","18","요한은 그 밖에도 여러 가지로 권고하면서 백성에게 기쁜 소식을 전하였다.","그 밖에도 요한은 사람들에게 여러 가지로 권하면서 복음을 선포하였다.","또 그밖에 여러 가지로 권하여 백성에게 좋은 소식을 전하였으나","또 기타 여러가지로 권하여 백성에게 좋은 소식을 전하였으나","요한은 이 밖에도 사람들에게 많은 권면과 기쁜 소식을 선포하였다.","Exhorting them in many other ways, he preached good news to the people.","And many other things in his exhortation preached he unto the people.","And with many other words John exhorted the people and preached the good news to them.","Multa quidem et alia exhortans evangelizabat populum.","וכן עוד דברים אחרים הרבה בשר וגם הזהיר את העם׃"],["49","3","19","그러나 헤로데 영주는 자기 동생의 아내 헤로디아 때문에, 그리고 자기가 저지른 온갖 악행 때문에 요한에게 여러 번 책망을 받고,","그런데 영주 헤로데는 자기 동생의 아내 헤로디아를 처로 맞아들인 일과 그 밖의 온갖 잘못을 들어 자기를 책망했다고 하여","분봉 왕 헤롯은 그의 동생의 아내 헤로디아의 일과 또 자기가 행한 모든 악한 일로 말미암아 요한에게 책망을 받고","분봉왕 헤롯은 그 동생의 아내 헤로디아의 일과 또 그의 행한 모든 악한 일을 인하여 요한에게 책망을 받고","그러나 갈릴리의 분봉왕 헤롯은 동생 빌립의 아내를 자기 아내로 만든 일과 그 밖에도 옳지 못한 많은 일에 대해 요한이 공공연하게 비판하자 그를 감옥에 가두었다. 이렇게 하여 헤롯은 가뜩이나 많은 죄에다 죄 하나를 더하였다.","Now Herod the tetrarch, who had been censured by him because of Herodias, his brother’s wife, and because of all the evil deeds Herod had committed,","But Herod the tetrarch, being reproved by him for Herodias his brother Philip's wife, and for all the evils which Herod had done,","But when John rebuked Herod the tetrarch because of Herodias, his brother's wife, and all the other evil things he had done,","Herodes autem tetrarcha, cum corriperetur ab illo de Herodiade uxore fratris sui et de omnibus malis, quae fecit Herodes,","והורדוס שר רבע המדינה אשר הוכח על ידו על אדות הורודיה אשת אחיו פילפוס ועל אדות כל הרע אשר עשה הורדוס׃"],["49","3","20","그 모든 악행에다 한 가지를 더 보태었다. 요한을 감옥에 가두어 버린 것이다.","요한을 감옥에 가두었다. 이리하여 헤로데는 악한 일 한 가지를 더하게 되었다.","그 위에 한 가지 악을 더하여 요한을 옥에 가두니라","이 위에 한 가지 악을 더하여 요한을 옥에 가두니라","(19절에 포함되어 있음)","added still another to these by [also] putting John in prison.","Added yet this above all, that he shut up John in prison.","Herod added this to them all: He locked John up in prison.","adiecit et hoc supra omnia et inclusit Ioannem in carcere.","הוסיף על כל אלה גם את זאת ויסגר את יוחנן במשמר׃"],["49","3","21","온 백성이 세례를 받은 뒤에 예수님께서도 세례를 받으시고 기도를 하시는데, 하늘이 열리며","사람들이 모두 세례를 받고 있을 때 예수께서도 세례를 받으시고 기도를 하고 계셨는데 홀연히 하늘이 열리며","백성이 다 세례를 받을새 예수도 세례를 받으시고 기도하실 때에 하늘이 열리며","백성이 다 세례를 받을쌔 예수도 세례를 받으시고 기도하실 때에 하늘이 열리며","군중이 모두 침례를 받을 때 예수께서도 친히 침례를 받으셨다. 그리고 기도하시는데 하늘이 열리고","After all the people had been baptized and Jesus also had been baptized and was praying, heaven was opened","Now when all the people were baptized, it came to pass, that Jesus also being baptized, and praying, the heaven was opened,","When all the people were being baptized, Jesus was baptized too. And as he was praying, heaven was opened","Factum est autem, cum baptizaretur omnis populus, et Iesu baptizato et orante, apertum est caelum,","ויהי בהטבל כל העם וגם ישוע נטבל ומתפלל ויפתחו השמים׃"],["49","3","22","성령께서 비둘기 같은 형체로 그분 위에 내리시고, 하늘에서 소리가 들려왔다. “너는 내가 사랑하는 아들, 내 마음에 드는 아들이다.”","성령이 비둘기 형상으로 그에게 내려오셨다. 그리고 하늘에서는 \"2)너는 내가 사랑하는 아들, 내 마음에 드는 아들이다.\" 하는 소리가 들려왔다.시편 2:7; 창세 22:2; 이사 42:1.","성령이 비둘기 같은 형체로 그의 위에 강림하시더니 하늘로부터 소리가 나기를 너는 내 사랑하는 아들이라 내가 너를 기뻐하노라 하시니라","성령이 형체로 비둘기 같이 그의 위에 강림하시더니 하늘로서 소리가 나기를 너는 내 사랑하는 아들이라 내가 너를 기뻐하노라 하시니라","성령이 비둘기 같은 형체로 그분 위에 내려오셨다. 그때 하늘에서 ㄴ) \"너는 내가 사랑하는 아들이요, 내 마음에 드는 아들이다\" 하는 음성이 들려 왔다. (ㄴ. 창22:1.시2:7,사42:1)","and the holy Spirit descended upon him in bodily form like a dove. And a voice came from heaven, “You are my beloved Son; with you I am well pleased.”","And the Holy Ghost descended in a bodily shape like a dove upon him, and a voice came from heaven, which said, Thou art my beloved Son; in thee I am well pleased.","and the Holy Spirit descended on him in bodily form like a dove. And a voice came from heaven: \"You are my Son, whom I love; with you I am well pleased.\"","et descendit Spiritus Sanctus corporali specie sicut columba super ipsum; et vox de caelo facta est:  “Tu es Filius meus dilectus; in te complacui mihi “.","וירד עליו רוח הקדש בדמות גוף כיונה ויהי קול מן השמים ויאמר אתה בני ידידי בך רצתה נפשי׃"],["49","3","23","예수님께서는 서른 살쯤에 활동을 시작하셨는데, 사람들은 그분을 요셉의 아들로 여겼다. 요셉은 엘리의 아들,","예수께서는 서른 살 가량 되어 전도하기 시작하셨는데 사람들이 알기에는 그는 요셉의 아들이요, 요셉은 엘리의 아들이며,","예수께서 가르치심을 시작하실 때에 삼십 세쯤 되시니라 사람들이 아는 대로는 요셉의 아들이니 요셉의 위는 헬리요","예수께서 가르치심을 시작할 때에 삼십세쯤 되시니라 사람들의 아는대로는 요셉의 아들이니 요셉의 이상은 헬리요","예수께서 가르침을 베풀기 시작하신 것은 서른 살쯤 되었을 때였다. 예수께서는 요셉의 아들로 알려져 있었다. 요셉의 아버지는 헬리, 헬리의 아버지는 맛닷, 맛닷의 아버지는 레위, 레위의 아버지는 멜기이다. 멜기의 아버지는 얀나, 얀나의 아버지는 요셉, 요셉의 아버지는 맛다디아, 맛다디아의 아버지는 아모스이다. 아모스의 아버지는 나훔, 나훔의 아버지는 에슬리, 에슬리의 아버지는 낙개, 낙개의 아버지는 마앗이다. 마앗의 아버지는 맛다디아, 맛다디아의 아버지는 서머인, 서머인의 아버지는 요섹, 요섹의 아버지는 요다이다. 요다의 아버지는 요아난, 요아난의 아버지는 레사, 레사의 아버지는 스룹바벨, 스룹바벨의 아버지는 스알디엘이다. 스알디엘의 아버지는 네리, 네리의 아버지는 멜기, 멜기의 아버지는 앗디, 앗디의 아버지는 고삼이다. 고삼의 아버지는 엘마담, 엘마담의 아버지는 에르, 에르의 아버지는 예수, 예수의 아버지는 엘리에서이","When Jesus began his ministry he was about thirty years of age. He was the son, as was thought, of Joseph, the son of Heli,","And Jesus himself began to be about thirty years of age, being (as was supposed) the son of Joseph, which was the son of Heli,","Now Jesus himself was about thirty years old when he began his ministry. He was the son, so it was thought, of Joseph, the son of Heli,","Et ipse Iesus erat incipiens quasi annorum triginta, ut putabatur, filius Ioseph, qui fuit Heli,","והוא ישוע בהחלו היה כבן שלשים שנה ויחשבהו לבן יוסף בן עלי׃"],["49","3","24","엘리는 마탓의 아들, 마탓은 레위의 아들, 레위는 멜키의 아들, 멜키는 얀나이의 아들, 얀나이는 요셉의 아들,","그 위로 거슬러 올라가면 마땃, 레위, 멜기, 얀나이, 요셉,","그 위는 맛닷이요 그 위는 레위요 그 위는 멜기요 그 위는 얀나요 그 위는 요셉이요","그 이상은 맛닷이요 그 이상은 레위요 그 이상은 멜기요 그 이상은 얀나요 그 이상은 요셉이요","(23절에 포함되어 있음)","the son of Matthat, the son of Levi, the son of Melchi, the son of Jannai, the son of Joseph,","Which was the son of Matthat, which was the son of Levi, which was the son of Melchi, which was the son of Janna, which was the son of Joseph,","the son of Matthat, the son of Levi, the son of Melki, the son of Jannai, the son of Joseph,","qui fuit Matthat, qui fuit Levi, qui fuit Melchi, qui fuit Iannae, qui fuit Ioseph,","בן מתת בן לוי בן מלכי בן יני בן יוסף׃"],["49","3","25","요셉은 마티트야의 아들, 마티트야는 아모츠의 아들, 아모츠는 나훔의 아들, 나훔은 헤슬리의 아들, 헤슬리는 나깨의 아들,","마따디아, 아모스, 나훔, 에슬리, 나깨,","그 위는 맛다디아요 그 위는 아모스요 그 위는 나훔이요 그 위는 에슬리요 그 위는 낙개요","그 이상은 맛다디아요 그 이상은 아모스요 그 이상은 나훔이요 그 이상은 에슬리요 그 이상은 낙개요","(23절에 포함되어 있음)","the son of Mattathias, the son of Amos, the son of Nahum, the son of Esli, the son of Naggai,","Which was the son of Mattathias, which was the son of Amos, which was the son of Naum, which was the son of Esli, which was the son of Nagge,","the son of Mattathias, the son of Amos, the son of Nahum, the son of Esli, the son of Naggai,","qui fuit Matthathiae, qui fuit Amos, qui fuit Nahum, qui fuit Esli, qui fuit Naggae,","בן מתתיה בן אמוץ בן נחום בן חסלי בן נגי׃"],["49","3","26","나깨는 마핫의 아들, 마핫은 마티트야의 아들, 마티트야는 시므이의 아들, 시므이는 요섹의 아들, 요섹은 요다의 아들,","마핫, 마따디아, 시므이, 요섹, 요다,","그 위는 마앗이요 그 위는 맛다디아요 그 위는 서머인이요 그 위는 요섹이요 그 위는 요다요","그 이상은 마앗이요 그 이상은 맛다디아요 그 이상은 서머인이요 그 이상은 요섹이요 그 이상은 요다요","(23절에 포함되어 있음)","the son of Maath, the son of Mattathias, the son of Semein, the son of Josech, the son of Joda,","Which was the son of Maath, which was the son of Mattathias, which was the son of Semei, which was the son of Joseph, which was the son of Juda,","the son of Maath, the son of Mattathias, the son of Semein, the son of Josech, the son of Joda,","qui fuit Maath, qui fuit Matthathiae, qui fuit Semei, qui fuit Iosech, qui fuit Ioda,","בן מחת בן מתתיה בן שמעי בן יוסף בן יודה׃"],["49","3","27","요다는 요하난의 아들, 요하난은 레사의 아들, 레사는 즈루빠벨의 아들, 즈루빠벨은 스알티엘의 아들, 스알티엘은 네리의 아들,","요하난, 레사, 즈루빠벨, 스알디엘, 네리,","그 위는 요아난이요 그 위는 레사요 그 위는 스룹바벨이요 그 위는 스알디엘이요 그 위는 네리요","그 이상은 요아난이요 그 이상은 레사요 그 이상은 스룹바벨이요 그 이상은 스알디엘이요 그 이상은 네리요","(23절에 포함되어 있음)","the son of Joanan, the son of Rhesa, the son of Zerubbabel, the son of Shealtiel, the son of Neri,","Which was the son of Joanna, which was the son of Rhesa, which was the son of Zorobabel, which was the son of Salathiel, which was the son of Neri,","the son of Joanan, the son of Rhesa, the son of Zerubbabel, the son of Shealtiel, the son of Neri,","qui fuit Ioanna, qui fuit Resa, qui fuit Zorobabel, qui fuit Salathiel, qui fuit Neri,","בן יוחנן בן רישא בן זרבלל בן שאלתיאל בן גרי׃"],["49","3","28","네리는 멜키의 아들, 멜키는 아띠의 아들, 아띠는 코삼의 아들, 코삼은 엘마담의 아들, 엘마담은 에르의 아들,","멜기, 아띠, 고삼, 엘마담, 에르,","그 위는 멜기요 그 위는 앗디요 그 위는 고삼이요 그 위는 엘마담이요 그 위는 에르요","그 이상은 멜기요 그 이상은 앗디요 그 이상은 고삼이요 그 이상은 엘마담이요 그 이상은 에르요","(23절에 포함되어 있음)","the son of Melchi, the son of Addi, the son of Cosam, the son of Elmadam, the son of Er,","Which was the son of Melchi, which was the son of Addi, which was the son of Cosam, which was the son of Elmodam, which was the son of Er,","the son of Melki, the son of Addi, the son of Cosam, the son of Elmadam, the son of Er,","qui fuit Melchi, qui fuit Addi, qui fuit Cosam, qui fuit Elmadam, qui fuit Her,","בן מלכי בן אדי בן קוסם בן אלמדם בן ער׃"],["49","3","29","에르는 여호수아의 아들, 여호수아는 엘리에제르의 아들, 엘리에제르는 요림의 아들, 요림은 마탓의 아들, 마탓은 레위의 아들,","여호수아, 엘리에젤, 요림, 마땃, 레위,","그 위는 예수요 그 위는 엘리에서요 그 위는 요림이요 그 위는 맛닷이요 그 위는 레위요","그 이상은 예수요 그 이상은 엘리에서요 그 이상은 요림이요 그 이상은 맛닷이요 그 이상은 레위요","(23절에 포함되어 있음)","the son of Joshua, the son of Eliezer, the son of Jorim, the son of Matthat, the son of Levi,","Which was the son of Jose, which was the son of Eliezer, which was the son of Jorim, which was the son of Matthat, which was the son of Levi,","the son of Joshua, the son of Eliezer, the son of Jorim, the son of Matthat, the son of Levi,","qui fuit Iesu, qui fuit Eliezer, qui fuit Iorim, qui fuit Matthat, qui fuit Levi,","בן יוסי בן אליעזר בן יורים בן מתת בן לוי׃"],["49","3","30","레위는 시메온의 아들, 시메온은 유다의 아들, 유다는 요셉의 아들, 요셉은 요남의 아들, 요남은 엘리야킴의 아들,","시므온, 유다, 요셉, 요남, 엘리아킴,","그 위는 시므온이요 그 위는 유다요 그 위는 요셉이요 그 위는 요남이요 그 위는 엘리아김이요","그 이상은 시므온이요 그 이상은 유다요 그 이상은 요셉이요 그 이상은 요남이요 그 이상은 엘리아김이요","(23절에 포함되어 있음)","the son of Simeon, the son of Judah, the son of Joseph, the son of Jonam, the son of Eliakim,","Which was the son of Simeon, which was the son of Juda, which was the son of Joseph, which was the son of Jonan, which was the son of Eliakim,","the son of Simeon, the son of Judah, the son of Joseph, the son of Jonam, the son of Eliakim,","qui fuit Simeon, qui fuit Iudae, qui fuit Ioseph, qui fuit Iona, qui fuit Eliachim,","בן שמעון בן יהודה בן יוסף בן יונם בן אליקים׃"],["49","3","31","엘리야킴은 멜레아의 아들, 멜레아는 멘나의 아들, 멘나는 마타타의 아들, 마타타는 나탄의 아들, 나탄은 다윗의 아들,","멜레아, 멘나, 마따다, 나단, 다윗,","그 위는 멜레아요 그 위는 멘나요 그 위는 맛다다요 그 위는 나단이요 그 위는 다윗이요","그 이상은 멜레아요 그 이상은 멘나요 그 이상은 맛다다요 그 이상은 나단이요 그 이상은 다윗이요","(23절에 포함되어 있음)","the son of Melea, the son of Menna, the son of Mattatha, the son of Nathan, the son of David,","Which was the son of Melea, which was the son of Menan, which was the son of Mattatha, which was the son of Nathan, which was the son of David,","the son of Melea, the son of Menna, the son of Mattatha, the son of Nathan, the son of David,","qui fuit Melea, qui fuit Menna, qui fuit Matthatha, qui fuit Nathan, qui fuit David,","בן מליא בן מינא בן מתתה בן נתן בן דוד׃"],["49","3","32","다윗은 이사이의 아들, 이사이는 오벳의 아들, 오벳은 보아즈의 아들, 보아즈는 살라의 아들, 살라는 나흐손의 아들,","이새, 오벳, 보아즈, 살몬, 나흐손,","그 위는 이새요 그 위는 오벳이요 그 위는 보아스요 그 위는 살몬이요 그 위는 나손이요","그 이상은 이새요 그 이상은 오벳이요 그 이상은 보아스요 그 이상은 살몬이요 그 이상은 나손이요","(23절에 포함되어 있음)","the son of Jesse, the son of Obed, the son of Boaz, the son of Sala, the son of Nahshon,","Which was the son of Jesse, which was the son of Obed, which was the son of Booz, which was the son of Salmon, which was the son of Naasson,","the son of Jesse, the son of Obed, the son of Boaz, the son of Salmon, the son of Nahshon,","qui fuit Iesse, qui fuit Obed, qui fuit Booz, qui fuit Salmon, qui fuit Naasson,","בן ישי בן עובד בן בעז בן שלמון בן נחשון׃"],["49","3","33","나흐손은 암미나답의 아들, 암미나답은 아드민의 아들, 아드민은 아르니의 아들, 아르니는 헤츠론의 아들, 헤츠론은 페레츠의 아들, 페레츠는 유다의 아들,","암미나답, 아드민, 아르니, 헤스론, 베레스, 유다,","그 위는 아미나답이요 그 위는 아니요 그 위는 헤스론이요 그 위는 베레스요 그 위는 유다요","그 이상은 아미나답이요 그 이상은 아니요 그 이상은 헤스론이요 그 이상은 베레스요 그 이상은 유다요","(23절에 포함되어 있음)","the son of Amminadab, the son of Admin, the son of Arni, the son of Hezron, the son of Perez, the son of Judah,","Which was the son of Aminadab, which was the son of Aram, which was the son of Esrom, which was the son of Phares, which was the son of Juda,","the son of Amminadab, the son of Ram, the son of Hezron, the son of Perez, the son of Judah,","qui fuit Aminadab, qui fuit Admin, qui fuit Arni, qui fuit Esrom, qui fuit Phares, qui fuit Iudae,","בן עמינדב בן ארם בן חצרון בן פרץ בן יהודה׃"],["49","3","34","유다는 야곱의 아들, 야곱은 이사악의 아들, 이사악은 아브라함의 아들, 아브라함은 테라의 아들, 테라는 나호르의 아들,","야곱, 이사악, 아브라함, 데라, 나홀,","그 위는 야곱이요 그 위는 이삭이요 그 위는 아브라함이요 그 위는 데라요 그 위는 나홀이요","그 이상은 야곱이요 그 이상은 이삭이요 그 이상은 아브라함이요 그 이상은 데라요 그 이상은 나홀이요","(23절에 포함되어 있음)","the son of Jacob, the son of Isaac, the son of Abraham, the son of Terah, the son of Nahor,","Which was the son of Jacob, which was the son of Isaac, which was the son of Abraham, which was the son of Thara, which was the son of Nachor,","the son of Jacob, the son of Isaac, the son of Abraham, the son of Terah, the son of Nahor,","qui fuit Iacob, qui fuit Isaac, qui fuit Abrahae, qui fuit Thare, qui fuit Nachor,","בן יעקב בן יצחק בן אברהם בן תרח בן נחור׃"],["49","3","35","나호르는 스룩의 아들, 스룩은 르우의 아들, 르우는 펠렉의 아들, 펠렉은 에베르의 아들, 에베르는 셀라의 아들,","스룩, 르우, 벨렉, 에벨, 셀라,","그 위는 스룩이요 그 위는 르우요 그 위는 벨렉이요 그 위는 헤버요 그 위는 살라요","그 이상은 스룩이요 그 이상은 르우요 그 이상은 벨렉이요 그 이상은 헤버요 그 이상은 살라요","(23절에 포함되어 있음)","the son of Serug, the son of Reu, the son of Peleg, the son of Eber, the son of Shelah,","Which was the son of Saruch, which was the son of Ragau, which was the son of Phalec, which was the son of Heber, which was the son of Sala,","the son of Serug, the son of Reu, the son of Peleg, the son of Eber, the son of Shelah,","qui fuit Seruch, qui fuit Ragau, qui fuit Phaleg, qui fuit Heber, qui fuit Sala,","בן שרוג בן רעו בן פלג בן עבר בן שלח׃"],["49","3","36","셀라는 케난의 아들, 케난은 아르팍삿의 아들, 아르팍삿은 셈의 아들, 셈은 노아의 아들, 노아는 라멕의 아들,","케난, 아르박삿, 셈, 노아, 라멕,","그 위는 가이난이요 그 위는 아박삿이요 그 위는 셈이요 그 위는 노아요 그 위는 레멕이요","그 이상은 가이난이요 그 이상은 아박삿이요 그 이상은 셈이요 그 이상은 노아요 그 이상은 레멕이요","(23절에 포함되어 있음)","the son of Cainan, the son of Arphaxad, the son of Shem, the son of Noah, the son of Lamech,","Which was the son of Cainan, which was the son of Arphaxad, which was the son of Sem, which was the son of Noe, which was the son of Lamech,","the son of Cainan, the son of Arphaxad, the son of Shem, the son of Noah, the son of Lamech,","qui fuit Cainan, qui fuit Arphaxad, qui fuit Sem, qui fuit Noe, qui fuit Lamech,","בן קינן בן ארפכשד בן שם בן נח בן למך׃"],["49","3","37","라멕은 므투셀라의 아들, 므투셀라는 에녹의 아들, 에녹은 예렛의 아들, 예렛은 마할랄엘의 아들, 마할랄엘은 케난의 아들,","므두셀라, 에녹, 야렛, 마할랄렐, 케난,","그 위는 므두셀라요 그 위는 에녹이요 그 위는 야렛이요 그 위는 마할랄렐이요 그 위는 가이난이요","그 이상은 므두셀라요 그 이상은 에녹이요 그 이상은 야렛이요 그 이상은 마할랄렐이요 그 이상은 가이난이요","(23절에 포함되어 있음)","the son of Methuselah, the son of Enoch, the son of Jared, the son of Mahalaleel, the son of Cainan,","Which was the son of Mathusala, which was the son of Enoch, which was the son of Jared, which was the son of Maleleel, which was the son of Cainan,","the son of Methuselah, the son of Enoch, the son of Jared, the son of Mahalalel, the son of Kenan,","qui fuit Mathusala, qui fuit Henoch, qui fuit Iared, qui fuit Malaleel, qui fuit Cainan,","בן מתושלח בן חנוך בן ירד בן מהללאל בן קינן׃"],["49","3","38","케난은 에노스의 아들, 에노스는 셋의 아들, 셋은 아담의 아들, 아담은 하느님의 아들이다.","에노스, 셋, 아담, 그리고 마침내 하느님께 이른다.","그 위는 에노스요 그 위는 셋이요 그 위는 아담이요 그 위는 하나님이시니라","그 이상은 에노스요 그 이상은 셋이요 그 이상은 아담이요 그 이상은 하나님이시니라","(23절에 포함되어 있음)","the son of Enos, the son of Seth, the son of Adam, the son of God.","Which was the son of Enos, which was the son of Seth, which was the son of Adam, which was the son of God.","the son of Enosh, the son of Seth, the son of Adam, the son of God.","qui fuit Enos, qui fuit Seth, qui fuit Adam, qui fuit Dei.","בן אנוש בן שת בן אדם בן אלהים׃"],["49","4","1","예수님께서는 성령으로 가득 차 요르단 강에서 돌아오셨다. 그리고 성령에 이끌려 광야로 가시어,","예수께서는 요르단 강에서 성령을 가득히 받고 돌아오신 뒤 성령의 인도로 광야에 가셔서","예수께서 성령의 충만함을 입어 요단 강에서 돌아오사 광야에서 사십 일 동안 성령에게 이끌리시며","예수께서 성령의 충만함을 입어 요단강에서 돌아오사 광야에서 사십일 동안 성령에게 이끌리시며","예수께서는 성령이 충만하여 요단강을 떠나 성령의 인도로 유대 광야로 가셨다.","Filled with the holy Spirit, Jesus returned from the Jordan and was led by the Spirit into the desert","And Jesus being full of the Holy Ghost returned from Jordan, and was led by the Spirit into the wilderness,","Jesus, full of the Holy Spirit, returned from the Jordan and was led by the Spirit in the desert,","Iesus autem plenus Spiritu Sancto regressus est ab Iordane et agebatur in Spiritu in deserto","וישוע שב מן הירדן מלא רוח הקדש וינהגהו הרוח המדברה׃"],["49","4","2","사십 일 동안 악마에게 유혹을 받으셨다. 그동안 아무것도 잡수시지 않아 그 기간이 끝났을 때에 시장하셨다.","사십 일 동안 악마에게 유혹을 받으셨다. 그 동안 아무것도 잡수시지 않아서 사십 일이 지났을 때에는 몹시 허기지셨다.","마귀에게 시험을 받으시더라 이 모든 날에 아무 것도 잡수시지 아니하시니 날 수가 다하매 주리신지라","마귀에게 시험을 받으시더라 이 모든 날에 아무 것도 잡수시지 아니하시니 날 수가 다하매 주리신지라","그리고 거기서 40일 동안 마귀에게 시험을 받으셨다. 그동안 아무 것도 잡수시지 않았기 때문에 몹시 시장하셨다.","for forty days, to be tempted by the devil. He ate nothing during those days, and when they were over he was hungry.","Being forty days tempted of the devil. And in those days he did eat nothing: and when they were ended, he afterward hungered.","where for forty days he was tempted by the devil. He ate nothing during those days, and at the end of them he was hungry.","diebus quadraginta et tentabatur a Diabolo. Et nihil manducavit in diebus illis et, consummatis illis, esuriit.","וינסהו השטן ארבעים יום ולא אכל מאומה בימים ההם ואחרי אשר תמו וירעב׃"],["49","4","3","그런데 악마가 그분께, “당신이 하느님의 아들이라면 이 돌더러 빵이 되라고 해 보시오.” 하고 말하였다.","그 때에 악마가 예수께 \"당신이 하느님의 아들이거든 이 돌더러 빵이 되라고 하여 보시오.\" 하고 꾀었다.","마귀가 이르되 네가 만일 하나님의 아들이어든 이 돌들에게 명하여 떡이 되게 하라","마귀가 가로되 네가 만일 하나님의 아들이어든 이 돌들에게 명하여 떡덩이가 되게 하라","마귀가 말하였다. \"만일 당신이 하나님의 아들이거든, 이 돌더러 떡이 되라고 해보시오.\"","The devil said to him, “If you are the Son of God, command this stone to become bread.”","And the devil said unto him, If thou be the Son of God, command this stone that it be made bread.","The devil said to him, \"If you are the Son of God, tell this stone to become bread.\"","Dixit autem illi Diabolus:  “Si Filius Dei es, dic lapidi huic, ut panis fiat “.","ויאמר אליו השטן אם בן האלהים אתה אמר אל האבן הזאת ותהי ללחם׃"],["49","4","4","예수님께서 그에게 대답하셨다. “‘사람은 빵만으로 살지 않는다.’고 성경에 기록되어 있다.”","예수께서는 \"'1)사람이 빵으로만 사는 것이 아니다'라고 성서에 기록되어 있다.\" 하고 대답하셨다. 칠십인역 신명 8:3.","예수께서 대답하시되 기록된 바 ㄱ)사람이 떡으로만 살 것이 아니라 하였느니라","예수께서 대답하시되 기록하기를 ㄱ)사람이 떡으로만 살 것이 아니라 하였느니라 신 8:3","그러나 예수께서 말씀하셨다. ㄱ) \"사람이 떡으로만 사는 것이 아니다\"라고 성경에 씌어 있다.\" (ㄱ. 70인역 신8:3)","Jesus answered him, “It is written, ‘One does not live by bread alone.’”","And Jesus answered him, saying, It is written, That man shall not live by bread alone, but by every word of God.","Jesus answered, \"It is written: 'Man does not live on bread alone.'\"","Et respondit ad illum Iesus:  “Scriptum est:  “Non in pane solo vivet homo “ “.","ויען אתו ישוע הן כתוב כי לא על הלחם לבדו יחיה האדם כי על כל מוצא פי יהוה׃"],["49","4","5","그러자 악마는 예수님을 높은 곳으로 데리고 가서 한순간에 세계의 모든 나라를 보여 주며,","그러자 악마는 예수를 높은 곳으로 데리고 가서 잠깐 사이에 세상의 모든 왕국을 보여주며","마귀가 또 예수를 이끌고 올라가서 순식간에 천하 만국을 보이며","마귀가 또 예수를 이끌고 올라가서 순식간에 천하 만국을 보이며","마귀가 예수를 데리고 높은 곳으로 올라가서 한순간에 세상에 있는 모든 나라들을 보이고 나서 말하였다.","Then he took him up and showed him all the kingdoms of the world in a single instant.","And the devil, taking him up into an high mountain, shewed unto him all the kingdoms of the world in a moment of time.","The devil led him up to a high place and showed him in an instant all the kingdoms of the world.","Et sustulit illum et ostendit illi omnia regna orbis terrae in momento temporis;","ויעלהו השטן על הר גבה ויראהו ברגע אחד את כל ממלכות תבל׃"],["49","4","6","그분께 말하였다. “내가 저 나라들의 모든 권세와 영광을 당신에게 주겠소. 내가 받은 것이니 내가 원하는 이에게 주는 것이오.","다시 말하였다. \"저 모든 권세와 영광을 당신에게 주겠소. 저것은 내가 받은 것이니 누구에게나 내가 주고 싶은 사람에게 줄 수 있소.","이르되 이 모든 권위와 그 영광을 내가 네게 주리라 이것은 내게 넘겨 준 것이므로 내가 원하는 자에게 주노라","가로되 이 모든 권세와 그 영광을 내가 네게 주리라 이것은 내게 넘겨준 것이므로 나의 원하는 자에게 주노라","\"만일 당신이 무릎을 꿇고 내게 절하면 네가 이 모든 나라들을 당신에게 주어 권세와 영화를 누리게 하겠소. 이것은 다 내 것이니 내가 원하는 사람이면 누구에게나 줄 수 있소.\"","The devil said to him, “I shall give to you all this power and their glory; for it has been handed over to me, and I may give it to whomever I wish.","And the devil said unto him, All this power will I give thee, and the glory of them: for that is delivered unto me; and to whomsoever I will I give it.","And he said to him, \"I will give you all their authority and splendor, for it has been given to me, and I can give it to anyone I want to.","et ait ei Diabolus:  “Tibi dabo potestatem hanc universam et gloriam illorum, quia mihi tradita est, et, cui volo, do illam:","ויאמר אליו השטן לך אתן את כל הממשלה הזאת ואת כבודן כי נמסרה בידי ונתתיה לאשר אחפץ׃"],["49","4","7","당신이 내 앞에 경배하면 모두 당신 차지가 될 것이오.”","만일 당신이 내 앞에 엎드려 절만 하면 모두가 당신의 것이 될 것이오.\"","그러므로 네가 만일 내게 절하면 다 네 것이 되리라","그러므로 네가 만일 내게 절하면 다 네 것이 되리라","(6절에 포함되어 있음)","All this will be yours, if you worship me.”","If thou therefore wilt worship me, all shall be thine.","So if you worship me, it will all be yours.\"","tu ergo, si adoraveris coram me, erit tua omnis “.","ועתה אם תשתחוה לפני הכל יהיה לך׃"],["49","4","8","예수님께서 그에게 대답하셨다. “성경에 기록되어 있다. ‘주 너의 하느님께 경배하고 그분만을 섬겨라.’”","예수께서는 악마에게 \"'2)주님이신 너의 하느님을 예배하고 그분만을 섬겨라.'라고 성서에 기록되어 있다.\" 하고 대답하셨다. 신명 6:13-14.","예수께서 대답하여 이르시되 기록된 바 ㄴ)주 너의 하나님께 경배하고 다만 그를 섬기라 하였느니라","예수께서 대답하여 가라사대 기록하기를 ㄴ)주 너의 하나님께 경배하고 다만 그를 섬기라 하였느니라 신 6:13","예수께서 말씀하셨다. ㄴ) \"우리는 하나님께 예배드리고 그분만을 섬겨야 한다. 성경에 그렇게 기록되어 있다.\" (ㄴ. 신6:13-14)","Jesus said to him in reply, “It is written: ‘You shall worship the Lord, your God, and him alone shall you serve.’”","And Jesus answered and said unto him, Get thee behind me, Satan: for it is written, Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, and him only shalt thou serve.","Jesus answered, \"It is written: 'Worship the Lord your God and serve him only.'\"","Et respondens Iesus dixit illi:  “Scriptum est:  “Dominum Deum tuum adorabis et illi soli servies “ “.","ויען ישוע ויאמר אליו סור ממני השטן כי כתוב ליהוה אלהיך תשתחוה ואתו תעבד׃"],["49","4","9","그러자 악마는 예수님을 예루살렘으로 데리고 가서 성전 꼭대기에 세운 다음, 그분께 말하였다. “당신이 하느님의 아들이라면 여기에서 밑으로 몸을 던져 보시오.","다시 악마는 예수를 예루살렘으로 데리고 가서 성전 꼭대기에 세우고 \"당신이 하느님의 아들이거든 여기에서 뛰어내려 보시오.","또 이끌고 예루살렘으로 가서 성전 꼭대기에 세우고 이르되 네가 만일 하나님의 아들이어든 여기서 뛰어내리라","또 이끌고 예루살렘으로 가서 성전 꼭대기에 세우고 가로되 네가 만일 하나님의 아들이어든 여기서 뛰어 내리라","그러자 마귀는 예수를 데리고 예루살렘 성전 꼭대기로 올라가서 말하였다. \"만일 당신이 하나님의 아들이거든 뛰어내리시오. 성경에 ㄷ) \"주께서 네가 어디를 가든지 주님의 천사를 보내 보호하게 하시니 그들이 두 손으로 너를 꽉 붙잡으리라. 혹시나 돌부리에라도 채이지 않을까 노심초사하리라\"고 하지 않았소?\" (ㄴ. 시91:11-12)","Then he led him to Jerusalem, made him stand on the parapet of the temple, and said to him, “If you are the Son of God, throw yourself down from here,","And he brought him to Jerusalem, and set him on a pinnacle of the temple, and said unto him, If thou be the Son of God, cast thyself down from hence:","The devil led him to Jerusalem and had him stand on the highest point of the temple. \"If you are the Son of God,\" he said, \"throw yourself down from here.","Duxit autem illum in Ierusalem et statuit eum supra pinnam templi et dixit illi:  “Si Filius Dei es, mitte te hinc deorsum.","ויביאהו ירושלים ויעמידהו על פנת בית המקדש ויאמר אליו אם בן האלהים אתה התנפל מזה מטה׃"],["49","4","10","성경에 이렇게 기록되어 있지 않소? ‘그분께서는 너를 위해 당신 천사들에게 너를 보호하라고 명령하시리라.’","성서에 '3)하느님이 당신의 천사들을 시켜 너를 지켜주시리라.' 하였고 시편 91:11.","기록되었으되 ㄷ)하나님이 너를 위하여 그 사자들을 명하사 너를 지키게 하시리라 하였고","기록하였으되 ㄷ)하나님이 너를 위하여 그 사자들을 명하사 너를 지키게 하시리라 하였고 시 91:11, 12","(9절에 포함되어 있음)","for it is written: ‘He will command his angels concerning you, to guard you,’","For it is written, He shall give his angels charge over thee, to keep thee:","For it is written: \"'He will command his angels concerning you to guard you carefully;","Scriptum est enim:  “Angelis suis mandabit de te, ut conservent te “","כי כתוב כי מלאכיו יצוה לך לשמרך׃"],["49","4","11","‘행여 네 발이 돌에 차일세라 그들이 손으로 너를 받쳐 주리라.’”","또 '4)너의 발이 돌에 부딪히지 않게 손으로 너를 받들게 하시리라.'라고 기록되어 있지 않소?\" 하고 말하였다. 시편 91:12.","또한 그들이 손으로 너를 받들어 네 발이 돌에 부딪치지 않게 하시리라 하였느니라","또한 저희가 손으로 너를 받들어 네 발이 돌에 부딪히지 않게 하시리라 하였느니라","(9절에 포함되어 있음)","and: ‘With their hands they will support you, lest you dash your foot against a stone.’”","And in their hands they shall bear thee up, lest at any time thou dash thy foot against a stone.","they will lift you up in their hands, so that you will not strike your foot against a stone.'\"","et:  “In manibus tollent te, ne forte offendas ad lapidem pedem tuum “ “.","וכי על כפים ישאונך פן תגף באבן רגלך׃"],["49","4","12","예수님께서는 그에게, “‘주 너의 하느님을 시험하지 마라.’ 하신 말씀이 성경에 있다.” 하고 대답하셨다.","예수께서는 \"'5)주님이신 너희 하느님을 떠보지 마라'라는 말씀이 성서에 있다.\" 하고 대답하셨다. 칠십인역 신명 6:16.","예수께서 대답하여 이르시되 ㄹ)주 너의 하나님을 시험하지 말라 하였느니라","예수께서 대답하여 가라사대 말씀하기를 ㄹ)주 너의 하나님을 시험치 말라 하였느니라 신 6:16","예수께서 말씀하셨다. \"성경에 ㄱ) 주 너의 하나님을 시험하지 말라\"고 하셨다.\" (ㄱ. 70인역 신6:16)","Jesus said to him in reply, “It also says, ‘You shall not put the Lord, your God, to the test.’”","And Jesus answering said unto him, It is said, Thou shalt not tempt the Lord thy God.","Jesus answered, \"It says: 'Do not put the Lord your God to the test.'\"","Et respondens Iesus ait illi:  “Dictum est:  “Non tentabis Dominum Deum tuum “ “.","ויען ישוע ויאמר אליו נאמר לא תנסה את יהוה אלהיך׃"],["49","4","13","악마는 모든 유혹을 끝내고 다음 기회를 노리며 그분에게서 물러갔다.","악마는 이렇게 여러 가지로 유혹해 본 끝에 다음 기회를 노리면서 예수를 떠나갔다.","마귀가 모든 시험을 다 한 후에 얼마 동안 떠나니라","마귀가 모든 시험을 다 한 후에 얼마 동안 떠나니라","마귀는 모든 시험을 끝내고 잠시 동안 예수를 떠나갔다.","When the devil had finished every temptation, he departed from him for a time.","And when the devil had ended all the temptation, he departed from him for a season.","When the devil had finished all this tempting, he left him until an opportune time.","Et consummata omni tentatione, Diabolus recessit ab illo usque ad tempus.","וככלות השטן כל מסה וירף ממנו עד עת׃"],["49","4","14","예수님께서 성령의 힘을 지니고 갈릴래아로 돌아가시니, 그분의 소문이 그 주변 모든 지방에 퍼졌다.","예수께서는 성령의 능력을 가득히 받고 갈릴래아로 돌아가셨다. 예수의 소문은 그 곳 모든 지방에 두루 퍼졌다.","예수께서 성령의 능력으로 갈릴리에 돌아가시니 그 소문이 사방에 퍼졌고","예수께서 성령의 권능으로 갈릴리에 돌아가시니 그 소문이 사방에 퍼졌고","예수께서는 성령의 능력이 충만하여 갈릴리로 돌아오셨다. 예수의 소문은 곧 그 지방 모든 사람들에게 퍼졌다.","Jesus returned to Galilee in the power of the Spirit, and news of him spread throughout the whole region.","And Jesus returned in the power of the Spirit into Galilee: and there went out a fame of him through all the region round about.","Jesus returned to Galilee in the power of the Spirit, and news about him spread through the whole countryside.","Et regressus est Iesus in virtute Spiritus in Galilaeam. Et fama exiit per universam regionem de illo.","וישב ישוע בגבורת הרוח אל הגליל ויצא שמעו בכל הככר׃"],["49","4","15","예수님께서는 그곳의 여러 회당에서 가르치시며 모든 사람에게 칭송을 받으셨다.","예수께서는 여러 회당에서 가르치시며 모든 사람에게 칭찬을 받으셨다.","친히 그 여러 회당에서 가르치시매 뭇 사람에게 칭송을 받으시더라","친히 그 여러 회당에서 가르치시매 뭇사람에게 칭송을 받으시더라","예수께서는 여러 회당에서 설교하셨으며 듣는 사람마다 예수를 찬양하였다.","He taught in their synagogues and was praised by all.","And he taught in their synagogues, being glorified of all.","He taught in their synagogues, and everyone praised him.","Et ipse docebat in synagogis eorum et magnificabatur ab omnibus.","והוא היה מלמד בבתי כנסיותיהם ויהללהו כלם׃"],["49","4","16","예수님께서는 당신이 자라신 나자렛으로 가시어, 안식일에 늘 하시던 대로 회당에 들어가셨다. 그리고 성경을 봉독하려고 일어서시자,","예수께서는 자기가 자라난 나자렛에 가셔서 안식일이 되자 늘 하시던 대로 회당에 들어가셨다. 그리고 성서를 읽으시려고 일어서서","예수께서 그 자라나신 곳 나사렛에 이르사 안식일에 늘 하시던 대로 회당에 들어가사 성경을 읽으려고 서시매","예수께서 그 자라나신 곳 나사렛에 이르사 안식일에 자기 규례대로 회당에 들어가사 성경을 읽으려고 서시매","예수께서는 자기가 자라난 고향 동네 나사렛에 오시자 전에 하던 대로 안식일에 회당에 들어가 성경을 읽으려고 일어나셨다.","He came to Nazareth, where he had grown up, and went according to his custom into the synagogue on the sabbath day. He stood up to read","And he came to Nazareth, where he had been brought up: and, as his custom was, he went into the synagogue on the sabbath day, and stood up for to read.","He went to Nazareth, where he had been brought up, and on the Sabbath day he went into the synagogue, as was his custom. And he stood up to read.","Et venit Nazareth, ubi erat nutritus, et intravit secundum consuetudinem suam die sabbati in synagogam et surrexit legere.","ויבא אל נצרת אשר גדל שם וילך כמשפטו ביום השבת אל בית הכנסת ויקם לקרא בתורה׃"],["49","4","17","이사야 예언자의 두루마리가 그분께 건네졌다. 그분께서는 두루마리를 펴시고 이러한 말씀이 기록된 부분을 찾으셨다.","이사야 예언서의 두루마리를 받아 들고 이러한 말씀이 적혀 있는 대목을 펴서 읽으셨다.","선지자 이사야의 글을 드리거늘 책을 펴서 이렇게 기록된 데를 찾으시니 곧","선지자 이사야의 글을 드리거늘 책을 펴서 이렇게 기록한 데를 찾으시니 곧","예언자 이사야의 책을 받아든 예수께서는 이런 말씀이 있는 곳을 펴셨다.","and was handed a scroll of the prophet Isaiah. He unrolled the scroll and found the passage where it was written:","And there was delivered unto him the book of the prophet Esaias. And when he had opened the book, he found the place where it was written,","The scroll of the prophet Isaiah was handed to him. Unrolling it, he found the place where it is written:","Et tradi tus est illi liber prophetae Isaiae; et ut revolvit librum, invenit locum, ubi scriptum erat:","ויתן לו ספר ישעיה הנביא ויפתח את הספר וימצא את המקום אשר היה כתוב בו׃"],["49","4","18","“주님께서 나에게 기름을 부어 주시니 주님의 영이 내 위에 내리셨다. 주님께서 나를 보내시어 가난한 이들에게 기쁜 소식을 전하고 잡혀간 이들에게 해방을 선포하며 눈먼 이들을 다시 보게 하고 억압받는 이들을 해방시켜 내보내며","\"6)주님의 성령이 나에게 내리셨다. 주께서 나에게 기름을 부으시어 가난한 이들에게 복음을 전하게 하셨다. 주께서 나를 보내시어 묶인 사람들에게는 해방을 알려주고 눈먼 사람들은 보게 하고, 억눌린 사람들에게는 자유를 주며칠십인역 이사 61:1-2(58:6 참조).","ㅁ)주의 성령이 내게 임하셨으니 이는 가난한 자에게 복음을 전하게 하시려고 내게 기름을 부으시고 나를 보내사 포로 된 자에게 자유를, 눈 먼 자에게 다시 보게 함을 전파하며 눌린 자를 자유롭게 하고","ㅁ)주의 성령이 내게 임하셨으니 이는 가난한 자에게 복음을 전하게 하시려고 내게 기름을 부으시고 나를 보내사 포로 된 자에게 자유를, 눈먼 자에게 다시 보게 함을 전파하며 눌린 자를 자유케 하고 사 61:1 이하","ㄴ) \"주 여호와의 기운이 나를 휘감아 돌았다. 여호와께서 내게 기름을 부어 예언자로 세우시고 불쌍한 사람들에게 기쁜 소식을 전하고 마음이 상한 이들에게 새로운 용기를 일으켜 주고 감옥에 갇힌 이들에게 너희가 이제 풀려 나간다! 모든 옥문들이 열리게 된다고 알려 주라고 나를 예루살렘으로 보내셨다. 우리의 하나님 여호와께서 우리의 억울하고 원통한 일을 다 풀어 주시며 슬피 우는 모든 사람을 위로해 주시는 시대가 되었다고 널리 알리도록 주께서 나를 보내셨다.\"","“The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he has anointed me to bring glad tidings to the poor. He has sent me to proclaim liberty to captives and recovery of sight to the blind, to let the oppressed go free,","The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he hath anointed me to preach the gospel to the poor; he hath sent me to heal the brokenhearted, to preach deliverance to the captives, and recovering of sight to the blind, to set at liberty them that are bruised,","\"The Spirit of the Lord is on me, because he has anointed me to preach good news to the poor. He has sent me to proclaim freedom for the prisoners and recovery of sight for the blind, to release the oppressed,","Spiritus Domini super me; propter quod unxit me evangelizare pauperibus, misit me praedicare captivis remissionem et caecis visum, dimittere confractos in remissione,","רוח אדני עלי יען משח אתי לבשר ענוים׃"],["49","4","19","주님의 은혜로운 해를 선포하게 하셨다.”","주님의 은총의 해를 선포하게 하셨다.\"","주의 은혜의 해를 전파하게 하려 하심이라 하였더라","주의 은혜의 해를 전파하게 하려 하심이라 하였더라","(18절에 포함되어 있음)","and to proclaim a year acceptable to the Lord.”","To preach the acceptable year of the Lord.","to proclaim the year of the Lord's favor.\"","praedicare annum Domini acceptum “.","שלחני לחבש לנשברי לב לקרא לשבוים דרור ולעורים פקח קוח לשלח רצוצים חפשים לקרא שנת רצון ליהוה׃"],["49","4","20","예수님께서 두루마리를 말아 시중드는 이에게 돌려주시고 자리에 앉으시니, 회당에 있던 모든 사람의 눈이 예수님을 주시하였다.","예수께서 두루마리를 말아서 시중들던 사람에게 되돌려주고 자리에 앉으시자 회당에 모였던 사람들의 눈이 모두 예수에게 쏠렸다.","책을 덮어 그 맡은 자에게 주시고 앉으시니 회당에 있는 자들이 다 주목하여 보더라","책을 덮어 그 1)맡은 자에게 주시고 앉으시니 회당에 있는 자들이 다 주목하여 보더라 헬, 사환에게","예수께서는 책을 덮어 시중들던 사람에게 돌려주고 자리에 앉으셨다. 회당에 모여 있던 사람들의 시선이 모두 예수께로 쏠렸다.","Rolling up the scroll, he handed it back to the attendant and sat down, and the eyes of all in the synagogue looked intently at him.","And he closed the book, and he gave it again to the minister, and sat down. And the eyes of all them that were in the synagogue were fastened on him.","Then he rolled up the scroll, gave it back to the attendant and sat down. The eyes of everyone in the synagogue were fastened on him,","Et cum plicuisset librum, reddidit ministro et sedit; et omnium in synagoga oculi erant intendentes in eum.","ויהי כאשר גלל את הספר וישיבהו אל החזן וישב ועיני כל אשר בבית הכנסת נשאות אליו׃"],["49","4","21","예수님께서 그들에게 말씀하기 시작하셨다. “오늘 이 성경 말씀이 너희가 듣는 가운데에서 이루어졌다.”","예수께서는 \"이 성서의 말씀이 오늘 너희가 들은 이 자리에서 이루어졌다.\" 하고 말씀하셨다.","이에 예수께서 그들에게 말씀하시되 이 글이 오늘 너희 귀에 응하였느니라 하시니","이에 예수께서 저희에게 말씀하시되 이 글이 오늘날 너희 귀에 응하였느니라 하시니","그러자 예수께서 말씀하셨다. \"이 성경의 말씀이 오늘 이루어졌다!\"","He said to them, “Today this scripture passage is fulfilled in your hearing.”","And he began to say unto them, This day is this scripture fulfilled in your ears.","and he began by saying to them, \"Today this scripture is fulfilled in your hearing.\"","Coepit autem dicere ad illos:  “Hodie impleta est haec Scriptura in auribus vestris “.","ויחל ויאמר אליהם היום נתמלא הכתוב הזה באזניכם׃"],["49","4","22","그러자 모두 그분을 좋게 말하며, 그분의 입에서 나오는 은총의 말씀에 놀라워하였다. 그러면서 “저 사람은 요셉의 아들이 아닌가?” 하고 말하였다.","사람들은 모두 예수를 칭찬하였고 그가 하시는 은총의 말씀에 탄복하며 \"저 사람은 요셉의 아들이 아닌가?\" 하고 수군거렸다.","그들이 다 그를 증언하고 그 입으로 나오는 바 은혜로운 말을 놀랍게 여겨 이르되 이 사람이 요셉의 아들이 아니냐","저희가 다 그를 증거하고 그 입으로 나오는바 은혜로운 말을 기이히 여겨 가로되 이 사람이 요셉의 아들이 아니냐","거기 있던 사람들은 모두 경탄을 금치 못하였다. 그리고 그분의 입에서 나오는 은혜로운 말씀에 놀라 \"어떻게 이런 말씀을 하실 수 있을까? 이 사람은 요셉의 아들이 아닌가?\" 하고 수군거렸다.","And all spoke highly of him and were amazed at the gracious words that came from his mouth. They also asked, “Isn’t this the son of Joseph?”","And all bare him witness, and wondered at the gracious words which proceeded out of his mouth. And they said, Is not this Joseph's son?","All spoke well of him and were amazed at the gracious words that came from his lips. \"Isn't this Joseph's son?\" they asked.","Et omnes testimonium illi dabant et mirabantur in verbis gratiae, quae procedebant de ore ipsius, et dicebant:  “Nonne hic filius est Ioseph? “.","וכלם העידהו ותמהו על דברי חן אשר יצאו מפיהו ויאמרו הלא זה הוא בן יוסף׃"],["49","4","23","예수님께서는 그들에게 이르셨다. “너희는 틀림없이 ‘의사야, 네 병이나 고쳐라.’ 하는 속담을 들며, ‘네가 카파르나움에서 하였다고 우리가 들은 그 일들을 여기 네 고향에서도 해 보아라.’ 할 것이다.”","예수께서는 \"너희는 필경 '의사여, 네 병이나 고쳐라.' 하는 속담을 들어 나더러 가파르나움에서 했다는 일을 네 고장인 여기에서도 해보라고 하고 싶을 것이다.\" 하시고는","예수께서 그들에게 이르시되 너희가 반드시 의사야 너 자신을 고치라 하는 속담을 인용하여 내게 말하기를 우리가 들은 바 가버나움에서 행한 일을 네 고향 여기서도 행하라 하리라","예수께서 저희에게 이르시되 너희가 반드시 의원아 너를 고치라 하는 속담을 인증하여 내게 말하기를 우리의 들은바 가버나움에서 행한 일을 네 고향 여기서도 행하라 하리라","그때 예수께서 말씀하셨다. \"아마도 너희는 \"의사여, 네 병이나 고쳐라\"라는 속담을 내게 적용하여 \"가버나움에서 행한 것과 같은 기적을 고향인 여기에서도 해보시오!\" 하고 말할 것이다.","He said to them, “Surely you will quote me this proverb, ‘Physician, cure yourself,’ and say, ‘Do here in your native place the things that we heard were done in Capernaum.’”","And he said unto them, Ye will surely say unto me this proverb, Physician, heal thyself: whatsoever we have heard done in Capernaum, do also here in thy country.","Jesus said to them, \"Surely you will quote this proverb to me: 'Physician, heal yourself! Do here in your hometown what we have heard that you did in Capernaum.'\"","Et ait illis:  “Utique dicetis mihi hanc similitudinem:  “Medice, cura teipsum; quanta audivimus facta in Capharnaum, fac et hic in patria tua “ “.","ויאמר אליהם הן תאמרו לי את המשל הזה רפא רפא את עצמך וככל אשר שמענו שנעשה בכפר נחום עשה כן גם פה בעיר מולדתך׃"],["49","4","24","그리고 계속 이르셨다. “내가 진실로 너희에게 말한다. 어떠한 예언자도 자기 고향에서는 환영을 받지 못한다.","또 이렇게 말씀하셨다. \"사실 어떤 예언자도 자기 고향에서는 환영을 받지 못한다.","또 이르시되 내가 진실로 너희에게 이르노니 선지자가 고향에서는 환영을 받는 자가 없느니라","또 가라사대 내가 진실로 너희에게 이르노니 선지자가 고향에서 환영을 받는 자가 없느니라","그러나 내가 분명히 너희에게 일러둔다. 자기 고향에서 환영받는 예언자는 없다.","And he said, “Amen, I say to you, no prophet is accepted in his own native place.","And he said, Verily I say unto you, No prophet is accepted in his own country.","\"I tell you the truth,\" he continued, \"no prophet is accepted in his hometown.","Ait autem:  “Amen dico vobis: Nemo propheta acceptus est in patria sua.","ויאמר אמן אמר אני לכם כי אין נביא רצוי בארץ מולדתו׃"],["49","4","25","내가 참으로 너희에게 말한다. 삼 년 육 개월 동안 하늘이 닫혀 온 땅에 큰 기근이 들었던 엘리야 때에, 이스라엘에 과부가 많이 있었다.","잘 들어라. 엘리야 시대에 삼 년 반 동안이나 하늘이 닫혀 비가 내리지 않고 온 나라에 심한 기근이 들었을 때 이스라엘에는 과부가 많았지만","내가 참으로 너희에게 이르노니 엘리야 시대에 하늘이 삼 년 육 개월간 닫히어 온 땅에 큰 흉년이 들었을 때에 이스라엘에 많은 과부가 있었으되","내가 참으로 너희에게 이르노니 엘리야 시대에 하늘이 세 해 여섯 달을 닫히어 온 땅에 큰 흉년이 들었을 때에 이스라엘에 많은 과부가 있었으되","예언자 엘리야가 시돈 땅에 있는 사렙다 과부를 도운 일을 생각해 보라. 그 당시 3년 6개월 동안이나 비가 오지 않아 온 땅에 기근이 계속되던 때에 도움이 필요한 이스라엘인 과부가 많이 있었으나 엘리야가 보냄을 받은 것은 그들이 아니라 이방인 과부가 아니었느냐?","Indeed, I tell you, there were many widows in Israel in the days of Elijah when the sky was closed for three and a half years and a severe famine spread over the entire land.","But I tell you of a truth, many widows were in Israel in the days of Elias, when the heaven was shut up three years and six months, when great famine was throughout all the land;","I assure you that there were many widows in Israel in Elijah's time, when the sky was shut for three and a half years and there was a severe famine throughout the land.","In veritate autem dico vobis: Multae viduae erant in diebus Eliae in Israel, quando clausum est caelum annis tribus et mensibus sex, cum facta est fames magna in omni terra;","ואמת אני אמר לכם אלמנות רבות היו בישראל בימי אליהו בהעצר השמים שלש שנים וששה חדשים ורעב גדול היה בכל הארץ׃"],["49","4","26","그러나 엘리야는 그들 가운데 아무에게도 파견되지 않고, 시돈 지방 사렙타의 과부에게만 파견되었다.","하느님께서는 엘리야를 그들 가운데 아무에게도 보내시지 않고 다만 시돈 지방 사렙다 마을에 사는 어떤 과부에게만 보내주셨다.","엘리야가 그 중 한 사람에게도 보내심을 받지 않고 오직 시돈 땅에 있는 사렙다의 한 과부에게 뿐이었으며","엘리야가 그 중 한 사람에게도 보내심을 받지 않고 오직 시돈 땅에 있는 사렙다의 한 과부에게 뿐이었으며","(25절에 포함되어 있음)","It was to none of these that Elijah was sent, but only to a widow in Zarephath in the land of Sidon.","But unto none of them was Elias sent, save unto Sarepta, a city of Sidon, unto a woman that was a widow.","Yet Elijah was not sent to any of them, but to a widow in Zarephath in the region of Sidon.","et ad nullam illarum missus est Elias nisi in Sarepta Sidoniae ad mulierem viduam.","ולא נשלח אליהו אל אחת מהנה זולתי צרפתה אשר לצידון אל אשה אלמנה׃"],["49","4","27","또 엘리사 예언자 시대에 이스라엘에는 나병 환자가 많이 있었다. 그러나 그들 가운데 아무도 깨끗해지지 않고, 시리아 사람 나아만만 깨끗해졌다.”","또 예언자 엘리사 시대에 이스라엘에는 많은 나병환자가 살고 있었지만 그들은 단 한 사람도 고쳐주시지 않고 시리아 사람인 나아만만을 깨끗하게 고쳐주셨다.\"","또 선지자 엘리사 때에 이스라엘에 많은 나병환자가 있었으되 그 중의 한 사람도 깨끗함을 얻지 못하고 오직 수리아 사람 나아만뿐이었느니라","또 선지자 엘리사 때에 이스라엘에 많은 문둥이가 있었으되 그 중에 한 사람도 깨끗함을 얻지 못하고 오직 수리아 사람 나아만 뿐이니라","또한 엘리사는 도움이 필요한 이스라엘인 나병환자들이 많이 있었는데도 그들을 제쳐놓고 오히려 수리아 사람 나아만을 고쳐 주지 않았더냐?\"","Again, there were many lepers in Israel during the time of Elisha the prophet; yet not one of them was cleansed, but only Naaman the Syrian.”","And many lepers were in Israel in the time of Eliseus the prophet; and none of them was cleansed, saving Naaman the Syrian.","And there were many in Israel with leprosy in the time of Elisha the prophet, yet not one of them was cleansed--only Naaman the Syrian.\"","Et multi leprosi erant in Israel sub Eliseo propheta; et nemo eorum mundatus est nisi Naaman Syrus “.","ומצרעים רבים היו בישראל בימי אלישע הנביא ולא טהר אחד מהם זולתי נעמן הארמי׃"],["49","4","28","회당에 있던 모든 사람들은 이 말씀을 듣고 화가 잔뜩 났다.","회당에 모였던 사람들은 이 말씀을 듣고는 모두 화가 나서","회당에 있는 자들이 이것을 듣고 다 크게 화가 나서","회당에 있는 자들이 이것을 듣고 다 분이 가득하여","이 말씀을 듣고 있던 사람들은 화가 나서","When the people in the synagogue heard this, they were all filled with fury.","And all they in the synagogue, when they heard these things, were filled with wrath,","All the people in the synagogue were furious when they heard this.","Et repleti sunt omnes in synagoga ira haec audientes;","וימלאו כל אשר בבית הכנסת חמה בשמעם את אלה׃"],["49","4","29","그래서 그들은 들고일어나 예수님을 고을 밖으로 내몰았다. 그 고을은 산 위에 지어져 있었는데, 그들은 예수님을 그 벼랑까지 끌고 가 거기에서 떨어뜨리려고 하였다.","들고일어나 예수를 동네 밖으로 끌어냈다. 그 동네는 산 위에 있었는데 그들은 예수를 산 벼랑까지 끌고 가서 밀어 떨어뜨리려 하였다.","일어나 동네 밖으로 쫓아내어 그 동네가 건설된 산 낭떠러지까지 끌고 가서 밀쳐 떨어뜨리고자 하되","일어나 동네 밖으로 쫓아내어 그 동네가 건설된 산 낭떠러지까지 끌고 가서 밀쳐 내리치고자 하되","뛰어 일어나 예수께 몰려들었다. 그리고 동네 끝에 있는 벼랑으로 끌고 가서 아래로 밀쳐 떨어뜨리려고 하였다.","They rose up, drove him out of the town, and led him to the brow of the hill on which their town had been built, to hurl him down headlong.","And rose up, and thrust him out of the city, and led him unto the brow of the hill whereon their city was built, that they might cast him down headlong.","They got up, drove him out of the town, and took him to the brow of the hill on which the town was built, in order to throw him down the cliff.","et surrexerunt et eiecerunt illum extra civitatem et duxerunt illum usque ad supercilium montis, supra quem civitas illorum erat aedificata, ut praecipitarent eum.","ויקומו וידיחו אותו אל מחוץ לעיר ויביאהו עד גב ההר אשר נבנתה עירם עליו למען השליכו מטה׃"],["49","4","30","그러나 예수님께서는 그들 한가운데를 가로질러 떠나가셨다.","그러나 예수께서는 그들의 한가운데를 지나서 자기의 갈 길을 가셨다.","예수께서 그들 가운데로 지나서 가시니라","예수께서 저희 가운데로 지나서 가시니라","그러나 예수께서는 군중 한가운데를 가로질러 그곳을 떠나셨다.","But he passed through the midst of them and went away.","But he passing through the midst of them went his way,","But he walked right through the crowd and went on his way.","Ipse autem transiens per medium illorum ibat.","אך הוא עבר בתוכם וילך לדרכו׃"],["49","4","31","예수님께서는 갈릴래아의 카파르나움 고을로 내려가시어, 안식일에 사람들을 가르치셨는데,","그 뒤 예수께서는 갈릴래아의 마을 가파르나움으로 내려가셨다. 거기에서도 안식일에 사람들을 가르치셨는데","갈릴리의 가버나움 동네에 내려오사 안식일에 가르치시매","갈릴리 가버나움 동네에 내려오사 안식일에 가르치시매","예수께서는 갈릴리의 가버나움으로 되돌아가서 안식일에 회당에 나가 설교하셨다.","Jesus then went down to Capernaum, a town of Galilee. He taught them on the sabbath,","And came down to Capernaum, a city of Galilee, and taught them on the sabbath days.","Then he went down to Capernaum, a town in Galilee, and on the Sabbath began to teach the people.","Et descendit in Capharnaum civitatem Galilaeae. Et docebat illos sabbatis;","וירד אל כפר נחום עיר הגליל וילמדם בשבתות׃"],["49","4","32","그들은 그분의 가르침에 몹시 놀랐다. 그분의 말씀에 권위가 있었기 때문이다.","그 말씀에 권위가 있었기 때문에 듣는 사람마다 그 가르침에 경탄하여 마지않았다.","그들이 그 가르치심에 놀라니 이는 그 말씀이 권위가 있음이러라","저희가 그 가르치심에 놀라니 이는 그 말씀이 권세가 있음이러라","여기서도 사람들은 예수의 말씀에 놀랐다. 예수께서는 단순히 다른 사람들의 의견을 인용하지 않고 그분 자신의 말로 확신 있게 진리를 말씀하셨기 때문이다.","and they were astonished at his teaching because he spoke with authority.","And they were astonished at his doctrine: for his word was with power.","They were amazed at his teaching, because his message had authority.","et stupebant in doctrina eius, quia in potestate erat sermo ipsius.","וישתוממו על תורתו כי עצום דברו׃"],["49","4","33","마침 그 회당에 더러운 마귀의 영이 들린 사람이 있었는데, 그가 크게 소리를 질렀다.","때마침 그 회당에 더러운 마귀가 들린 한 사람이 와 있다가 큰소리로","회당에 더러운 귀신 들린 사람이 있어 크게 소리 질러 이르되","회당에 더러운 귀신 들린 사람이 있어 크게 소리질러 가로되","마침 그 회당에 더러운 귀신 들린 사람 하나가 있다가 예수께 소리 질렀다.","In the synagogue there was a man with the spirit of an unclean demon, and he cried out in a loud voice,","And in the synagogue there was a man, which had a spirit of an unclean devil, and cried out with a loud voice,","In the synagogue there was a man possessed by a demon, an evil spirit. He cried out at the top of his voice,","Et in synagoga erat homo habens spiritum daemonii immundi; et exclamavit voce magna:","ואיש היה בבית הכנסת ובו רוח שד טמא ויצעק בקול גדול לאמר׃"],["49","4","34","“아! 나자렛 사람 예수님, 당신께서 저희와 무슨 상관이 있습니까? 저희를 멸망시키러 오셨습니까? 저는 당신이 누구신지 압니다. 당신은 하느님의 거룩하신 분이십니다.”","\"나자렛 예수님, 왜 우리를 간섭하시려는 것입니까? 우리를 없애려고 오셨습니까? 나는 당신이 누구신지 압니다. 하느님께서 보내신 거룩한 분이십니다.\" 하고 외쳤다.","아 나사렛 예수여 우리가 당신과 무슨 상관이 있나이까 우리를 멸하러 왔나이까 나는 당신이 누구인 줄 아노니 하나님의 거룩한 자니이다","아 나사렛 예수여 우리가 당신과 무슨 상관이 있나이까 우리를 멸하러 왔나이까 나는 당신이 누구인줄 아노니 하나님의 거룩한 자니이다","\"나사렛 예수여! 우리를 이대로 놔두시오. 당신은 우리를 멸하려고 오셨습니까? 나는 당신이 누구인지 압니다. 당신은 하나님의 거룩한 아들이십니다.\"","“Ha! What have you to do with us, Jesus of Nazareth? Have you come to destroy us? I know who you are—the Holy One of God!”","Saying, Let us alone; what have we to do with thee, thou Jesus of Nazareth? art thou come to destroy us? I know thee who thou art; the Holy One of God.","\"Ha! What do you want with us, Jesus of Nazareth? Have you come to destroy us? I know who you are--the Holy One of God!\"","Sine; quid nobis et tibi, Iesu Nazarene? Venisti perdere nos? Scio te qui sis: Sanctus Dei.","אתה מה לנו ולך ישוע הנצרי באת להאבידנו ידעתיך מי אתה קדוש האלהים׃"],["49","4","35","예수님께서 그에게 “조용히 하여라. 그 사람에게서 나가라.” 하고 꾸짖으시니, 마귀는 그를 사람들 한가운데에 내동댕이치기는 하였지만, 아무런 해도 끼치지 못하고 그에게서 나갔다.","예수께서는 \"입을 다물고 이 사람에게서 썩 나가거라.\" 하고 꾸짖으셨다. 그러자 마귀는 사람들이 보는 앞에서 그 사람을 쓰러뜨리고 떠나갔다. 그러나 그 사람은 아무런 상처도 입지 않았다.","예수께서 꾸짖어 이르시되 잠잠하고 그 사람에게서 나오라 하시니 귀신이 그 사람을 무리 중에 넘어뜨리고 나오되 그 사람은 상하지 아니한지라","예수께서 꾸짖어 가라사대 잠잠하고 그 사람에게서 나오라 하시니 귀신이 그 사람을 무리 중에 넘어뜨리고 나오되 그 사람은 상하지 아니한지라","예수께서는 그를 꾸짖으며 \"조용히 하라! 그리고 그에게서 나오라\" 하고 명령하셨다. 귀신은 군중이 지켜 보는 앞에서 그 사람을 내동댕이치더니 더 이상 그에게 상처를 입히지 않고 떠나가 버렸다.","Jesus rebuked him and said, “Be quiet! Come out of him!” Then the demon threw the man down in front of them and came out of him without doing him any harm.","And Jesus rebuked him, saying, Hold thy peace, and come out of him. And when the devil had thrown him in the midst, he came out of him, and hurt him not.","\"Be quiet!\" Jesus said sternly. \"Come out of him!\" Then the demon threw the man down before them all and came out without injuring him.","Et increpavit illi Iesus dicens:  “Obmutesce et exi ab illo! “. Et cum proiecisset illum daemonium in medium, exiit ab illo nihilque illum nocuit.","ויגער בו ישוע לאמר האלם וצא ממנו ויפילהו השד בתוכם ויצא ממנו לא הרע לו׃"],["49","4","36","그러자 모든 사람이 몹시 놀라, “이게 대체 어떤 말씀인가? 저이가 권위와 힘을 가지고 명령하니 더러운 영들도 나가지 않는가?” 하며 서로 말하였다.","이것을 본 사람들은 모두 놀라며 \"정말 그 말씀은 신기하구나! 권위와 능력을 가지고 명령하시니 더러운 귀신들이 다 물러가지 않는가!\" 하면서 서로 수군거렸다.","다 놀라 서로 말하여 이르되 이 어떠한 말씀인고 권위와 능력으로 더러운 귀신을 명하매 나가는도다 하더라","다 놀라 서로 말하여 가로되 이 어떠한 말씀인고 권세와 능력으로 더러운 귀신을 명하매 나가는도다 하더라","사람들은 눈이 휘둥그래져서 \"이분의 말씀에는 도대체 무슨 능력이 있기에 귀신까지도 복종하는가?\" 하였다.","They were all amazed and said to one another, “What is there about his word? For with authority and power he commands the unclean spirits, and they come out.”","And they were all amazed, and spake among themselves, saying, What a word is this! for with authority and power he commandeth the unclean spirits, and they come out.","All the people were amazed and said to each other, \"What is this teaching? With authority and power he gives orders to evil spirits and they come out!\"","Et factus est pavor in omnibus; et colloquebantur ad invicem dicentes:  “Quod est hoc verbum, quia in potestate et virtute imperat immundis spiritibus, et exeunt? “.","ותפל אימה על כלם וידברו איש אל רעהו לאמר מה הדבר הזה כי בשלטן ובגבורה מצוה לרוחות הטמאה והמה יצאים׃"],["49","4","37","그리하여 그분의 소문이 그 주변 곳곳으로 퍼져 나갔다.","예수의 이야기가 그 지방 방방곡곡에 퍼져 나갔다.","이에 예수의 소문이 그 근처 사방에 퍼지니라","이에 예수의 소문이 그 근처 사방에 퍼지니라","예수께서 행하신 이 일은 화젯거리가 되어 그 온 지방으로 퍼져 나갔다.","And news of him spread everywhere in the surrounding region.","And the fame of him went out into every place of the country round about.","And the news about him spread throughout the surrounding area.","Et divulgabatur fama de illo in omnem locum regionis.","ושמעו הולך בכל מקמות הככר׃"],["49","4","38","예수님께서는 회당을 떠나 시몬의 집으로 가셨다. 그때에 시몬의 장모가 심한 열에 시달리고 있어서, 사람들이 그를 위해 예수님께 청하였다.","예수께서는 회당을 떠나 시몬의 집으로 가셨다. 그 때 시몬의 장모가 마침 심한 열병으로 앓고 있었는데 사람들이 그 부인을 고쳐달라고 간청하였다.","예수께서 일어나 회당에서 나가사 시몬의 집에 들어가시니 시몬의 장모가 중한 열병을 앓고 있는지라 사람들이 그를 위하여 예수께 구하니","예수께서 일어나 회당에서 나가사 시몬의 집에 들어가시니 시몬의 장모가 중한 열병에 붙들린지라 사람이 저를 위하여 예수께 구하니","회당에서 나오신 예수께서 시몬의 집으로 가셨다. 마침 시몬의 장모는 심한 열병을 앓고 있었으므로 사람들은 \"제발 이 부인을 고쳐 주십시오\" 하고 간절하게 애원하였다.","After he left the synagogue, he entered the house of Simon. Simon’s mother-in-law was afflicted with a severe fever, and they interceded with him about her.","And he arose out of the synagogue, and entered into Simon's house. And Simon's wife's mother was taken with a great fever; and they besought him for her.","Jesus left the synagogue and went to the home of Simon. Now Simon's mother-in-law was suffering from a high fever, and they asked Jesus to help her.","Surgens autem de synagoga introivit in domum Simonis. Socrus autem Simonis tenebatur magna febri; et rogaverunt illum pro ea.","ויקם מבית הכנסת ויבא ביתה שמעון וחמות שמעון אחזתה קדחת חזקה וישאלהו בעדה׃"],["49","4","39","예수님께서 그 부인에게 가까이 가시어 열을 꾸짖으시니 열이 가셨다. 그러자 부인은 즉시 일어나 그들의 시중을 들었다.","예수께서 그 부인 곁에 서서 열이 떨어지라고 명령하시자 부인은 열이 내려 곧 일어나서 사람들을 시중들었다.","예수께서 가까이 서서 열병을 꾸짖으신대 병이 떠나고 여자가 곧 일어나 그들에게 수종드니라","예수께서 가까이 서서 열병을 꾸짖으신대 병이 떠나고 여자가 곧 일어나 저희에게 수종드니라","예수께서 그 부인 곁에 서서 열병을 꾸짖자 곧 병이 떠나 체온이 정상으로 되돌아왔으며 그 부인은 일어나서 그들을 위하여 식사를 준비하였다.","He stood over her, rebuked the fever, and it left her. She got up immediately and waited on them.","And he stood over her, and rebuked the fever; and it left her: and immediately she arose and ministered unto them.","So he bent over her and rebuked the fever, and it left her. She got up at once and began to wait on them.","Et stans super illam imperavit febri, et dimisit illam; et continuo surgens ministrabat illis.","ויתיצב עליה ויגער בקדחת ותרף ממנה ותקם מהרה ותשרת אתם׃"],["49","4","40","해 질 무렵에 사람들이 갖가지 질병을 앓는 이들을 있는 대로 모두 예수님께 데리고 왔다. 예수님께서는 한 사람 한 사람에게 손을 얹으시어 그들을 고쳐 주셨다.","해 질 무렵에 이집 저집에서 온갖 병자들을 다 예수께 데려왔다. 예수께서는 그들 한 사람 한 사람에게 손을 얹어 모두 고쳐주셨다.","해 질 무렵에 사람들이 온갖 병자들을 데리고 나아오매 예수께서 일일이 그 위에 손을 얹으사 고치시니","해 질 적에 각색 병으로 앓는 자 있는 사람들이 다 병인을 데리고 나아오매 예수께서 일일히 그 위에 손을 얹으사 고치시니","해질 무렵에 사람들은 무슨 병에 걸렸든지 가리지 않고 병자들을 예수께 데려왔다. 예수께서는 일일이 그들 위에 손을 얹어 모두 고쳐 주셨다.","At sunset, all who had people sick with various diseases brought them to him. He laid his hands on each of them and cured them.","Now when the sun was setting, all they that had any sick with divers diseases brought them unto him; and he laid his hands on every one of them, and healed them.","When the sun was setting, the people brought to Jesus all who had various kinds of sickness, and laying his hands on each one, he healed them.","Cum sol autem occidisset, omnes, qui habebant infirmos variis languoribus, ducebant illos ad eum; at ille singulis manus imponens curabat eos.","וכבוא השמש הביאו אליו כל אשר להם חלים חליים שונים וירפא אותם בשומו את ידיו על כל אחד מהם׃"],["49","4","41","마귀들도 많은 사람에게서 나가며, “당신은 하느님의 아드님이십니다.” 하고 소리 질렀다. 그러나 예수님께서는 꾸짖으시며 그들이 말하는 것을 용납하지 않으셨다. 당신이 그리스도임을 그들이 알고 있었기 때문이다.","악마들도 여러 사람에게서 떠나가며 \"당신은 하느님의 아들이십니다!\" 하고 외쳤다. 그러나 예수께서는 그들을 꾸짖으시며 아무 말도 하지 못하게 하셨다. 악마들은 예수가 그리스도라는 것을 알고 있었기 때문이다.","여러 사람에게서 귀신들이 나가며 소리 질러 이르되 당신은 하나님의 아들이니이다 예수께서 꾸짖으사 그들이 말함을 허락하지 아니하시니 이는 자기를 그리스도인 줄 앎이러라","여러 사람에게서 귀신들이 나가며 소리질러 가로되 당신은 하나님의 아들이니이다 예수께서 꾸짖으사 저희의 말함을 허락지 아니하시니 이는 자기를 그리스도인줄 앎이러라","또 귀신들이 예수의 명령을 받고 여러 사람에게서 나가며 \"당신은 하나님의 아들이십니다\"라고 소리 질렀다. 귀신들이 이미 예수가 그리스도인 줄 알고 있었기 때문에 예수께서는 귀신들을 꾸짖어 그 말을 못하게 하셨다.","And demons also came out from many, shouting, “You are the Son of God.” But he rebuked them and did not allow them to speak because they knew that he was the Messiah.","And devils also came out of many, crying out, and saying, Thou art Christ the Son of God. And he rebuking them suffered them not to speak: for they knew that he was Christ.","Moreover, demons came out of many people, shouting, \"You are the Son of God!\" But he rebuked them and would not allow them to speak, because they knew he was the Christ.","Exibant autem daemonia a multis clamantia et dicentia:  “Tu es Filius Dei “. Et increpans non sinebat ea loqui, quia sciebant ipsum esse Christum.","וגם שדים יצאו מרבים צעקים ואמרים אתה הוא המשיח בן האלהים ויגער בם ולא נתנם לדבר כי ידעו אשר הוא המשיח׃"],["49","4","42","날이 새자 예수님께서는 밖으로 나가시어 외딴곳으로 가셨다. 군중은 예수님을 찾아다니다가 그분께서 계시는 곳까지 가서, 자기들을 떠나지 말아 주십사고 붙들었다.","날이 밝자 예수께서는 그 곳을 떠나 한적한 곳으로 가셨다. 그런데 사람들이 예수를 찾아 돌아다니다가 예수를 만나자 자기들을 떠나지 말아달라고 붙들었다.","날이 밝으매 예수께서 나오사 한적한 곳에 가시니 무리가 찾다가 만나서 자기들에게서 떠나시지 못하게 만류하려 하매","날이 밝으매 예수께서 나오사 한적한 곳에 가시니 무리가 찾다가 만나서 자기들에게서 떠나시지 못하게 만류하려 하매","날이 밝자 예수께서는 한적한 곳으로 가셨다. 사람들이 사방으로 찾아 헤매다가 예수를 만나자 자기들을 떠나지 말라고 간청하였다.","At daybreak, Jesus left and went to a deserted place. The crowds went looking for him, and when they came to him, they tried to prevent him from leaving them.","And when it was day, he departed and went into a desert place: and the people sought him, and came unto him, and stayed him, that he should not depart from them.","At daybreak Jesus went out to a solitary place. The people were looking for him and when they came to where he was, they tried to keep him from leaving them.","Facta autem die, egressus ibat in desertum locum; et turbae requirebant eum et venerunt usque ad ipsum et detinebant illum, ne discederet ab eis.","ויצא וילך לו כאור הבקר אל מקום חרבה והמון העם בקשהו ויבאו עדיו ויפצרו בו לבלתי סור מהם׃"],["49","4","43","그러나 예수님께서는 그들에게 말씀하셨다. “나는 하느님 나라의 기쁜 소식을 다른 고을에도 전해야 한다. 사실 나는 그 일을 하도록 파견된 것이다.”","그러나 예수께서는 \"나는 하느님 나라의 복음을 다른 고을에도 전해야 한다. 하느님께서는 이 일을 하도록 나를 보내셨다.\" 하고 말씀하셨다.","예수께서 이르시되 내가 다른 동네들에서도 하나님의 나라 복음을 전하여야 하리니 나는 이 일을 위해 보내심을 받았노라 하시고","예수께서 이르시되 내가 다른 동네에서도 하나님의 나라 복음을 전하여야 하리니 나는 이 일로 보내심을 입었노라 하시고","그러나 예수께서는 \"나는 다른 여러 곳에서도 하나님 나라의 복음을 전해야 한다. 하나님이 이 일을 위해 나를 보내셨다\"고 말씀하셨다.","But he said to them, “To the other towns also I must proclaim the good news of the kingdom of God, because for this purpose I have been sent.”","And he said unto them, I must preach the kingdom of God to other cities also: for therefore am I sent.","But he said, \"I must preach the good news of the kingdom of God to the other towns also, because that is why I was sent.\"","Quibus ille ait:  “Et aliis civitatibus oportet me evangelizare regnum Dei, quia ideo missus sum “.","ויאמר להם הן עלי לבשר גם לערים האחרות את בשורת מלכות האלהים כי לזאת שלחתי׃"],["49","4","44","그러고 나서 예수님께서는 유다의 여러 회당에서 복음을 선포하셨다.","그 뒤 예수께서는 유다의 여러 회당을 다니시며 복음을 전하셨다.","갈릴리 여러 회당에서 전도하시더라","2)갈릴리 여러 회당에서 전도하시더라어떤 사본에는, 유대","그리고 예수께서는 온 유대를 다니시며 여러 회당에서 복음을 전하셨다.","And he was preaching in the synagogues of Judea.","And he preached in the synagogues of Galilee.","And he kept on preaching in the synagogues of Judea.","Et erat praedicans in synagogis Iudaeae.","ויהי קורא בבתי הכנסיות אשר בגליל׃"],["49","5","1","예수님께서 겐네사렛 호숫가에 서 계시고, 군중은 그분께 몰려들어 하느님의 말씀을 듣고 있을 때였다.","하루는 많은 사람들이 겐네사렛 호숫가에 서 계시는 예수를 에워싸고 하느님의 말씀을 듣고 있었다.","무리가 몰려와서 하나님의 말씀을 들을새 예수는 게네사렛 호숫가에 서서","무리가 옹위하여 하나님의 말씀을 들을쌔 예수는 게네사렛 호숫가에 서서","하루는 예수께서 게네사렛 호숫가에서 설교를 하시는데 많은 군중이 하나님의 말씀을 들으려고 몰려왔다.","While the crowd was pressing in on Jesus and listening to the word of God, he was standing by the Lake of Gennesaret.","And it came to pass, that, as the people pressed upon him to hear the word of God, he stood by the lake of Gennesaret,","One day as Jesus was standing by the Lake of Gennesaret, with the people crowding around him and listening to the word of God,","Factum est autem, cum turba urgeret illum et audiret verbum Dei, et ipse stabat secus stagnum Genesareth","ויהי כאשר נדחק המון העם לשמע את דבר האלהים והוא עמד על יד ים גניסר׃"],["49","5","2","그분께서는 호숫가에 대어 놓은 배 두 척을 보셨다. 어부들은 거기에서 내려 그물을 씻고 있었다.","그 때 예수께서는 호숫가에 대어둔 배 두 척을 보셨다. 어부들은 배에서 나와 그물을 씻고 있었다.","호숫가에 배 두 척이 있는 것을 보시니 어부들은 배에서 나와서 그물을 씻는지라","호숫가에 두 배가 있는 것을 보시니 어부들은 배에서 나와서 그물을 씻는지라","그때 호숫가에서 작은 배 두 척을 대어 놓고 어부들이 그물을 씻고 있는 것을 보신","He saw two boats there alongside the lake; the fishermen had disembarked and were washing their nets.","And saw two ships standing by the lake: but the fishermen were gone out of them, and were washing their nets.","he saw at the water's edge two boats, left there by the fishermen, who were washing their nets.","et vidit duas naves stantes secus stagnum; piscatores autem descenderant de illis et lavabant retia.","וירא שתי אניות עמדות על יד הים והדיגים יצאו מהן וידיחו את המכמרות׃"],["49","5","3","예수님께서는 그 두 배 가운데 시몬의 배에 오르시어 그에게 뭍에서 조금 저어 나가 달라고 부탁하신 다음, 그 배에 앉으시어 군중을 가르치셨다.","그 중 하나는 시몬의 배였는데 예수께서는 그 배에 올라 시몬에게 배를 땅에서 조금 떼어놓게 하신 다음 배에 앉아 군중을 가르치셨다.","예수께서 한 배에 오르시니 그 배는 시몬의 배라 육지에서 조금 떼기를 청하시고 앉으사 배에서 무리를 가르치시더니","예수께서 한 배에 오르시니 그 배는 시몬의 배라 육지에서 조금 띄기를 청하시고 앉으사 배에서 무리를 가르치시더니","예수께서 그 배들 중 시몬의 배에 오르셨다. 그리고 배를 호숫가에서 약간 떼어놓게 하신 후에 앉으셔서 군중들을 가르치셨다.","Getting into one of the boats, the one belonging to Simon, he asked him to put out a short distance from the shore. Then he sat down and taught the crowds from the boat.","And he entered into one of the ships, which was Simon's, and prayed him that he would thrust out a little from the land. And he sat down, and taught the people out of the ship.","He got into one of the boats, the one belonging to Simon, and asked him to put out a little from shore. Then he sat down and taught the people from the boat.","Ascendens autem in unam navem, quae erat Simonis, rogavit eum a terra reducere pusillum; et sedens docebat de navicula turbas.","וירד אל אחת מן האניות אשר היא לשמעון ויבקש ממנו להוליכו מעט מן היבשה אל הים וישב וילמד את העם מתוך האניה׃"],["49","5","4","예수님께서 말씀을 마치시고 나서 시몬에게 이르셨다. “깊은 데로 저어 나가서 그물을 내려 고기를 잡아라.”","예수께서는 말씀을 마치시고 시몬에게 \"깊은 데로 가서 그물을 쳐 고기를 잡아라.\" 하셨다.","말씀을 마치시고 시몬에게 이르시되 깊은 데로 가서 그물을 내려 고기를 잡으라","말씀을 마치시고 시몬에게 이르시되 깊은데로 가서 그물을 내려 고기를 잡으라","예수께서 말씀을 다 마치시고 시몬에게 \"이제 깊은데로 나가서 그물을 내리라. 그러면 많은 고기가 잡힐 것이다\" 하고 말씀하셨다.","After he had finished speaking, he said to Simon, “Put out into deep water and lower your nets for a catch.”","Now when he had left speaking, he said unto Simon, Launch out into the deep, and let down your nets for a draught.","When he had finished speaking, he said to Simon, \"Put out into deep water, and let down the nets for a catch.\"","Ut cessavit autem loqui, dixit ad Simonem:  “Duc in altum et laxate retia vestra in capturam “.","ויכל לדבר ויאמר אל שמעון הוליכה אל עמק הים והורידו את מכמרותיכם לצוד׃"],["49","5","5","시몬이 “스승님, 저희가 밤새도록 애썼지만 한 마리도 잡지 못하였습니다. 그러나 스승님의 말씀대로 제가 그물을 내리겠습니다.” 하고 대답하였다.","시몬은 \"선생님, 저희가 밤새도록 애썼지만 한 마리도 못 잡았습니다. 그러나 선생님께서 말씀하시니 그물을 치겠습니다.\" 하고 대답한 뒤","시몬이 대답하여 이르되 선생님 우리들이 밤이 새도록 수고하였으되 잡은 것이 없지마는 말씀에 의지하여 내가 그물을 내리리이다 하고","시몬이 대답하여 가로되 선생이여 우리들이 밤이 맟도록 수고를 하였으되 얻은 것이 없지마는 말씀에 의지하여 내가 그물을 내리리이다 하고","시몬이 대답하였다. \"선생님, 저희가 어제 밤새도록 애를 썼으나 한 마리도 잡지 못하였습니다. 그러나 선생님이 그렇게 말씀하시니 다시 해보겠습니다.\"","Simon said in reply, “Master, we have worked hard all night and have caught nothing, but at your command I will lower the nets.”","And Simon answering said unto him, Master, we have toiled all the night, and have taken nothing: nevertheless at thy word I will let down the net.","Simon answered, \"Master, we've worked hard all night and haven't caught anything. But because you say so, I will let down the nets.\"","Et respondens Simon dixit:  “Praeceptor, per totam noctem laborantes nihil cepimus; in verbo autem tuo laxabo retia “.","ויען שמעון ויאמר אליו מורה כל הלילה יגענו ולא לכדנו מאומה אך על פי דברך אוריד את המכמרת׃"],["49","5","6","그렇게 하자 그들은 그물이 찢어질 만큼 매우 많은 물고기를 잡게 되었다.","그대로 하였더니 과연 엄청나게 많은 고기가 걸려들어 그물이 찢어질 지경이 되었다.","그렇게 하니 고기를 잡은 것이 심히 많아 그물이 찢어지는지라","그리한즉 고기를 에운 것이 심히 많아 그물이 찢어지는지라","시몬이 그대로 하였더니 그물이 가득차서 찢어질 지경이었다.","When they had done this, they caught a great number of fish and their nets were tearing.","And when they had this done, they inclosed a great multitude of fishes: and their net brake.","When they had done so, they caught such a large number of fish that their nets began to break.","Et cum hoc fecissent, concluserunt piscium multitudinem copiosam; rumpebantur autem retia eorum.","ויעשו כן וילכדו דגים הרבה מאד ותקרע מכמרתם׃"],["49","5","7","그래서 다른 배에 있는 동료들에게 손짓하여 와서 도와 달라고 하였다. 동료들이 와서 고기를 두 배에 가득 채우니 배가 가라앉을 지경이 되었다.","그들은 다른 배에 있는 동료들에게 손짓하여 와서 도와달라고 하였다. 동료들이 와서 같이 고기를 끌어올려 배가 가라앉을 정도로 두 배에 가득히 채웠다.","이에 다른 배에 있는 동무들에게 손짓하여 와서 도와 달라 하니 그들이 와서 두 배에 채우매 잠기게 되었더라","이에 다른 배에 있는 동무를 손짓하여 와서 도와달라 하니 저희가 와서 두 배에 채우매 잠기게 되었더라","그들은 다른 배에 있는 동료들에게 소리쳐 도움을 청하였다. 배가 가라 앉을 정도로 곧 두 배에 고기가 가득 찼다.","They signaled to their partners in the other boat to come to help them. They came and filled both boats so that they were in danger of sinking.","And they beckoned unto their partners, which were in the other ship, that they should come and help them. And they came, and filled both the ships, so that they began to sink.","So they signaled their partners in the other boat to come and help them, and they came and filled both boats so full that they began to sink.","Et annuerunt sociis, qui erant in alia navi, ut venirent et adiuvarent eos; et venerunt et impleverunt ambas naviculas, ita ut mergerentur.","ויניפו יד אל חבריהם אשר באמיה השנית לבוא אליהם ולעזרם ויבאו וימלאו את שתי האניות עד כי שקעו׃"],["49","5","8","시몬 베드로가 그것을 보고 예수님의 무릎 앞에 엎드려 말하였다. “주님, 저에게서 떠나 주십시오. 저는 죄 많은 사람입니다.”","이것을 본 시몬 베드로는 예수의 발 앞에 엎드려 \"주님, 저는 죄인입니다. 저에게서 떠나 주십시오.\" 하고 말하였다.","시몬 베드로가 이를 보고 예수의 무릎 아래에 엎드려 이르되 주여 나를 떠나소서 나는 죄인이로소이다 하니","시몬 베드로가 이를 보고 예수의 무릎 아래 엎드려 가로되 주여 나를 떠나소서 나는 죄인이로소이다 하니","시몬 베드로가 이것을 보고 예수 앞에 무릎을 꿇고 \"오 주님, 제게서 떠나 주십시오. 저는 주님을 모시기에는 너무나도 부족한 죄인입니다\" 하고 말하였다.","When Simon Peter saw this, he fell at the knees of Jesus and said, “Depart from me, Lord, for I am a sinful man.”","When Simon Peter saw it, he fell down at Jesus' knees, saying, Depart from me; for I am a sinful man, O Lord.","When Simon Peter saw this, he fell at Jesus' knees and said, \"Go away from me, Lord; I am a sinful man!\"","Quod cum videret Simon Petrus, procidit ad genua Iesu dicens:  “Exi a me, quia homo peccator sum, Domine “.","ויהי כראות שמעון פטרוס את זאת ויפל לברכי ישוע ויאמר אדני צא נא מעמי כי איש חוטא אנכי׃"],["49","5","9","사실 베드로도, 그와 함께 있던 이들도 모두 자기들이 잡은 그 많은 고기를 보고 몹시 놀랐던 것이다.","베드로는 너무나 많은 고기가 잡힌 것을 보고 겁을 집어먹었던 것이다. 그의 동료들과","이는 자기 및 자기와 함께 있는 모든 사람이 고기 잡힌 것으로 말미암아 놀라고","이는 자기와 및 함께 있는 모든 사람이 고기 잡힌 것을 인하여 놀라고","베드로는 다른 사람들과 마찬가지로 엄청나게 많이 잡힌 고기를 보고 놀랐던 것이다.","For astonishment at the catch of fish they had made seized him and all those with him,","For he was astonished, and all that were with him, at the draught of the fishes which they had taken:","For he and all his companions were astonished at the catch of fish they had taken,","Stupor enim circumdederat eum et omnes, qui cum illo erant, in captura piscium, quos ceperant;","כי שמה החזיקה אותו ואת כל אשר אתו על ציד הדגים אשר צדו׃"],["49","5","10","시몬의 동업자인 제베대오의 두 아들 야고보와 요한도 그러하였다. 예수님께서 시몬에게 이르셨다. “두려워하지 마라. 이제부터 너는 사람을 낚을 것이다.”","제베대오의 두 아들 야고보와 요한도 똑같이 놀랐는데 그들은 다 시몬의 동업자였다. 그러나 예수께서 시몬에게 \"두려워하지 마라. 너는 이제부터 사람들을 낚을 것이다.\" 하고 말씀하시자","세베대의 아들로서 시몬의 동업자인 야고보와 요한도 놀랐음이라 예수께서 시몬에게 이르시되 무서워하지 말라 이제 후로는 네가 사람을 취하리라 하시니","세베대의 아들로서 시몬의 동업자인 야고보와 요한도 놀랐음이라 예수께서 시몬에게 일러 가라사대 무서워 말라 이제 후로는 네가 사람을 1)취하리라 하시니 헬, 사로잡으리라","시몬의 동료인 세베대의 아들 야고보와 요한도 똑같이 놀랐다. 예수께서 시몬에게 말씀하셨다. \"두려워하지 말아라. 이제부터 너는 사람을 낚게 될 것이다.\"","and likewise James and John, the sons of Zebedee, who were partners of Simon. Jesus said to Simon, “Do not be afraid; from now on you will be catching men.”","And so was also James, and John, the sons of Zebedee, which were partners with Simon. And Jesus said unto Simon, Fear not; from henceforth thou shalt catch men.","and so were James and John, the sons of Zebedee, Simon's partners. Then Jesus said to Simon, \"Don't be afraid; from now on you will catch men.\"","similiter autem et Iacobum et Ioannem, filios Zebedaei, qui erant socii Simonis. Et ait ad Simonem Iesus:  “Noli timere; ex hoc iam homines eris capiens “.","וכן גם את יעקב ואת יוחנן בני זבדי אשר התחברו עם שמעון ויאמר ישוע אל שמעון אל תירא מעתה צוד תצוד אנשים׃"],["49","5","11","그들은 배를 저어다 뭍에 대어 놓은 다음, 모든 것을 버리고 예수님을 따랐다.","그들은 배를 끌어다 호숫가에 대어놓은 다음 모든 것을 버리고 예수를 따라갔다.","그들이 배들을 육지에 대고 모든 것을 버려 두고 예수를 따르니라","저희가 배들을 육지에 대고 모든 것을 버려두고 예수를 좇으니라","그들은 곧 배를 호숫가에 댄 후에 모든 것을 버려 두고 예수를 따라갔다.","When they brought their boats to the shore, they left everything and followed him.","And when they had brought their ships to land, they forsook all, and followed him.","So they pulled their boats up on shore, left everything and followed him.","Et subductis ad terram navibus, relictis omnibus, secuti sunt illum.","ויוליכו את האניות אל היבשה ויעזבו את הכל וילכו אחריו׃"],["49","5","12","예수님께서 어느 한 고을에 계실 때, 온몸에 나병이 걸린 사람이 다가왔다. 그는 예수님을 보자 얼굴을 땅에 대고 엎드려 이렇게 청하였다. “주님! 주님께서는 하고자 하시면 저를 깨끗하게 하실 수 있습니다.”","예수께서 어느 동네에 계실 때에 온몸이 나병으로 문드러진 사람 하나가 나타났다. 그는 예수를 보자 땅에 엎드려 간청하며 \"주님, 주님께서는 하시고자 하시면 저를 깨끗이 고쳐주실 수 있으십니다.\" 하고 말씀 드렸다.","예수께서 한 동네에 계실 때에 온 몸에 나병 들린 사람이 있어 예수를 보고 엎드려 구하여 이르되 주여 원하시면 나를 깨끗하게 하실 수 있나이다 하니","예수께서 한 동네에 계실 때에 온 몸에 문둥병 들린 사람이 있어 예수를 보고 엎드려 구하여 가로되 주여 원하시면 나를 깨끗케 하실 수 있나이다 하니","예수께서 어떤 동네를 방문하셨을 때 거기에 온몸이 나병으로 문드러진 사람이 있었다. 그가 예수를 보자 엎드려서 얼굴을 땅에 대고 나병을 고쳐 달라고 애원하였다. \"선생님, 해주고자만 하신다면 선생님은 제 병을 깨끗이 고치실 수 있습니다.\"","Now there was a man full of leprosy in one of the towns where he was; and when he saw Jesus, he fell prostrate, pleaded with him, and said, “Lord, if you wish, you can make me clean.”","And it came to pass, when he was in a certain city, behold a man full of leprosy: who seeing Jesus fell on his face, and besought him, saying, Lord, if thou wilt, thou canst make me clean.","While Jesus was in one of the towns, a man came along who was covered with leprosy. When he saw Jesus, he fell with his face to the ground and begged him, \"Lord, if you are willing, you can make me clean.\"","Et factum est, cum esset in una civitatum, et ecce vir plenus lepra; et videns Iesum et procidens in faciem rogavit eum dicens:  “Domine, si vis, potes me mundare “.","ויהי בהיותו באחת הערים והנה איש מלא צרעת וירא את ישוע ויפל על פניו ויתחנן אליו לאמר אדני אם תחפץ תוכל לטהרני׃"],["49","5","13","예수님께서 손을 내밀어 그에게 대시며 말씀하셨다. “내가 하고자 하니 깨끗하게 되어라.” 그러자 곧 나병이 가셨다.","예수께서 손을 내밀어 그에게 대시며 \"그렇게 해주마. 깨끗하게 되어라.\" 하시자 곧 그의 나병이 깨끗이 나았다.","예수께서 손을 내밀어 그에게 대시며 이르시되 내가 원하노니 깨끗함을 받으라 하신대 나병이 곧 떠나니라","예수께서 손을 내밀어 저에게 대시며 가라사대 내가 원하노니 깨끗함을 받으라 하신대 문둥병이 곧 떠나니라","예수께서 손을 내밀어 그를 만지며 \"내가 원한다. 깨끗해지라\" 하고 말씀하시자 나병이 곧 나았다.","Jesus stretched out his hand, touched him, and said, “I do will it. Be made clean.” And the leprosy left him immediately.","And he put forth his hand, and touched him, saying, I will: be thou clean. And immediately the leprosy departed from him.","Jesus reached out his hand and touched the man. \"I am willing,\" he said. \"Be clean!\" And immediately the leprosy left him.","Et extendens manum tetigit illum dicens:  “Volo, mundare! “; et confestim lepra discessit ab illo.","וישלח את ידו ויגע בו ויאמר חפץ אנכי טהר ופתאם סרה ממנו הצרעת׃"],["49","5","14","예수님께서는 아무에게도 말하지 말라고 그에게 분부하시고, “다만 사제에게 가서 네 몸을 보이고, 모세가 명령한 대로 네가 깨끗해진 것에 대한 예물을 바쳐, 그들에게 증거가 되게 하여라.” 하셨다.","예수께서는 \"아무에게도 이 일을 말하지 말고 다만 사제에게 가서 몸을 보이고 모세가 명한 대로 예물을 드려 네 몸이 깨끗해진 것을 사람들에게 증명하여라.\" 하고 이르셨다.","예수께서 그를 경고하시되 아무에게도 이르지 말고 가서 ㄱ)제사장에게 네 몸을 보이고 또 네가 깨끗하게 됨으로 인하여 모세가 명한 대로 예물을 드려 그들에게 입증하라 하셨더니","예수께서 저를 경계하시되 아무에게도 이르지 말고 가서 ㄱ)제사장에게 네 몸을 보이고 또 네 깨끗케 됨을 인하여 모세의 명한대로 예물을 드려 저희에게 증거하라 하셨더니 레 14:2 이하","예수께서 \"아무에게도 알리지 말고 곧장 제사장에게 가서 몸을 보이고 모세의 율법에 정한대로 예물을 드려 네가 깨끗해졌다는 것을 증명하라\"고 이르셨다.","Then he ordered him not to tell anyone, but “Go, show yourself to the priest and offer for your cleansing what Moses prescribed; that will be proof for them.”","And he charged him to tell no man: but go, and shew thyself to the priest, and offer for thy cleansing, according as Moses commanded, for a testimony unto them.","Then Jesus ordered him, \"Don't tell anyone, but go, show yourself to the priest and offer the sacrifices that Moses commanded for your cleansing, as a testimony to them.\"","Et ipse praecepit illi, ut nemini diceret, sed:  “Vade, ostende te sacerdoti et offer pro emundatione tua, sicut praecepit Moyses, in testimonium illis “.","ויעד בו לבלתי ספר לאיש כי אם לך והראה אל הכהן והקרב קרבן על טהרתך כאשר צוה משה לעדות להם׃"],["49","5","15","그래도 예수님의 소문은 점점 더 퍼져, 많은 군중이 말씀도 듣고 병도 고치려고 모여 왔다.","그러나 예수의 소문은 더욱 더 널리 퍼져서 예수의 말씀을 듣거나 병을 고치려고 사람들이 사방에서 떼지어 왔다.","예수의 소문이 더욱 퍼지매 수많은 무리가 말씀도 듣고 자기 병도 고침을 받고자 하여 모여 오되","예수의 소문이 더욱 퍼지매 허다한 무리가 말씀도 듣고 자기 병도 나음을 얻고자 하여 모여 오되","그러나 예수께 능력이 많으시다는 소문은 금방 퍼져 나가서 설교를 듣거나 병을 고치려는 사람들이 떼지어 몰려들었다.","The report about him spread all the more, and great crowds assembled to listen to him and to be cured of their ailments,","But so much the more went there a fame abroad of him: and great multitudes came together to hear, and to be healed by him of their infirmities.","Yet the news about him spread all the more, so that crowds of people came to hear him and to be healed of their sicknesses.","Perambulabat autem magis sermo de illo, et conveniebant turbae multae, ut audirent et curarentur ab infirmitatibus suis;","ושמעו הולך הלוך וגדל ויקבצו עם רב לשמוע ולהרפא בידו מתחלואיהם׃"],["49","5","16","그러나 예수님께서는 외딴곳으로 물러가 기도하셨다.","그러나 예수께서는 때때로 한적한 곳으로 물러가셔서 기도를 드리셨다.","예수는 물러가사 한적한 곳에서 기도하시니라","예수는 물러가사 한적한 곳에서 기도하시니라","그러나 예수께서는 때때로 한적한 곳으로 물러가서 홀로 기도하셨다.","but he would withdraw to deserted places to pray.","And he withdrew himself into the wilderness, and prayed.","But Jesus often withdrew to lonely places and prayed.","ipse autem secedebat in desertis et orabat.","והוא סר אל המדברות ויתפלל׃"],["49","5","17","하루는 예수님께서 가르치고 계셨는데, 갈릴래아와 유다의 모든 마을과 예루살렘에서 온 바리사이들과 율법 교사들도 앉아 있었다. 예수님께서는 주님의 힘으로 병을 고쳐 주기도 하셨다.","하루는 예수께서 가르치고 계셨는데 거기에 갈릴래아와 유다의 여러 마을과 예루살렘에서 온 바리사이파 사람들과 율법학자들이 앉아 있었다. 예수께서는 하느님의 능력으로 병자들을 고쳐주기도 하셨는데","하루는 가르치실 때에 갈릴리의 각 마을과 유대와 예루살렘에서 온 바리새인과 율법교사들이 앉았는데 병을 고치는 주의 능력이 예수와 함께 하더라","하루는 가르치실 때에 갈릴리 각 촌과 유대와 예루살렘에서 나온 바리새인과 교법사들이 앉았는데 병을 고치는 주의 능력이 예수와 함께하더라","하루는 예수께서 가르치고 계시는 자리에 갈릴리와 유대 여러 동네와 예루살렘에서 온 바리새파 사람들과 율법학자들 몇 명도 함께 앉아 있었다. 예수께는 하나님의 병 고치는 능력이 함께 하고 있었다.","One day as Jesus was teaching, Pharisees and teachers of the law were sitting there who had come from every village of Galilee and Judea and Jerusalem, and the power of the Lord was with him for healing.","And it came to pass on a certain day, as he was teaching, that there were Pharisees and doctors of the law sitting by, which were come out of every town of Galilee, and Judaea, and Jerusalem: and the power of the Lord was present to heal them.","One day as he was teaching, Pharisees and teachers of the law, who had come from every village of Galilee and from Judea and Jerusalem, were sitting there. And the power of the Lord was present for him to heal the sick.","Et factum est, in una dierum, et ipse erat docens, et erant pharisaei sedentes et legis doctores, qui venerant ex omni castello Galilaeae et Iudaeae et Ierusalem; et virtus Domini erat ei ad sanandum.","ויהי באחד הימים והוא מלמד וישבו שם פרושים ומורי התורה אשר באו מכל כפרי הגליל ומיהודה וירושלים וגבורת יהוה היתה בו לרפוא׃"],["49","5","18","그때에 남자 몇이 중풍에 걸린 어떤 사람을 평상에 누인 채 들고 와서, 예수님 앞으로 들여다 놓으려고 하였다.","그 때 사람들이 중풍 들린 사람을 침상에 눕혀가지고 와서 예수 앞에 데리고 가려 하였으나","한 중풍병자를 사람들이 침상에 메고 와서 예수 앞에 들여놓고자 하였으나","한 중풍병자를 사람들이 침상에 메고 와서 예수 앞에 들여놓고자 하였으나","그때 어떤 사람들이 중풍병자 한 사람을 침상에 누인 채 데려왔다. 그들은 사람들 사이를 헤치고 들어오려 하였으나 도저히 예수 앞에 이를 수 없음을 알자 지붕 위로 올라가 기와를 벗겨 내고 병자를 침상째 예수 앞에 달아 내렸다.","And some men brought on a stretcher a man who was paralyzed; they were trying to bring him in and set [him] in his presence.","And, behold, men brought in a bed a man which was taken with a palsy: and they sought means to bring him in, and to lay him before him.","Some men came carrying a paralytic on a mat and tried to take him into the house to lay him before Jesus.","Et ecce viri portantes in lecto hominem, qui erat paralyticus, et quaerebant eum inferre et ponere ante eum.","והנה אנשים נושאים איש במטה והוא נכה אברים ויבקשו להביאו הביתה ולשום לפניו׃"],["49","5","19","그러나 군중 때문에 그를 안으로 들일 길이 없어 지붕으로 올라가 기와를 벗겨 내고, 평상에 누인 그 환자를 예수님 앞 한가운데로 내려 보냈다.","사람들이 많아서 병자를 안으로 데리고 들어갈 수가 없었다. 그래서 그들은 지붕으로 올라가 기와를 벗겨 구멍을 내고 병자를 요에 눕힌 채 사람들에게 둘러싸여 있는 예수 앞에 내려보냈다.","무리 때문에 메고 들어갈 길을 얻지 못한지라 지붕에 올라가 기와를 벗기고 병자를 침상째 무리 가운데로 예수 앞에 달아 내리니","무리 때문에 메고 들어갈 길을 얻지 못한지라 지붕에 올라가 기와를 벗기고 병자를 침상채 무리 가운데로 예수 앞에 달아 내리니","(18절에 포함되어 있음)","But not finding a way to bring him in because of the crowd, they went up on the roof and lowered him on the stretcher through the tiles into the middle in front of Jesus.","And when they could not find by what way they might bring him in because of the multitude, they went upon the housetop, and let him down through the tiling with his couch into the midst before Jesus.","When they could not find a way to do this because of the crowd, they went up on the roof and lowered him on his mat through the tiles into the middle of the crowd, right in front of Jesus.","Et non invenientes qua parte illum inferrent prae turba, ascenderunt supra tectum et per tegulas summiserunt illum cum lectulo in medium ante Iesum.","ולא מצאו דרך להכניסו מרב העם ויעלו הגגה ויורידהו ואת ערשו בין הרעפים לתוך הבית לפני ישוע׃"],["49","5","20","예수님께서 그들의 믿음을 보시고 말씀하셨다. “사람아, 너는 죄를 용서받았다.”","예수께서는 그들의 믿음을 보시고 \"너는 죄를 용서받았다.\" 하고 말씀하셨다.","예수께서 그들의 믿음을 보시고 이르시되 이 사람아 네 죄 사함을 받았느니라 하시니","예수께서 저희 믿음을 보시고 이르시되 이 사람아 네 죄 사함을 받았느니라 하시니","그들의 믿음을 보시고 예수께서 \"네 죄는 용서받았다\" 하고 말씀하셨다.","When he saw their faith, he said, “As for you, your sins are forgiven.”","And when he saw their faith, he said unto him, Man, thy sins are forgiven thee.","When Jesus saw their faith, he said, \"Friend, your sins are forgiven.\"","Quorum fidem ut vidit, dixit:  “Homo, remittuntur tibi peccata tua “.","וירא את אמונתם ויאמר אליו בן אדם נסלחו לך חטאתיך׃"],["49","5","21","율법 학자들과 바리사이들은 의아하게 생각하기 시작하였다. ‘저 사람은 누구인데 하느님을 모독하는 말을 하는가? 하느님 한 분 외에 누가 죄를 용서할 수 있단 말인가?’","이 말을 들은 율법학자와 바리사이파 사람들은 \"저 사람이 누구인데 저런 말을 하여 하느님을 모독하는가? 하느님말고 누가 죄를 용서할 수 있단 말인가?\" 하고 수군거리기 시작하였다.","서기관과 바리새인들이 생각하여 이르되 이 신성모독 하는 자가 누구냐 오직 하나님 외에 누가 능히 죄를 사하겠느냐","서기관과 바리새인들이 의논하여 가로되 이 참람한 말을 하는 자가 누구뇨 오직 하나님 외에 누가 능히 죄를 사하겠느냐","바리새파 사람들과 율법학자들이 서로 수군거렸다. \"이 사람은 자기를 누구라고 생각하는 것일까? 저렇게 하나님을 모독하는 말을 함부로 하다니. 하나님 한분 외에 누가 죄를 용서할 수 있단 말인가?\"","Then the scribes and Pharisees began to ask themselves, “Who is this who speaks blasphemies? Who but God alone can forgive sins?”","And the scribes and the Pharisees began to reason, saying, Who is this which speaketh blasphemies? Who can forgive sins, but God alone?","The Pharisees and the teachers of the law began thinking to themselves, \"Who is this fellow who speaks blasphemy? Who can forgive sins but God alone?\"","Et coeperunt cogitare scribae et pharisaei dicentes:  “Quis est hic, qui loquitur blasphemias? Quis potest dimittere peccata nisi solus Deus? “.","ויחלו הסופרים והפרושים לחשב מחשבות לאמר מי הוא זה המדבר גדופים מי יוכל לסלח חטאים מבלעדי האלהים לבדו׃"],["49","5","22","예수님께서는 그들의 생각을 아시고 대답하셨다. “너희는 어찌하여 마음속으로 의아하게 생각하느냐?","예수께서는 그들의 생각을 알아채시고 이렇게 말씀하셨다. \"어찌하여 너희는 그런 생각을 품고 있느냐?","예수께서 그 생각을 아시고 대답하여 이르시되 너희 마음에 무슨 생각을 하느냐","예수께서 그 의논을 아시고 대답하여 가라사대 너희 마음에 무슨 의논을 하느냐","예수께서는 그들의 생각을 아시고 말씀하셨다. \"왜 그것이 하나님을 모독하는 것이 되느냐?","Jesus knew their thoughts and said to them in reply, “What are you thinking in your hearts?","But when Jesus perceived their thoughts, he answering said unto them, What reason ye in your hearts?","Jesus knew what they were thinking and asked, \"Why are you thinking these things in your hearts?","Ut cognovit autem Iesus cogitationes eorum, respondens dixit ad illos:  “Quid cogitatis in cordibus vestris?","וידע ישוע את מחשבותם ויען ויאמר אליהם מה אתם חשבים בלבבכם׃"],["49","5","23","‘너는 죄를 용서받았다.’ 하고 말하는 것과 ‘일어나 걸어가라.’ 하고 말하는 것 가운데에서 어느 쪽이 더 쉬우냐?","너는 죄를 용서받았다.' 하는 것과 '일어나 걸어가라.' 하는 것과 어느 편이 더 쉽겠느냐?","네 죄 사함을 받았느니라 하는 말과 일어나 걸어가라 하는 말이 어느 것이 쉽겠느냐","네 죄 사함을 받았느니라 하는 말과 일어나 걸어 가라 하는 말이 어느 것이 쉽겠느냐","\"네 죄사함을 받았다\" 하는 말과 \"일어나 걸어가라\" 하는 말 중에 어느 것이 더 쉽겠느냐? 인자는 땅 위에서 죄를 용서할 권세를 가지고 있다. 내가 이 사람을 고쳐서 너희에게 그 증거를 삼겠다.\" 그리고 중풍병자에게 \"침상을 들고 집으로 가라. 네 병이 나았다\" 하고 명령하셨다.","Which is easier, to say, ‘Your sins are forgiven,’ or to say, ‘Rise and walk’?","Whether is easier, to say, Thy sins be forgiven thee; or to say, Rise up and walk?","Which is easier: to say, 'Your sins are forgiven,' or to say, 'Get up and walk'?","Quid est facilius, dicere:  “Dimittuntur tibi peccata tua “, an dicere:  “Surge et ambula “?","מה הוא הנקל האמר נסלחו לך חטאתיך אם אמר קום והתהלך׃"],["49","5","24","이제 사람의 아들이 땅에서 죄를 용서하는 권한을 가지고 있음을 너희가 알게 해 주겠다.” 그러고 나서 중풍에 걸린 이에게 말씀하셨다. “내가 너에게 말한다. 일어나 네 평상을 가지고 집으로 가거라.”","이제 땅에서 죄를 용서하는 권한이 사람의 아들에게 있다는 것을 보여주겠다.\" 그리고 나서 중풍병자에게 \"내가 말하는 대로 하여라. 일어나 요를 걷어들고 집으로 돌아가거라.\" 하셨다.","그러나 인자가 땅에서 죄를 사하는 권세가 있는 줄을 너희로 알게 하리라 하시고 중풍병자에게 말씀하시되 내가 네게 이르노니 일어나 네 침상을 가지고 집으로 가라 하시매","그러나 인자가 땅에서 죄를 사하는 권세가 있는 줄을 너희로 알게 하리라 하시고 중풍병자에게 말씀하시되 내가 네게 이르노니 일어나 네 침상을 가지고 집으로 가라 하시매","(23절에 포함되어 있음)","But that you may know that the Son of Man has authority on earth to forgive sins”—he said to the man who was paralyzed, “I say to you, rise, pick up your stretcher, and go home.”","But that ye may know that the Son of man hath power upon earth to forgive sins, (he said unto the sick of the palsy,) I say unto thee, Arise, and take up thy couch, and go into thine house.","But that you may know that the Son of Man has authority on earth to forgive sins....\" He said to the paralyzed man, \"I tell you, get up, take your mat and go home.\"","Ut autem sciatis quia Filius hominis potestatem habet in terra dimittere peccata - ait paralytico - : Tibi dico: Surge, tolle lectulum tuum et vade in domum tuam “.","אך למען תדעון כי בן האדם יש לו השלטן בארץ לסלח חטאים ויאמר אל נכה האברים אמר אני אליך קום ושא את ערשך ולך לך אל ביתך׃"],["49","5","25","그러자 그는 그들 앞에서 즉시 일어나 자기가 누워 있던 것을 들고, 하느님을 찬양하며 집으로 돌아갔다.","그러자 병자는 사람들이 보는 앞에서 벌떡 일어나 깔고 누웠던 요를 걷어들고 하느님을 찬양하며 집으로 돌아갔다.","그 사람이 그들 앞에서 곧 일어나 그 누웠던 것을 가지고 하나님께 영광을 돌리며 자기 집으로 돌아가니","그 사람이 저희 앞에서 곧 일어나 그 누웠던 것을 가지고 하나님께 영광을 돌리며 자기 집으로 돌아가니","그러자 모든 사람이 지켜 보는 가운데 그 사람은 벌떡 일어나 침상을 들고 하나님을 찬양하며 집으로 갔다.","He stood up immediately before them, picked up what he had been lying on, and went home, glorifying God.","And immediately he rose up before them, and took up that whereon he lay, and departed to his own house, glorifying God.","Immediately he stood up in front of them, took what he had been lying on and went home praising God.","Et confestim surgens coram illis tulit, in quo iacebat, et abiit in domum suam magnificans Deum.","וימהר ויקם לעיניהם וישא את משכבו וילך לו אל ביתו מהלל את האלהים וישא את משכבו וילך לו אל ביתו מהלל את האלהים׃"],["49","5","26","이에 모든 사람이 크게 놀라 하느님을 찬양하였다. 그리고 두려움에 차서 “우리가 오늘 신기한 일을 보았다.” 하고 말하였다.","사람들은 모두 놀라 하느님을 찬양하면서도 마음은 두려움에 싸여 \"우리는 오늘 참으로 신기한 일을 보았다.\" 하고 말하였다.","모든 사람이 놀라 하나님께 영광을 돌리며 심히 두려워하여 이르되 오늘 우리가 놀라운 일을 보았다 하니라","모든 사람이 놀라 하나님께 영광을 돌리며 심히 두려워하여 가로되 오늘날 우리가 기이한 일을 보았다 하니라","그 자리에 있던 사람들은 모두 놀라움과 두려움에 사로잡혔다. 그들은 하나님을 찬양하며 \"우리는 오늘 신기한 일을 보았다\" 하고 말하였다.","Then astonishment seized them all and they glorified God, and, struck with awe, they said, “We have seen incredible things today.”","And they were all amazed, and they glorified God, and were filled with fear, saying, We have seen strange things to day.","Everyone was amazed and gave praise to God. They were filled with awe and said, \"We have seen remarkable things today.\"","Et stupor apprehendit omnes, et magnificabant Deum; et repleti sunt timore dicentes:  “Vidimus mirabilia hodie “.","ושמה החזיקה את כלם ויברכו את האלהים וימלאו יראה ויאמרו כי נפלאות ראינו היום׃"],["49","5","27","그 뒤에 예수님께서는 밖에 나가셨다가 레위라는 세리가 세관에 앉아 있는 것을 보시고 말씀하셨다. “나를 따라라.”","이 일이 있은 뒤 예수께서 그 곳을 떠나 길을 가시다가 레위라는 세리가 세관에 앉아 있는 것을 보시고 \"나를 따라오너라.\" 하셨다.","그 후에 예수께서 나가사 레위라 하는 세리가 세관에 앉아 있는 것을 보시고 나를 따르라 하시니","그 후에 나가사 레위라 하는 세리가 세관에 앉은 것을 보시고 나를 좇으라 하시니","그후 예수께서는 마을을 떠나 나오다가 세리 한 사람이 세관에 앉아 있는 것을 보셨다. 그의 이름은 레위였다. 예수께서 그에게 \"와서 나를 따르라!\"고 말씀하셨다.","After this he went out and saw a tax collector named Levi sitting at the customs post. He said to him, “Follow me.”","And after these things he went forth, and saw a publican, named Levi, sitting at the receipt of custom: and he said unto him, Follow me.","After this, Jesus went out and saw a tax collector by the name of Levi sitting at his tax booth. \"Follow me,\" Jesus said to him,","Et post haec exiit et vidit publicanum nomine Levi sedentem ad teloneum et ait illi:  “Sequere me “.","ויהי אחרי כן ויצא וירא מוכס ושמו לוי יושב בבית המכס ויאמר אליו לכה אחרי׃"],["49","5","28","그러자 레위는 모든 것을 버려둔 채 일어나 그분을 따랐다.","그러자 그는 모든 것을 버리고 예수를 따라 나섰다.","그가 모든 것을 버리고 일어나 따르니라","저가 모든 것을 버리고 일어나 좇으니라","그러자 레위는 모든 것을 버리고 일어나 예수를 따랐다.","And leaving everything behind, he got up and followed him.","And he left all, rose up, and followed him.","and Levi got up, left everything and followed him.","Et relictis omnibus, surgens secutus est eum.","ויעזב את הכל ויקם וילך אחריו׃"],["49","5","29","레위가 자기 집에서 예수님께 큰 잔치를 베풀었는데, 세리들과 다른 사람들이 큰 무리를 지어 함께 식탁에 앉았다.","레위는 자기 집에서 큰 잔치를 베풀고 예수를 모셨는데 그 자리에는 많은 세리들과 그 밖에 여러 사람이 함께 앉아 있었다.","레위가 예수를 위하여 자기 집에서 큰 잔치를 하니 세리와 다른 사람이 많이 함께 앉아 있는지라","레위가 예수를 위하여 자기 집에서 큰 잔치를 하니 세리와 다른 사람이 많이 함께 2)앉았는지라 헬, 기대어 누웠는지라 (유대인의 음식 먹을 때에 가지는 자세)","레위는 곧 자기 집에서 예수를 귀빈으로 모시고 잔치를 베풀었다. 레위의 많은 동료 세리들과 손님들이 모였다.","Then Levi gave a great banquet for him in his house, and a large crowd of tax collectors and others were at table with them.","And Levi made him a great feast in his own house: and there was a great company of publicans and of others that sat down with them.","Then Levi held a great banquet for Jesus at his house, and a large crowd of tax collectors and others were eating with them.","Et fecit ei convivium magnum Levi in domo sua; et erat turba multa publicanorum et aliorum, qui cum illis erant discumbentes.","ויעש לו לוי משתה גדול בביתו ועם רב של מוכסים ואנשים אחרים היו מסבים עמהם׃"],["49","5","30","그래서 바리사이들과 그들의 율법 학자들이 그분의 제자들에게 투덜거렸다. “당신들은 어째서 세리와 죄인들과 함께 먹고 마시는 것이오?”","이것을 본 바리사이파 사람들과 그들의 율법학자들은 못마땅하게 생각하여 예수의 제자들에게 \"어찌하여 당신들은 세리와 죄인들과 어울려 먹고 마시는 것입니까?\" 하고 트집을 잡았다.","바리새인과 그들의 서기관들이 그 제자들을 비방하여 이르되 너희가 어찌하여 세리와 죄인과 함께 먹고 마시느냐","바리새인과 저희 서기관들이 그 제자들을 비방하여 가로되 너희가 어찌하여 세리와 죄인과 함께 먹고 마시느냐","바리새파 사람들과 율법학자들은 예수의 제자들을 비방하며 \"당신들은 어찌하여 세리와 죄인과 함께 먹고 마시는 겁니까?\" 하고 말하였다.","The Pharisees and their scribes complained to his disciples, saying, “Why do you eat and drink with tax collectors and sinners?”","But their scribes and Pharisees murmured against his disciples, saying, Why do ye eat and drink with publicans and sinners?","But the Pharisees and the teachers of the law who belonged to their sect complained to his disciples, \"Why do you eat and drink with tax collectors and 'sinners'?\"","Et murmurabant pharisaei et scribae eorum adversus discipulos eius dicentes:  “Quare cum publicanis et peccatoribus manducatis et bibitis? “.","]13-03[ וילונו הסופרים אשר בהם והפרושים על תלמידיו ויאמרו למה אתם אכלים אליהם הבריאים אינם צריכים לרפא כי אם החלים׃"],["49","5","31","예수님께서 그들에게 대답하셨다. “건강한 이들에게는 의사가 필요하지 않으나 병든 이들에게는 필요하다.","예수께서 이 말을 들으시고 이렇게 대답하셨다. \"건강한 사람에게는 의사가 필요하지 않으나 병자에게는 필요하다.","예수께서 대답하여 이르시되 건강한 자에게는 의사가 쓸 데 없고 병든 자에게라야 쓸 데 있나니","예수께서 대답하여 가라사대 건강한 자에게는 의원이 쓸데 없고 병든 자에게라야 쓸데 있나니","예수께서 그들에게 말씀하셨다. \"의사가 필요한 사람은 병자이지 건강한 사람이 아니다.","Jesus said to them in reply, “Those who are healthy do not need a physician, but the sick do.","And Jesus answering said unto them, They that are whole need not a physician; but they that are sick.","Jesus answered them, \"It is not the healthy who need a doctor, but the sick.","Et respondens Iesus dixit ad illos:  “Non egent, qui sani sunt, medico, sed qui male habent.","]13-03[׃"],["49","5","32","나는 의인이 아니라 죄인을 불러 회개시키러 왔다.”","나는 의인을 불러 회개시키러 온 것이 아니라 죄인들을 불러 회개시키러 왔다.\"","내가 의인을 부르러 온 것이 아니요 죄인을 불러 회개시키러 왔노라","내가 의인을 부르러 온 것이 아니요 죄인을 불러 회개시키러 왔노라","내가 죄인들과 함께 하는 것은 그들을 죄에서 돌아서게 하려는 까닭이다. 자신은 이미 흠잡을데 없다고 생각하는 사람들과는 시간을 보낼 까닭이 없지 않느냐?\"","I have not come to call the righteous to repentance but sinners.”","I came not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance.","I have not come to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance.\"","Non veni vocare iustos sed peccatores in paenitentiam “.","לא באתי לקרוא הצדיקים כי אם החטאים לתשובה׃"],["49","5","33","그러자 그들이 예수님께 말하였다. “요한의 제자들은 자주 단식하며 기도를 하고 바리사이의 제자들도 그렇게 하는데, 당신의 제자들은 먹고 마시기만 하는군요.”","이 말씀을 듣고 그들이 \"요한의 제자들은 물론이요 바리사이파 사람들의 제자들까지도 자주 단식하며 기도하는데 어찌하여 당신의 제자들은 먹고 마시기만 합니까?\" 하며 따지자","그들이 예수께 말하되 요한의 제자는 자주 금식하며 기도하고 바리새인의 제자들도 또한 그리하되 당신의 제자들은 먹고 마시나이다","저희가 예수께 말하되 요한의 제자는 자주 금식하며 기도하고 바리새인의 제자들도 또한 그리하되 당신의 제자들은 먹고 마시나이다","그들은 또 \"침례 요한의 제자들은 금식하면서 기도하고 바리새파의 제자들도 그렇게 합니다. 그런데 당신의 제자들은 왜 먹고 마시기만 합니까?\" 하며 트집을 잡았다.","And they said to him, “The disciples of John fast often and offer prayers, and the disciples of the Pharisees do the same; but yours eat and drink.”","And they said unto him, Why do the disciples of John fast often, and make prayers, and likewise the disciples of the Pharisees; but thine eat and drink?","They said to him, \"John's disciples often fast and pray, and so do the disciples of the Pharisees, but yours go on eating and drinking.\"","At illi dixerunt ad eum:  “Discipuli Ioannis ieiunant frequenter et obsecrationes faciunt, similiter et pharisaeorum; tui autem edunt et bibunt “.","ויאמרו אליו הן תלמידי יוחנן צמים הרבה ואמרים תחנות וגם תלמידי הפרושים עשים כן ותלמידיך אכלים ושתים׃"],["49","5","34","예수님께서 그들에게 이르셨다. “혼인 잔치 손님들이 신랑과 함께 있는 동안에 단식을 할 수야 없지 않으냐?","예수께서는 이렇게 대답하셨다. \"너희는 잔칫집에 온 신랑의 친구들이 신랑과 함께 있는 동안에도 그들을 단식하게 할 수 있겠느냐?","예수께서 그들에게 이르시되 혼인 집 손님들이 신랑과 함께 있을 때에 너희가 그 손님으로 금식하게 할 수 있느냐","예수께서 저희에게 이르시되 혼인집 손님들이 신랑과 함께 있을 때에 너희가 그 손님으로 금식하게 할 수 있느뇨","예수께서 대답하셨다. \"결혼 잔치 손님들이 신랑과 함께 축하를 하는 동안 배고프게 지내더냐?","Jesus answered them, “Can you make the wedding guests fast while the bridegroom is with them?","And he said unto them, Can ye make the children of the bridechamber fast, while the bridegroom is with them?","Jesus answered, \"Can you make the guests of the bridegroom fast while he is with them?","Quibus Iesus ait:  “Numquid potestis convivas nuptiarum, dum cum illis est sponsus, facere ieiunare?","ויאמר אליהם התוכלו אנס בני החפה לצום והחתן עוד עמהם׃"],["49","5","35","그러나 그들이 신랑을 빼앗길 날이 올 것이다. 그때에는 그들도 단식할 것이다.”","이제 때가 오면 신랑을 빼앗길 것이니 그 때에는 그들도 단식을 할 것이다.\"","그러나 그 날에 이르러 그들이 신랑을 빼앗기리니 그 날에는 금식할 것이니라","그러나 그 날에 이르러 저희가 신랑을 빼앗기리니 그 날에는 금식할 것이니라","그러나 신랑이 죽임을 당할 날이 올 것인데 그때에는 그들이 아무 것도 먹으려 하지 않을 것이다.\"","But the days will come, and when the bridegroom is taken away from them, then they will fast in those days.”","But the days will come, when the bridegroom shall be taken away from them, and then shall they fast in those days.","But the time will come when the bridegroom will be taken from them; in those days they will fast.\"","Venient autem dies; et cum ablatus fuerit ab illis sponsus, tunc ieiunabunt in illis diebus “.","ואולם ימים באים ולקח מאתם החתן אז יצומו בימים ההמה׃"],["49","5","36","예수님께서는 그들에게 또 비유를 말씀하셨다. “아무도 새 옷에서 조각을 찢어 내어 헌 옷에 대고 꿰매지 않는다. 그렇게 하면 새 옷을 찢을 뿐만 아니라, 새 옷에서 찢어 낸 조각이 헌 옷에 어울리지도 않을 것이다.","그리고 예수께서는 비유를 들어 말씀하셨다. \"새 옷에서 조각을 찢어내어 헌 옷을 깁는 사람은 없다. 그렇게 하면 새 옷을 못쓰게 만들 뿐만 아니라 새 옷 조각이 헌 옷에 어울리지도 않을 것이다.","또 비유하여 이르시되 새 옷에서 한 조각을 찢어 낡은 옷에 붙이는 자가 없나니 만일 그렇게 하면 새 옷을 찢을 뿐이요 또 새 옷에서 찢은 조각이 낡은 것에 어울리지 아니하리라","또 비유하여 이르시되 새 옷에서 한 조각을 찢어 낡은 옷에 붙이는 자가 없나니 만일 그렇게 하면 새 옷을 찢을 뿐이요 또 새 옷에서 찢은 조각이 낡은 것에 합하지 아니하리라","예수께서 다시 비유를 들어 말씀하셨다. \"새 옷에서 조각을 베어 내어 낡은 옷에 대고 깁는 사람은 아무도 없다. 새 옷을 못쓰게 할뿐만 아니라 낡은 옷도 새로 댄 조각때문에 어울리지 않는다.","And he also told them a parable. “No one tears a piece from a new cloak to patch an old one. Otherwise, he will tear the new and the piece from it will not match the old cloak.","And he spake also a parable unto them; No man putteth a piece of a new garment upon an old; if otherwise, then both the new maketh a rent, and the piece that was taken out of the new agreeth not with the old.","He told them this parable: \"No one tears a patch from a new garment and sews it on an old one. If he does, he will have torn the new garment, and the patch from the new will not match the old.","Dicebat autem et similitudinem ad illos:  “Nemo abscindit commissuram a vestimento novo et immittit in vestimentum vetus; alioquin et novum rumpet, et veteri non conveniet commissura a novo.","וידבר אליהם גם אם המשל הזה אין איש מעלה מטלית של בגד חדש על בגד בלוי כי אז גם החדש יקרע וגם לא תשוה מטלית החדש לבלוי׃"],["49","5","37","또한 아무도 새 포도주를 헌 가죽 부대에 담지 않는다. 그렇게 하면 새 포도주가 부대를 터뜨려, 포도주는 쏟아지고 부대도 버리게 된다.","그리고 새 술을 헌 가죽부대에 담는 사람도 없다. 그렇게 하면 새 포도주가 부대를 터뜨릴 것이니 포도주는 쏟아지고 부대는 못쓰게 된다.","새 포도주를 낡은 가죽 부대에 넣는 자가 없나니 만일 그렇게 하면 새 포도주가 부대를 터뜨려 포도주가 쏟아지고 부대도 못쓰게 되리라","새 포도주를 낡은 가죽 부대에 넣는 자가 없나니 만일 그렇게 하면 새 포도주가 부대를 터뜨려 포도주가 쏟아지고 부대도 버리게 되리라","또 새 포도주를 낡은 가죽부대에 담는 사람도 없다. 새 포도주가 낡은 가죽부대를 터뜨려서 부대를 버리게 되고 포도주도 쏟아질 것이다.","Likewise, no one pours new wine into old wineskins. Otherwise, the new wine will burst the skins, and it will be spilled, and the skins will be ruined.","And no man putteth new wine into old bottles; else the new wine will burst the bottles, and be spilled, and the bottles shall perish.","And no one pours new wine into old wineskins. If he does, the new wine will burst the skins, the wine will run out and the wineskins will be ruined.","Et nemo mittit vinum novum in utres veteres; alioquin rumpet vinum novum utres et ipsum effundetur, et utres peribunt;","ואין איש נתן יין חדש בנאדות בלים כי אז היין החדש יבקע את הנאדות והוא ישפך והנאדות יאבדו׃"],["49","5","38","새 포도주는 새 부대에 담아야 한다.","그러므로 새 포도주는 새 부대에 넣어야 한다.","새 포도주는 새 부대에 넣어야 할 것이니라","새 포도주는 새 부대에 넣어야 할것이니라","새 포도주는 새 부대에 담아야 한다.","Rather, new wine must be poured into fresh wineskins.","But new wine must be put into new bottles; and both are preserved.","No, new wine must be poured into new wineskins.","sed vinum novum in utres novos mittendum est.","אך יתן היין החדש בנאדות חדשים ושניהם יחדו ישמרו׃"],["49","5","39","묵은 포도주를 마시던 사람은 새 포도주를 원하지 않는다. 사실 그런 사람은 ‘묵은 것이 좋다.’고 말한다.”","또 묵은 포도주를 마셔본 사람은 '묵은 것이 더 좋다.' 하면서 새 것을 마시려 하지 않는다.\"","묵은 포도주를 마시고 새 것을 원하는 자가 없나니 이는 묵은 것이 좋다 함이니라","묵은 포도주를 마시고 새 것을 원하는 자가 없나니 이는 묵은 것이 좋다 함이니라","묵은 포도주를 마시고 나서 새 포도주를 달라는 사람은 없다. 묵은 것이 좋다는 것을 누구나 다 알고 있기 때문이다.\"","[And] no one who has been drinking old wine desires new, for he says, ‘The old is good.’”","No man also having drunk old wine straightway desireth new: for he saith, The old is better.","And no one after drinking old wine wants the new, for he says, 'The old is better.'\"","Et nemo bibens vetus vult novum; dicit enim:  “Vetus melius est! “ “.","ואשר שתה יין ישן איננו חפץ עוד ביין חדש כי יאמר הישן הוא נעים ממנו׃"],["49","6","1","예수님께서 안식일에 밀밭 사이를 가로질러 가시게 되었다. 그런데 그분의 제자들이 밀 이삭을 뜯어 손으로 비벼 먹었다.","어느 안식일에 예수께서 밀밭 사이를 지나가시게 되었다. 그 때에 제자들이 밀 이삭을 잘라서 손으로 비벼 먹었다.","안식일에 예수께서 밀밭 사이로 지나가실새 제자들이 이삭을 잘라 손으로 비비어 먹으니","안식일에 예수께서 밀밭 사이로 지나가실쌔 제자들이 이삭을 잘라 손으로 비비어 먹으니","어느 안식일에 예수와 제자들이 밀밭 사이를 지나가게 되었는데 제자들이 밀 이삭을 잘라 손으로 비벼 먹었다.","While he was going through a field of grain on a sabbath, his disciples were picking the heads of grain, rubbing them in their hands, and eating them.","And it came to pass on the second sabbath after the first, that he went through the corn fields; and his disciples plucked the ears of corn, and did eat, rubbing them in their hands.","One Sabbath Jesus was going through the grainfields, and his disciples began to pick some heads of grain, rub them in their hands and eat the kernels.","Factum est autem in sabbato, cum transiret per sata, et velle bant discipuli eius spicas et manducabant confricantes manibus.","ויהי בשבת השנית לספירת העמר עבר בין הקמה ויקטפו תלמידיו מלילת ויפרכו אתן בידיהם ויאכלו׃"],["49","6","2","바리사이 몇 사람이 말하였다. “당신들은 어째서 안식일에 해서는 안 되는 일을 하오?”","이것을 본 바리사이파 사람 몇몇이 \"당신들은 왜 안식일에 해서는 안 될 일을 하는 것입니까?\" 하고 말하였다.","어떤 바리새인들이 말하되 어찌하여 안식일에 하지 못할 일을 하느냐","어떤 바리새인들이 말하되 어찌하여 안식일에 하지 못할 일을 하느뇨","그러자 바리새파 사람들 몇이 말하였다. \"선생님의 제자들이 이삭을 거두다니 그건 불법이오. 안식일에 일을 하지 말라는 유대의 법을 어겼단 말입니다.\"","Some Pharisees said, “Why are you doing what is unlawful on the sabbath?”","And certain of the Pharisees said unto them, Why do ye that which is not lawful to do on the sabbath days?","Some of the Pharisees asked, \"Why are you doing what is unlawful on the Sabbath?\"","Quidam autem pharisaeorum dixerunt:  “Quid facitis, quod non licet in sabbatis? “.","ויש מן הפרושים אשר אמרו אליהם למה אתם עשים את אשר איננו מתר לעשות בשבת׃"],["49","6","3","그러자 예수님께서 그들에게 대답하셨다. “다윗과 그 일행이 배가 고팠을 때, 다윗이 한 일을 읽어 본 적이 없느냐?","예수께서는 이렇게 물으셨다. \"너희는 다윗의 일행이 굶주렸을 때에 다윗이 한 일을 읽어보지 못하였느냐?","예수께서 대답하여 이르시되 ㄱ)다윗이 자기 및 자기와 함께 한 자들이 시장할 때에 한 일을 읽지 못하였느냐","예수께서 대답하여 가라사대 ㄱ)다윗이 자기와 및 함께한 자들이 시장할 때에 한 일을 읽지 못하였느냐 삼상 21:6","예수께서 대답하셨다. ㄱ) \"너희는 성경에서 다윗왕과 그의 신하가 시장하였을 때 한 일을 읽어 보지 못하였느냐? (ㄱ. 삼상21:1-6)","Jesus said to them in reply, “Have you not read what David did when he and those [who were] with him were hungry?","And Jesus answering them said, Have ye not read so much as this, what David did, when himself was an hungred, and they which were with him;","Jesus answered them, \"Have you never read what David did when he and his companions were hungry?","Et respondens Iesus ad eos dixit:  “Nec hoc legistis, quod fecit David, cum esurisset ipse et qui cum eo erant?","ויען ישוע ויאמר אליהם הלא קראתם את אשר עשה דוד בהיותו רעב הוא ואשר היו אתו׃"],["49","6","4","그가 하느님의 집에 들어가, 사제가 아니면 아무도 먹어서는 안 되는 제사 빵을 집어서 먹고 자기 일행에게도 주지 않았느냐?”","다윗은 하느님의 집에 들어가 사제들밖에 먹을 수 없는 제단의 빵을 먹고 함께 있던 사람들에게도 주지 않았느냐?\"","그가 하나님의 전에 들어가서 다만 제사장 외에는 먹어서는 안 되는 진설병을 먹고 함께 한 자들에게도 주지 아니하였느냐","그가 하나님의 전에 들어가서 다만 제사장 외에는 먹지 못하는 진설병을 집어 먹고 함께한 자들에게도 주지 아니하였느냐","그는 성전에 들어가서 제사장들 외에는 먹을 수 없는 진설병을 가져다가 먹고 다른 이들에게도 나누어 주었다. 이 역시 불법이 아니었느냐?\"","[How] he went into the house of God, took the bread of offering, which only the priests could lawfully eat, ate of it, and shared it with his companions.”","How he went into the house of God, and did take and eat the shewbread, and gave also to them that were with him; which it is not lawful to eat but for the priests alone?","He entered the house of God, and taking the consecrated bread, he ate what is lawful only for priests to eat. And he also gave some to his companions.\"","Quomodo intravit in domum Dei et panes propositionis sumpsit et manducavit et dedit his, qui cum ipso erant, quos non licet manducare nisi tantum sacerdotibus? “.","כאשר בא אל בית האלהים ויקח את לחם הפנים ויאכל וגם נתן לאשר אתו את אשר לא נכון לאכלו כי אם לכהנים לבדם׃"],["49","6","5","이어서 그들에게 말씀하셨다. “사람의 아들은 안식일의 주인이다.”","그리고 예수께서는 이렇게 말씀하셨다. \"사람의 아들이 바로 안식일의 주인이다.\"","또 이르시되 인자는 안식일의 주인이니라 하시더라","또 가라사대 인자는 안식일의 주인이니라 하시더라","그리고 덧붙여 말씀하셨다. \"나 인자는 안식일의 주인이다.\"","Then he said to them, “The Son of Man is lord of the sabbath.”","And he said unto them, That the Son of man is Lord also of the sabbath.","Then Jesus said to them, \"The Son of Man is Lord of the Sabbath.\"","Et dicebat illis:  “Dominus est sabbati Filius hominis “.","ויאמר אליהם בן האדם גם אדון השבת הוא׃"],["49","6","6","다른 안식일에 예수님께서 회당에 들어가 가르치셨는데, 그곳에 오른손이 오그라든 사람이 있었다.","또 다른 안식일에 예수께서 회당에 들어가 가르치고 계셨는데 거기에 마침 오른손이 오그라든 사람이 있었다.","또 다른 안식일에 예수께서 회당에 들어가사 가르치실새 거기 오른손 마른 사람이 있는지라","또 다른 안식일에 예수께서 회당에 들어가사 가르치실쌔 거기 오른손 마른 사람이 있는지라","다른 안식일에 예수께서는 회당께서 가르치고 계셨는데 그 자리에 오른손이 오그라든 사람 하나가 있었다.","On another sabbath he went into the synagogue and taught, and there was a man there whose right hand was withered.","And it came to pass also on another sabbath, that he entered into the synagogue and taught: and there was a man whose right hand was withered.","On another Sabbath he went into the synagogue and was teaching, and a man was there whose right hand was shriveled.","Factum est autem in alio sabbato, ut intraret in synagogam et doceret; et erat ibi homo, et manus eius dextra erat arida.","ויהי בשבת אחרת בא אל בית הכנסת וילמד ושם איש אשר יבשה ידו הימנית׃"],["49","6","7","율법 학자들과 바리사이들은 예수님을 고발할 구실을 찾으려고, 그분께서 안식일에 병을 고쳐 주시는지 지켜보고 있었다.","한편 율법학자들과 바리사이파 사람들은 예수께서 안식일에 병을 고쳐주시기만 하면 그를 고발하려고 지켜보고 있었다.","서기관과 바리새인들이 예수를 고발할 증거를 찾으려 하여 안식일에 병을 고치시는가 엿보니","서기관과 바리새인들이 예수를 송사할 빙거를 찾으려 하여 안식일에 병 고치시는가 엿보니","율법학자들과 바리새파 사람들은 가까이 앉아서 예수께서 그 사람을 고쳐 주는가를 지켜 보고 있었다. 그들은 예수를 고소할 구실을 찾고 있었던 것이다.","The scribes and the Pharisees watched him closely to see if he would cure on the sabbath so that they might discover a reason to accuse him.","And the scribes and Pharisees watched him, whether he would heal on the sabbath day; that they might find an accusation against him.","The Pharisees and the teachers of the law were looking for a reason to accuse Jesus, so they watched him closely to see if he would heal on the Sabbath.","Observabant autem illum scribae et pharisaei, si sabbato curaret, ut invenirent accusare illum.","ויארבו לו הסופרים והפרושים לראות אם ירפא בשבת למען ימצאו עליו שטנה׃"],["49","6","8","예수님께서 그들의 생각을 아시고 손이 오그라든 사람에게, “일어나 가운데에 서라.” 하고 이르셨다. 그가 일어나 서자","그러나 예수께서는 그들의 속셈을 아시고 손이 오그라든 사람에게 \"일어나 가운데로 나와 서라.\" 하셨다. 그가 일어나 가운데로 나서자","예수께서 그들의 생각을 아시고 손 마른 사람에게 이르시되 일어나 한가운데 서라 하시니 그가 일어나 서거늘","예수께서 저희 생각을 아시고 손 마른 사람에게 이르시되 일어나 한가운데 서라 하시니 저가 일어나 서거늘","예수께서 그들의 생각을 이미 아시고 손이 오그라든 사람에게 \"와서 모든 사람이 보는 앞에 서라\" 하고 말씀하셨다. 그 사람이 일어서 나오자","But he realized their intentions and said to the man with the withered hand, “Come up and stand before us.” And he rose and stood there.","But he knew their thoughts, and said to the man which had the withered hand, Rise up, and stand forth in the midst. And he arose and stood forth.","But Jesus knew what they were thinking and said to the man with the shriveled hand, \"Get up and stand in front of everyone.\" So he got up and stood there.","Ipse vero sciebat cogitationes eorum et ait homini, qui habebat manum aridam:  “Surge et sta in medium “. Et surgens stetit.","והוא ידע את מחשבותם ויאמר אל האיש אשר ידו יבשה קום ועמוד בתוך ויקם ויעמד׃"],["49","6","9","예수님께서 그들에게 말씀하셨다. “내가 너희에게 묻겠다. 안식일에 좋은 일을 하는 것이 합당하냐? 남을 해치는 일을 하는 것이 합당하냐? 목숨을 구하는 것이 합당하냐? 죽이는 것이 합당하냐?”","예수께서 그들에게 \"너희에게 한 가지 물어보겠다. 율법에 어떻게 하라고 하였느냐? 안식일에 착한 일을 하라고 하였느냐? 악한 일을 하라고 하였느냐? 사람을 살리라고 하였느냐? 죽이라고 하였느냐?\"","예수께서 그들에게 이르시되 내가 너희에게 묻노니 안식일에 선을 행하는 것과 악을 행하는 것, 생명을 구하는 것과 죽이는 것, 어느 것이 옳으냐 하시며","예수께서 저희에게 이르시되 내가 너희에게 묻노니 안식일에 선을 행하는 것과 악을 행하는 것 생명을 구하는 것과 멸하는 것 어느 것이 옳으냐 하시며","예수께서 바리새파 사람들과 율법학자들에게 말씀하셨다. \"너희에게 한가지 물어 보겠다. 안식일에 선한 일을 하는 것이 옳으냐? 아니면 악한 일을 하는 것이 옳으냐? 생명을 구하는 것이 옳으냐? 아니면 생명을 파멸케 하는 것이 옳으냐?\"","Then Jesus said to them, “I ask you, is it lawful to do good on the sabbath rather than to do evil, to save life rather than to destroy it?”","Then said Jesus unto them, I will ask you one thing; Is it lawful on the sabbath days to do good, or to do evil? to save life, or to destroy it?","Then Jesus said to them, \"I ask you, which is lawful on the Sabbath: to do good or to do evil, to save life or to destroy it?\"","Ait autem ad illos Iesus:  “Interrogo vos, si licet sabbato bene facere an male; animam salvam facere an perdere? “.","ויאמר אליהם ישוע אשאלה אתכם דבר הנכון בשבת להיטיב אם להרע להציל נפש אם לאבד׃"],["49","6","10","그러고 나서 그들을 모두 둘러보시고는 그 사람에게, “손을 뻗어라.” 하고 말씀하셨다. 그가 그렇게 하자 그 손이 다시 성하여졌다.","이렇게 물으시며 그들을 모두 둘러보시고 나서 손이 오그라든 사람에게 \"손을 펴라.\" 하셨다. 그가 손을 펴자 그 손이 이전처럼 성하게 되었다.","무리를 둘러보시고 그 사람에게 이르시되 네 손을 내밀라 하시니 그가 그리하매 그 손이 회복된지라","무리를 둘러 보시고 그 사람에게 이르시되 네 손을 내밀라 하시니 저가 그리하매 그 손이 회복된지라","예수께서는 사람들을 일일이 둘러본 뒤에 그 사람에게 \"네 손을 펴라\" 하고 말씀하셨다. 그러자 그 손이 정상으로 회복되었다.","Looking around at them all, he then said to him, “Stretch out your hand.” He did so and his hand was restored.","And looking round about upon them all, he said unto the man, Stretch forth thy hand. And he did so: and his hand was restored whole as the other.","He looked around at them all, and then said to the man, \"Stretch out your hand.\" He did so, and his hand was completely restored.","Et circumspectis omnibus illis, dixit illi:  “Extende manum tuam “. Et fecit; et restituta est manus eius.","ויבט סביב אל כלם ויאמר לאיש פשט את ידך ויעש כן ותרפא ידו ותשב כאחרת׃"],["49","6","11","그들은 골이 잔뜩 나서 예수님을 어떻게 할까 서로 의논하였다.","그들은 잔뜩 화가 나서 예수를 어떻게 하면 좋을까 하고 서로 의논하였다.","그들은 노기가 가득하여 예수를 어떻게 할까 하고 서로 의논하니라","저희는 분기가 가득하여 예수를 어떻게 처치할 것을 서로 의논하니라","예수를 미워하는 자들은 화가 치밀어 올라 예수 죽일 모의를 시작하였다.","But they became enraged and discussed together what they might do to Jesus.","And they were filled with madness; and communed one with another what they might do to Jesus.","But they were furious and began to discuss with one another what they might do to Jesus.","Ipsi autem repleti sunt insipientia et colloquebantur ad invicem quidnam facerent Iesu.","והמה נמלאו חמה ויוסדו יחד מה לעשות לישוע׃"],["49","6","12","그 무렵에 예수님께서는 기도하시려고 산으로 나가시어, 밤을 새우며 하느님께 기도하셨다.","그 무렵에 예수께서는 기도하시려고 산에 들어가 밤을 새우시며 하느님께 기도하셨다.","이 때에 예수께서 기도하시러 산으로 가사 밤이 새도록 하나님께 기도하시고","이 때에 예수께서 기도하시러 산으로 가사 밤이 맟도록 하나님께 기도하시고","바로 그 무렵 예수께서는 기도하러 산에 올라가서 밤새워 하나님께 기도하셨다.","In those days he departed to the mountain to pray, and he spent the night in prayer to God.","And it came to pass in those days, that he went out into a mountain to pray, and continued all night in prayer to God.","One of those days Jesus went out to a mountainside to pray, and spent the night praying to God.","Factum est autem in illis diebus, exiit in montem orare et erat pernoctans in oratione Dei.","ויהי בימים ההם ויצא ההרה להתפלל ויעמד כל הלילה בתפלה לאלהים׃"],["49","6","13","그리고 날이 새자 제자들을 부르시어 그들 가운데에서 열둘을 뽑으셨다. 그들을 사도라고도 부르셨는데,","날이 밝자 예수께서 제자들을 불러 그 중에서 열둘을 뽑아 사도로 삼으셨다.","밝으매 그 제자들을 부르사 그 중에서 열둘을 택하여 사도라 칭하셨으니","밝으매 그 제자들을 부르사 그 중에서 열 둘을 택하여 사도라 칭하셨으니","날이 밝자 제자들을 한자리에 부르고 그 중에서 열둘을 택하여 사도로 임명하셨다.","When day came, he called his disciples to himself, and from them he chose Twelve, whom he also named apostles:","And when it was day, he called unto him his disciples: and of them he chose twelve, whom also he named apostles;","When morning came, he called his disciples to him and chose twelve of them, whom he also designated apostles:","Et cum dies factus esset, vocavit discipulos suos et elegit Duodecim ex ipsis, quos et apostolos nominavit:","ובהית הבקר אסף אליו את תלמידיו ויבחר מהם שנים עשר אשר גם קרא להם שליחים׃"],["49","6","14","그들은 베드로라고 이름을 지어 주신 시몬, 그의 동생 안드레아, 그리고 야고보, 요한, 필립보, 바르톨로메오,","열두 사도는 베드로라는 이름을 주신 시몬과 그의 동생 안드레아, 야고보와 요한, 필립보와 바르톨로메오,","곧 베드로라고도 이름을 주신 시몬과 그의 동생 안드레와 야고보와 요한과 빌립과 바돌로매와","곧 베드로라고도 이름 주신 시몬과 및 그 형제 안드레와 및 야고보와 요한과 빌립과 바돌로매와","열두 사도는 베드로라는 이름을 받은 시몬, 그의 동생 안드레, 야고보, 요한, 빌립, 바돌로매, 마태,도마, 알패오의 아들 야고보, 셀롯 당원 시몬, 야고보의 아들 유다. 나중에 예수를 배반할 가룟 유다 등이다.","Simon, whom he named Peter, and his brother Andrew, James, John, Philip, Bartholomew,","Simon, (whom he also named Peter,) and Andrew his brother, James and John, Philip and Bartholomew,","Simon (whom he named Peter), his brother Andrew, James, John, Philip, Bartholomew,","Simonem, quem et cognominavit Petrum, et Andream fratrem eius et Iacobum et Ioannem et Philippum et Bartholomaeum","את שמעון אשר גם קראו פטרוס ואת אנדרי אחיו את יעקב ואת יוחנן את פילפוס ואת בר תלמי׃"],["49","6","15","마태오, 토마스, 알패오의 아들 야고보, 열혈당원이라고 불리는 시몬,","마태오와 토마, 알패오의 아들 야고보와 혁명당원 시몬,","마태와 도마와 알패오의 아들 야고보와 셀롯이라는 시몬과","마태와 도마와 및 알패오의 아들 야고보와 및 1)셀롯이라 하는 시몬과 열심당원","(14절에 포함되어 있음)","Matthew, Thomas, James the son of Alphaeus, Simon who was called a Zealot,","Matthew and Thomas, James the son of Alphaeus, and Simon called Zelotes,","Matthew, Thomas, James son of Alphaeus, Simon who was called the Zealot,","et Matthaeum et Thomam et Iacobum Alphaei et Simonem, qui vocatur Zelotes,","את מתי ואת תומא ואת יעקב בן חלפי ואת שמעון המכנה הקנא׃"],["49","6","16","야고보의 아들 유다, 또 배신자가 된 유다 이스카리옷이다.","야고보의 아들 유다, 그리고 후에 배반자가 된 가리옷 사람 유다이다.","야고보의 아들 유다와 예수를 파는 자 될 가룟 유다라","및 야고보의 아들 유다와 및 예수를 파는 자 될 가룟 유다라","(14절에 포함되어 있음)","and Judas the son of James, and Judas Iscariot, who became a traitor.","And Judas the brother of James, and Judas Iscariot, which also was the traitor.","Judas son of James, and Judas Iscariot, who became a traitor.","et Iudam Iacobi et Iudam Iscarioth, qui fuit proditor.","את יהודה בן יעקב ואת יהודה איש קריות אשר גם היה למוסר׃"],["49","6","17","예수님께서 그들과 함께 산에서 내려가 평지에 서시니, 그분의 제자들이 많은 군중을 이루고, 온 유다와 예루살렘, 그리고 티로와 시돈의 해안 지방에서 온 백성이 큰 무리를 이루고 있었다.","예수께서 그들과 함께 산에서 내려와 평지에 이르러 보니 거기에 많은 제자들과 함께 유다 각 지방과 예루살렘과 해안 지방인 띠로와 시돈에서 온 사람들이 많이 모여 있었다.","예수께서 그들과 함께 내려오사 평지에 서시니 그 제자의 많은 무리와 예수의 말씀도 듣고 병 고침을 받으려고 유대 사방과 예루살렘과 두로와 시돈의 해안으로부터 온 많은 백성도 있더라","예수께서 저희와 함께 내려오사 평지에 서시니 그 제자의 허다한 무리와 또 예수의 말씀도 듣고 병 고침을 얻으려고 유대 사방과 예루살렘과 및 두로와 시돈의 해안으로부터 온 많은 백성도 있더라","예수께서 그들과 함께 산에서 내려와 평지에 이르시자 예수를 따르는 수많은 사람들이 그곳에 모여 있다가 예수 일행을 둘러 쌌다. 그들은 온 유대와 예루살렘과 해안지방 두로와 시돈에서 예수의 말씀을 들으러 오거나 병을 고치고자 온 사람들이었다. 예수께서는 더러운 귀신들을 쫓아내 주셨다.","And he came down with them and stood on a stretch of level ground. A great crowd of his disciples and a large number of the people from all Judea and Jerusalem and the coastal region of Tyre and Sidon","And he came down with them, and stood in the plain, and the company of his disciples, and a great multitude of people out of all Judaea and Jerusalem, and from the sea coast of Tyre and Sidon, which came to hear him, and to be healed of their diseases;","He went down with them and stood on a level place. A large crowd of his disciples was there and a great number of people from all over Judea, from Jerusalem, and from the coast of Tyre and Sidon,","Et descendens cum illis stetit in loco campestri, et turba multa discipulorum eius, et multitudo copiosa plebis ab omni Iudaea et Ierusalem et maritima Tyri et Sidonis,","וירד אתם ויעמד במקום מישור והמון תלמידיו וקהל עם רב מכל יהודה וירושלים ומחוף ים צר וצידון אשר באו לשמע אתו ולהרפא מחלייהם׃"],["49","6","18","그들은 예수님의 말씀도 듣고 질병도 고치려고 온 사람들이었다. 그리하여 더러운 영들에게 시달리는 이들도 낫게 되었다.","그들은 예수의 말씀도 듣고 병도 고치려고 온 사람들이었다. 그 중에는 더러운 악령에 걸려 고생하는 사람들도 있었는데 예수께서는 그들도 고쳐주셨다.","더러운 귀신에게 고난 받는 자들도 고침을 받은지라","더러운 귀신에게 고난 받는 자들도 고침을 얻은지라","(17절에 포함되어 있음)","came to hear him and to be healed of their diseases; and even those who were tormented by unclean spirits were cured.","And they that were vexed with unclean spirits: and they were healed.","who had come to hear him and to be healed of their diseases. Those troubled by evil spirits were cured,","qui venerunt, ut audirent eum et sanarentur a languoribus suis; et, qui vexabantur a spiritibus immundis, curabantur.","וגם הנלחצים ברוחות טמאות וירפאו׃"],["49","6","19","군중은 모두 예수님께 손을 대려고 애를 썼다. 그분에게서 힘이 나와 모든 사람을 고쳐 주었기 때문이다.","이렇게 예수에게서 기적의 힘이 나와 누구든지 다 낫는 것을 보고는 모든 사람이 저마다 예수를 만지려고 하였다.","온 무리가 예수를 만지려고 힘쓰니 이는 능력이 예수께로부터 나와서 모든 사람을 낫게 함이러라","온 무리가 예수를 만지려고 힘쓰니 이는 능력이 예수께로 나서 모든 사람을 낫게 함이러라","모든 사람이 저마다 예수를 만지려고 야단이었다. 예수를 만지기만 하면 치료하는 힘이 예수에게서 나와 그들을 모두 낫게 하였기 때문이다.","Everyone in the crowd sought to touch him because power came forth from him and healed them all.","And the whole multitude sought to touch him: for there went virtue out of him, and healed them all.","and the people all tried to touch him, because power was coming from him and healing them all.","Et omnis turba quaerebant eum tangere, quia virtus de illo exibat et sanabat omnes.","וכל ההמון מבקשים לגעת בו כי גבורה יצאה מאתו ורפאה את כלם׃"],["49","6","20","예수님께서 눈을 들어 제자들을 보시며 말씀하셨다. “행복하여라, 가난한 사람들! 하느님의 나라가 너희 것이다.","그 때에 예수께서 제자들을 바라보시며 말씀하셨다. \"가난한 사람들아, 너희는 행복하다. 하느님 나라가 너희의 것이다.","예수께서 눈을 들어 제자들을 보시고 이르시되 너희 가난한 자는 복이 있나니 하나님의 나라가 너희 것임이요","예수께서 눈을 들어 제자들을 보시고 가라사대 가난한 자는 복이 있나니 하나님의 나라가 너희 것임이요","예수께서 제자들을 향해 말씀하셨다. \"가난한 너희는 복이 있다. 하나님 나라가 너희의 것이다.","And raising his eyes toward his disciples he said: “Blessed are you who are poor, for the kingdom of God is yours.","And he lifted up his eyes on his disciples, and said, Blessed be ye poor: for yours is the kingdom of God.","Looking at his disciples, he said: \"Blessed are you who are poor, for yours is the kingdom of God.","Et ipse, elevatis oculis suis in discipulos suos, dicebat:  “Beati pauperes, quia vestrum est regnum Dei.","והוא נשא את עיניו אל תלמידיו ויאמר אשריכם העניים כי לכם מלכות האלהים׃"],["49","6","21","행복하여라, 지금 굶주리는 사람들! 너희는 배부르게 될 것이다. 행복하여라, 지금 우는 사람들! 너희는 웃게 될 것이다.","지금 굶주린 사람들아, 너희는 행복하다. 너희가 배부르게 될 것이다. 지금 우는 사람들아, 너희는 행복하다. 너희가 웃게 될 것이다.","지금 주린 자는 복이 있나니 너희가 배부름을 얻을 것임이요 지금 우는 자는 복이 있나니 너희가 웃을 것임이요","이제 주린 자는 복이 있나니 너희가 배부름을 얻을 것임이요 이제 우는 자는 복이 있나니 너희가 웃을 것임이요","지금 배고픈 너희는 복이 있다. 너희가 만족하게 될 것이다. 지금 울고 있는 너희는 복이 있다. 너희가 기뻐하며 웃을 날이 올 것이다.","Blessed are you who are now hungry, for you will be satisfied. Blessed are you who are now weeping, for you will laugh.","Blessed are ye that hunger now: for ye shall be filled. Blessed are ye that weep now: for ye shall laugh.","Blessed are you who hunger now, for you will be satisfied. Blessed are you who weep now, for you will laugh.","Beati, qui nunc esuritis, quia saturabimini. Beati, qui nunc fletis, quia ridebitis.","אשריכם הרעבים כעת כי תשבעו אשריכם הבכים כעת כי תשחקו׃"],["49","6","22","사람들이 너희를 미워하면, 그리고 사람의 아들 때문에 너희를 쫓아내고 모욕하고 중상하면, 너희는 행복하다!","사람의 아들 때문에 사람들에게 미움을 사고 내어쫓기고 욕을 먹고 누명을 쓰면 너희는 행복하다.","인자로 말미암아 사람들이 너희를 미워하며 멀리하고 욕하고 너희 이름을 악하다 하여 버릴 때에는 너희에게 복이 있도다","인자를 인하여 사람들이 너희를 미워하며 멀리하고 욕하고 너희 이름을 악하다 하여 버릴 때에는 너희에게 복이 있도다","내 제자라는 이유로 사람들에게 미움을 받고 배척을 당하고 욕을 먹고 억울하게 누명을 쓰는 너희는 복이 있다.","Blessed are you when people hate you, and when they exclude and insult you, and denounce your name as evil on account of the Son of Man.","Blessed are ye, when men shall hate you, and when they shall separate you from their company, and shall reproach you, and cast out your name as evil, for the Son of man's sake.","Blessed are you when men hate you, when they exclude you and insult you and reject your name as evil, because of the Son of Man.","Beati eritis, cum vos oderint homines et cum separaverint vos et exprobraverint et eiecerint nomen vestrum tamquam malum propter Filium hominis. 23 Gaudete in illa die et exsultate, ecce enim merces vestra multa in caelo; secundum haec enim faciebant prophetis patres eorum.","אשריכם אם ישנאו אתכם האנשים ואם ינדו אתכם וחרפו והדיחו את שמכם כשם רע בעבור בן האדם׃"],["49","6","23","그날에 기뻐하고 뛰놀아라. 보라, 너희가 하늘에서 받을 상이 크다. 사실 그들의 조상들도 예언자들을 그렇게 대하였다.”","그럴 때에 너희는 기뻐하고 즐거워하여라. 하늘에서 너희가 받을 상이 클 것이다. 그들의 조상들도 예언자들을 그렇게 대하였다.","그 날에 기뻐하고 뛰놀라 하늘에서 너희 상이 큼이라 그들의 조상들이 선지자들에게 이와 같이 하였느니라","그날에 기뻐하고 뛰놀라 하늘에서 너희 상이 큼이라 저희 조상들이 선지자들에게 이와 같이 하였느니라","그런 일이 너희에게 있거든 기뻐하고 즐거워하라. 하늘에서 큰 상을 받을 것이다. 옛 예언자들도 그같은 일을 당하였다.","Rejoice and leap for joy on that day! Behold, your reward will be great in heaven. For their ancestors treated the prophets in the same way.","Rejoice ye in that day, and leap for joy: for, behold, your reward is great in heaven: for in the like manner did their fathers unto the prophets.","\"Rejoice in that day and leap for joy, because great is your reward in heaven. For that is how their fathers treated the prophets.",null,"שמחו ביום ההוא ורקדו כי הנה שכרכם רב בשמים כי כזאת עשו אבתיהם לנביאים׃"],["49","6","24","“그러나 불행하여라, 너희 부유한 사람들! 너희는 이미 위로를 받았다.","그러나 부요한 사람들아, 너희는 불행하다. 너희는 이미 받을 위로를 다 받았다.","그러나 화 있을진저 너희 부요한 자여 너희는 너희의 위로를 이미 받았도다","그러나 화 있을찐저 너희 부요한 자여 너희는 너희의 위로를 이미 받았도다","그러나 너희 부자들은 화가 있다. 너희는 이미 이 세상에서 온갖 행복을 다 누리고 있다.","But woe to you who are rich, for you have received your consolation.","But woe unto you that are rich! for ye have received your consolation.","\"But woe to you who are rich, for you have already received your comfort.","Verumtamen vae vobis divitibus, quia habetis consolationem vestram!","אך אוי לכם העשירים כי כבר לקחתם את נחמתכם׃"],["49","6","25","불행하여라, 너희 지금 배부른 사람들! 너희는 굶주리게 될 것이다. 불행하여라, 지금 웃는 사람들! 너희는 슬퍼하며 울게 될 것이다.","지금 배불리 먹고 지내는 사람들아, 너희는 불행하다. 너희가 굶주릴 날이 올 것이다. 지금 웃고 지내는 사람들아, 너희는 불행하다. 너희가 슬퍼하며 울 날이 올 것이다.","화 있을진저 너희 지금 배부른 자여 너희는 주리리로다 화 있을진저 너희 지금 웃는 자여 너희가 애통하며 울리로다","화 있을찐저 너희 이제 배부른 자여 너희는 주리리로다 화 있을찐저 너희 이제 웃는 자여 너희가 애통하며 울리로다","너희 배부른 자들은 화가 있다. 너희는 지금 살이 찌고 호강을 하지만 비참하게 굶주릴 날이 닥쳐올 것이다. 지금 웃고 있는 자들은 화가 있다. 너희가 지금 태평하게 웃는 그 웃음은 실상 슬픔을 예고하는 것이다.","But woe to you who are filled now, for you will be hungry. Woe to you who laugh now, for you will grieve and weep.","Woe unto you that are full! for ye shall hunger. Woe unto you that laugh now! for ye shall mourn and weep.","Woe to you who are well fed now, for you will go hungry. Woe to you who laugh now, for you will mourn and weep.","Vae vobis, qui saturati estis nunc, quia esurietis! Vae vobis, qui ridetis nunc, quia lugebitis et flebitis!","אוי לכם השבעים כי תרעבו אוי לכם השחקים כעת כי תתאבלו ותבכו׃"],["49","6","26","모든 사람이 너희를 좋게 말하면, 너희는 불행하다! 사실 그들의 조상들도 거짓 예언자들을 그렇게 대하였다.”","모든 사람에게 칭찬을 받는 사람들아, 너희는 불행하다. 그들의 조상들도 거짓 예언자들을 그렇게 대하였다.\"","모든 사람이 너희를 칭찬하면 화가 있도다 그들의 조상들이 거짓 선지자들에게 이와 같이 하였느니라","모든 사람이 너희를 칭찬하면 화가 있도다 저희 조상들이 거짓 선지자들에게 이와 같이 하였느니라","사람들에게 칭송받는 자들은 화가 있다. 거짓 예언자들도 언제나 찬양을 받아 왔다.","Woe to you when all speak well of you, for their ancestors treated the false prophets in this way.","Woe unto you, when all men shall speak well of you! for so did their fathers to the false prophets.","Woe to you when all men speak well of you, for that is how their fathers treated the false prophets.","Vae, cum bene vobis dixerint omnes homines! Secundum haec enim faciebant pseudoprophetis patres eorum.","אוי לכם אם כל האנשים משבחים אתכם כי כזאת עשו אבותיהם לנביאי השקר׃"],["49","6","27","“그러나 내 말을 듣고 있는 너희에게 내가 말한다. 너희는 원수를 사랑하여라. 너희를 미워하는 자들에게 잘해 주고,","\"그러나 이제 내 말을 듣는 사람들아, 잘 들어라. 너희는 원수를 사랑하여라. 너희를 미워하는 사람들에게 잘해 주고","그러나 너희 듣는 자에게 내가 이르노니 너희 원수를 사랑하며 너희를 미워하는 자를 선대하며","그러나 너희 듣는 자에게 내가 이르노니 너희 원수를 사랑하며 너희를 미워하는 자를 선대하며","모두 내 말을 들으라. 너희 원수를 사랑하라. 너희를 미워하는 사람들에게 선을 행하라.","“But to you who hear I say, love your enemies, do good to those who hate you,","But I say unto you which hear, Love your enemies, do good to them which hate you,","\"But I tell you who hear me: Love your enemies, do good to those who hate you,","Sed vobis dico, qui auditis: Diligite inimicos vestros, bene facite his, qui vos oderunt;","אבל אליכם השמעים אני אמר אהבו את איביכם היטיבו לשנאיכם׃"],["49","6","28","너희를 저주하는 자들에게 축복하며, 너희를 학대하는 자들을 위하여 기도하여라.","너희를 저주하는 사람들을 축복해 주어라. 그리고 너희를 학대하는 사람들을 위하여 기도해 주어라.","너희를 저주하는 자를 위하여 축복하며 너희를 모욕하는 자를 위하여 기도하라","너희를 저주하는 자를 위하여 축복하며 너희를 모욕하는 자를 위하여 기도하라","너희를 저주하는 사람들에게 복을 빌어 주고 너희에게 해를 끼치는 사람들을 위하여 기도하라.","bless those who curse you, pray for those who mistreat you.","Bless them that curse you, and pray for them which despitefully use you.","bless those who curse you, pray for those who mistreat you.","benedicite male dicentibus vobis, orate pro calumniantibus vos.","ברכו את מקלליכם והתפללו בעד מכלימיכם׃"],["49","6","29","네 뺨을 때리는 자에게 다른 뺨을 내밀고, 네 겉옷을 가져가는 자는 속옷도 가져가게 내버려 두어라.","누가 뺨을 치거든 다른 뺨마저 돌려대 주고 누가 겉옷을 빼앗거든 속옷마저 내어주어라.","너의 이 뺨을 치는 자에게 저 뺨도 돌려대며 네 겉옷을 빼앗는 자에게 속옷도 거절하지 말라","네 이 뺨을 치는 자에게 저 뺨도 돌려 대며 네 겉옷을 빼앗는 자에게 속옷도 금하지 말라","만일 누가 네 한쪽 뺨을 치거든 다른 쪽 뺨도 돌려 대고 겉옷을 달라 하거든 속옷까지도 주라.","To the person who strikes you on one cheek, offer the other one as well, and from the person who takes your cloak, do not withhold even your tunic.","And unto him that smiteth thee on the one cheek offer also the other; and him that taketh away thy cloak forbid not to take thy coat also.","If someone strikes you on one cheek, turn to him the other also. If someone takes your cloak, do not stop him from taking your tunic.","Ei, qui te percutit in maxillam, praebe et alteram; et ab eo, qui aufert tibi vestimentum, etiam tunicam noli prohibere.","המכה אתך על הלחי הטה לו גם את האחרת והלקח את מעילך אל תמנע ממנו גם את כתנתך׃"],["49","6","30","달라고 하면 누구에게나 주고, 네 것을 가져가는 이에게서 되찾으려고 하지 마라.","달라는 사람에게는 주고 빼앗는 사람에게는 되받으려고 하지 마라.","네게 구하는 자에게 주며 네 것을 가져가는 자에게 다시 달라 하지 말며","무릇 네게 구하는 자에게 주며 네 것을 가져가는 자에게 다시 달라지 말며","네게 구하는 사람들에게는 주고, 누가 네 것을 가져가거든 도로 찾으려고 애쓰지 말라.","Give to everyone who asks of you, and from the one who takes what is yours do not demand it back.","Give to every man that asketh of thee; and of him that taketh away thy goods ask them not again.","Give to everyone who asks you, and if anyone takes what belongs to you, do not demand it back.","Omni petenti te tribue; et ab eo, qui aufert, quae tua sunt, ne repetas.","וכל השאל ממך תן לו והלקח את אשר לך אל תשאל מאתו׃"]]