[["55","4","4","그러나 때가 차자 하느님께서 당신의 아드님을 보내시어 여인에게서 태어나 율법 아래 놓이게 하셨습니다.","그러나 때가 찼을 때 하느님께서 당신의 아들을 보내시어 여자의 몸에서 나게 하시고 율법의 지배를 받게 하시어","때가 차매 하나님이 그 아들을 보내사 여자에게서 나게 하시고 율법 아래에 나게 하신 것은","때가 차매 하나님이 그 아들을 보내사 여자에게서 나게 하시고 율법 아래 나게 하신 것은","그러나 정해진 때가 되자 하나님께서는 여자의 몸을 빌어 그 아들을 유대인으로 태어나게 하셨습니다.","But when the fullness of time had come, God sent his Son, born of a woman, born under the law,","But when the fulness of the time was come, God sent forth his Son, made of a woman, made under the law,","But when the time had fully come, God sent his Son, born of a woman, born under law,","at ubi venit plenitudo temporis, misit Deus Filium suum, factum ex muliere, factum sub lege,","ובמלאת העת שלח האלהים את בנו אשר נולד מאשה ונתן תחת יד התורה׃"],["55","4","5","율법 아래 있는 이들을 속량하시어 우리가 하느님의 자녀 되는 자격을 얻게 하시려는 것이었습니다.","율법의 지배를 받고 사는 사람을 구원해 내시고 또 우리에게 당신의 자녀가 되는 자격을 얻게 하셨습니다.","율법 아래에 있는 자들을 속량하시고 우리로 아들의 명분을 얻게 하려 하심이라","율법 아래 있는 자들을 속량하시고 우리로 아들의 명분을 얻게 하려 하심이라","율법의 노예가 되어 있던 우리를 사서 자유의 몸이 되게 하시고 하나님의 자녀로 삼아 주시려고 그렇게 한 것입니다.","to ransom those under the law, so that we might receive adoption.","To redeem them that were under the law, that we might receive the adoption of sons.","to redeem those under law, that we might receive the full rights of sons.","ut eos, qui sub lege erant, redimeret, ut adoptionem filiorum reciperemus.","לפדות את אשר היו תחת יד התורה למען נקבל את משפט הבנים׃"],["55","4","6","진정 여러분이 자녀이기 때문에 하느님께서 당신 아드님의 영을 우리 마음 안에 보내 주셨습니다. 그 영께서 “아빠! 아버지!” 하고 외치고 계십니다.","이제 여러분은 하느님의 자녀가 되었으므로 하느님께서는 여러분의 마음속에 당신의 아들의 성령을 보내주셨습니다. 그래서 여러분은 하느님을 \"아빠, 아버지!\"라고 부를 수 있게 되었습니다.","너희가 아들이므로 하나님이 그 아들의 영을 우리 마음 가운데 보내사 아빠 아버지라 부르게 하셨느니라","너희가 아들인고로 하나님이 그 아들의 영을 우리 마음 가운데 보내사 아바 아버지라 부르게 하셨느니라","그리고 우리가 하나님의 자녀가 되자 우리에게 아들의 영을 보내 주셨습니다. 그래서 지금 우리는 하나님을 아버지라고 부를 수 있게 된 것입니다.","As proof that you are children, God sent the spirit of his Son into our hearts, crying out, “Abba, Father!”","And because ye are sons, God hath sent forth the Spirit of his Son into your hearts, crying, Abba, Father.","Because you are sons, God sent the Spirit of his Son into our hearts, the Spirit who calls out, \"Abba, Father.\"","Quoniam autem estis filii, misit Deus Spiritum Filii sui in corda nostra clamantem:  “Abba, Pater! “.","ויען כי בנים אתם שלח האלהים בלבבכם את רוח בנו הקורא אבא אבינו׃"],["55","4","7","그러므로 그대는 더 이상 종이 아니라 자녀입니다. 그리고 자녀라면 하느님께서 세워 주신 상속자이기도 합니다.","그러므로 여러분은 이제 종이 아니라 자녀입니다. 자녀라면 하느님께서 세워주신 상속자인 것입니다.","그러므로 네가 이 후로는 종이 아니요 아들이니 아들이면 하나님으로 말미암아 유업을 받을 자니라","그러므로 네가 이 후로는 종이 아니요 아들이니 아들이면 하나님으로 말미암아 유업을 이을 자니라","우리는 이제 노예가 아닙니다. 하나님의 자녀입니다. 그러므로 하나님께서 가지신 모든 것은 우리들 자녀의 것입니다.","So you are no longer a slave but a child, and if a child then also an heir, through God.","Wherefore thou art no more a servant, but a son; and if a son, then an heir of God through Christ.","So you are no longer a slave, but a son; and since you are a son, God has made you also an heir.","Itaque iam non es servus sed filius; quod si filius, et heres per Deum.","לכן אינך עוד עבד כי אם בן ואם בן אתה הנך גם יורש האלהים על ידי המשיח׃"],["55","4","8","전에 여러분이 하느님을 알지 못할 때에는 본디 신이 아닌 것들에게 종살이를 하였습니다.","여러분이 하느님을 모르고 있을 때에는 본래 하느님이 아닌 신들의 종노릇을 하였습니다.","그러나 너희가 그 때에는 하나님을 알지 못하여 본질상 하나님이 아닌 자들에게 종 노릇 하였더니","그러나 너희가 그 때에는 하나님을 알지 못하여 본질상 하나님이 아닌 자들에게 종노릇 하였더니","여러분 이방인들이 하나님을 알지 못했을 때는 실제로 존재하지도 않는 신들의 노예나 다름없었습니다.","At a time when you did not know God, you became slaves to things that by nature are not gods;","Howbeit then, when ye knew not God, ye did service unto them which by nature are no gods.","Formerly, when you did not know God, you were slaves to those who by nature are not gods.","Sed tunc quidem ignorantes Deum, his, qui natura non sunt dii, servistis;","הן לפנים באין דעת אלהים הייתם עבדים את אשר בעצמותם אינם אלהים׃"],["55","4","9","그러나 지금은 하느님을 알게 되었습니다. 아니, 하느님께서 여러분을 알아주셨습니다. 그런데 여러분은 어떻게 그 약하고 초라한 정령들에게 돌아갈 수가 있습니까? 그것들에게 다시 종살이를 하고 싶다는 말입니까?","그러나 이제는 여러분이 하느님을 알고 있을 뿐만 아니라 하느님께서 여러분을 알고 계신데 왜 또다시 그 무력하고 천한 2)자연 숭배로 되돌아가서 그것들의 종노릇을 하려고 합니까? \"자연 숭배\"는 우주의 원리, 초등 학문을 가리킨다.","이제는 너희가 하나님을 알 뿐 아니라 더욱이 하나님이 아신 바 되었거늘 어찌하여 다시 약하고 천박한 초등학문으로 돌아가서 다시 그들에게 종 노릇 하려 하느냐","이제는 너희가 하나님을 알뿐더러 하나님의 아신바 되었거늘 어찌하여 다시 약하고 천한 초등 학문으로 돌아가서 다시 저희에게 종노릇 하려 하느냐","그러나 이제 여러분은 하나님을 알고 있고 또 하나님께서도 여러분을 알고 계십니다. 그런데 왜 또다시 율법을 지켜야만 하늘나라에 들어간다고 하는 그 빈약하고 천한 종교의 노예가 되려고 합니까?","but now that you have come to know God, or rather to be known by God, how can you turn back again to the weak and destitute elemental powers? Do you want to be slaves to them all over again?","But now, after that ye have known God, or rather are known of God, how turn ye again to the weak and beggarly elements, whereunto ye desire again to be in bondage?","But now that you know God--or rather are known by God--how is it that you are turning back to those weak and miserable principles? Do you wish to be enslaved by them all over again?","nunc autem, cum cognoveritis Deum, immo cogniti sitis a Deo, quomodo convertimini iterum ad infirma et egena elementa, quibus rursus ut antea servire vultis?","ועתה אחרי ידעתם את האלהים ויותר אחרי שנודעתם לאלהים איך תשובו אל היסדות הרפים והדלים ההם אשר תרצו להכנע להם מחדש׃"],["55","4","10","여러분은 날과 달과 절기와 해를 잘도 지킵니다.","여러분이 날과 달과 계절과 해를 숭상하기 시작했다고 하니","너희가 날과 달과 절기와 해를 삼가 지키니","너희가 날과 달과 절기와 해를 삼가 지키니","여러분이 특정한 날과 달과 계절과 해에 대한 규정을 만들어 놓고 그것을 지키고 있다니","You are observing days, months, seasons, and years.","Ye observe days, and months, and times, and years.","You are observing special days and months and seasons and years!","Dies observatis et menses et tempora et annos!","ימים אתם שמרים וחדשים ומועדים ושנים׃"],["55","4","11","내가 여러분을 위하여 애쓴 것이 헛일이 되지 않을까 두렵습니다.","여러분을 위한 내 수고가 허사로 돌아가지나 않았나 염려됩니다.","내가 너희를 위하여 수고한 것이 헛될까 두려워하노라","내가 너희를 위하여 수고한 것이 헛될까 두려워하노라","나는 여러분이 걱정스러워 마음을 놓을 수가 없습니다. 내가 여러분을 위해 온 힘을 쏟은 것이 허사로 돌아갈까봐 애가 탑니다.","I am afraid on your account that perhaps I have labored for you in vain.","I am afraid of you, lest I have bestowed upon you labour in vain.","I fear for you, that somehow I have wasted my efforts on you.","Timeo vos, ne forte sine causa laboraverim in vobis.","מתירא אני פן לריק עמלתי בכם׃"],["55","4","12","형제 여러분, 내가 여러분에게 간청합니다. 내가 여러분과 같이 되었으니 여러분도 나와 같이 되십시오. 여러분은 나에게 잘못한 적이 없습니다.","형제 여러분, 내가 여러분과 같은 사람이 되었으니 여러분도 나와 같은 사람이 되기를 바랍니다. 여러분이 나에게 잘못한 일은 조금도 없습니다.","형제들아 내가 너희와 같이 되었은즉 너희도 나와 같이 되기를 구하노라 너희가 내게 해롭게 하지 아니하였느니라","형제들아 내가 너희와 같이 되었은즉 너희도 나와 같이 되기를 구하노라 너희가 내게 해롭게 하지 아니하였느니라","사랑하는 형제들이여, 나 역시 지난날에는 여러분과 마찬가지로 율법의 사슬에 매여 있었습니다. 그러나 이제는 자유의 몸이 되었습니다. 그러니 여러분도 나처럼 되십시오. 내가 처음 여러분에게 복음을 전할 때 여러분은 나를 경멸하지 않았습니다.","I implore you, brothers, be as I am, because I have also become as you are. You did me no wrong;","Brethren, I beseech you, be as I am; for I am as ye are: ye have not injured me at all.","I plead with you, brothers, become like me, for I became like you. You have done me no wrong.","Estote sicut ego, quia et ego sicut vos; fratres, obsecro vos. Nihil me laesistis;","היו נא כמוני כי גם אני כמוכם מתחנן אני לכם אחי לא הרעתם לי מאומה׃"],["55","4","13","여러분도 알다시피, 나는 육신의 병이 계기가 되어 여러분에게 처음으로 복음을 전하게 되었습니다.","여러분이 아시는 바와 같이 전에 내가 병을 앓았던 것이 기회가 되어 여러분에게 복음을 전하게 되었습니다.","내가 처음에 육체의 약함으로 말미암아 너희에게 복음을 전한 것을 너희가 아는 바라","내가 처음에 육체의 약함을 인하여 너희에게 복음을 전한 것을 너희가 아는 바라","그리스도의 복음을 전할 당시 나는 병을 앓고 있었으므로","you know that it was because of a physical illness that I originally preached the gospel to you,","Ye know how through infirmity of the flesh I preached the gospel unto you at the first.","As you know, it was because of an illness that I first preached the gospel to you.","scitis autem quia per infirmitatem carnis pridem vobis evangelizavi,","אתם ידעתם אשר בחלשת בשרי בשרתי לכם את הבשורה לראשונה׃"],["55","4","14","그때에 내 육신의 상태가 여러분에게는 하나의 시련이었지만, 여러분은 나를 업신여기지도 않았고 역겨워하지도 않았습니다. 오히려 나를 하느님의 천사처럼, 그리스도 예수님처럼 받아들였습니다.","나의 신체 조건이 여러분에게는 괴로운 짐이 되었지만 여러분은 나를 외면하거나 멸시하지 않고 오히려 하느님의 천사와도 같이, 또 그리스도 예수와도 같이 영접해 주었습니다.","너희를 시험하는 것이 내 육체에 있으되 이것을 너희가 업신여기지도 아니하며 버리지도 아니하고 오직 나를 하나님의 천사와 같이 또는 그리스도 예수와 같이 영접하였도다","너희를 시험하는 것이 내 육체에 있으되 이것을 너희가 업신여기지도 아니하며 버리지도 아니하고 오직 나를 하나님의 천사와 같이 또는 그리스도 예수와 같이 영접하였도다","여러분에게 불쾌감을 주었을 텐데도 여러분은 나를 외면하거나 쫓아내지 않았습니다. 쫓아내기는커녕 마치 하나님이 보낸 천사나 예수 그리스도를 만난 것처럼 나를 대하며 돌보아주었습니다.","and you did not show disdain or contempt because of the trial caused you by my physical condition, but rather you received me as an angel of God, as Christ Jesus.","And my temptation which was in my flesh ye despised not, nor rejected; but received me as an angel of God, even as Christ Jesus.","Even though my illness was a trial to you, you did not treat me with contempt or scorn. Instead, you welcomed me as if I were an angel of God, as if I were Christ Jesus himself.","et tentationem vestram in carne mea non sprevistis neque respuistis, sed sicut angelum Dei excepistis me, sicut Christum Iesum.","ואתם לא בזיתם את נסיוני אשר נסיתי בבשרי ולא געלתם אתו כי אם קבלתם אתי כמלאך אלהים כמשיח ישוע׃"],["55","4","15","그런데 행복을 느끼던 여러분의 그 마음은 어디로 갔습니까? 내가 장담하건대, 여러분은 할 수만 있다면 눈이라도 뽑아 나에게 주었을 것입니다.","그 때의 여러분의 그 감격은 다 어디로 갔습니까? 분명히 말하지만 그 때 여러분은 만일 할 수만 있었다면 눈이라도 뽑아서 나에게 주지 않았겠습니까?","너희의 복이 지금 어디 있느냐 내가 너희에게 증언하노니 너희가 할 수만 있었더라면 너희의 눈이라도 빼어 나에게 주었으리라","너희의 복이 지금 어디 있느냐 내가 너희에게 증거하노니 너희가 할 수만 있었더면 너희의 눈이라도 빼어 나를 주었으리라","그때 우리가 함께 나눈 그 행복은 어디로 갔습니까? 그 시절 여러분은 나를 돕는 일이라면 눈이라도 기꺼이 빼어 줄 정도가 아니었습니까?","Where now is that blessedness of yours? Indeed, I can testify to you that, if it had been possible, you would have torn out your eyes and given them to me.","Where is then the blessedness ye spake of? for I bear you record, that, if it had been possible, ye would have plucked out your own eyes, and have given them to me.","What has happened to all your joy? I can testify that, if you could have done so, you would have torn out your eyes and given them to me.","Ubi est ergo beatitudo vestra? Testimonium enim perhibeo vobis, quia, si fieri posset, oculos vestros eruissetis et dedissetis mihi.","ועתה איה אשרכם כי מעיד אני עליכם אשר אם יכלתם הייתם עקרים את עיניכם לתתן לי׃"],["55","4","16","그런데 이제 내가 여러분에게 진리를 말한다고 해서 여러분의 원수가 되었다는 말입니까?","그런데 이제 내가 진실을 말한다고 해서 나를 원수로 여기는 것입니까?","그런즉 내가 너희에게 참된 말을 하므로 원수가 되었느냐","그런즉 1)내가 너희에게 참된 말을 하므로 원수가 되었느냐 혹 내가 정당히 너희를 대접하므로","그런데 지금 여러분에게 진리를 말하고 있다 해서 나를 원수처럼 여긴단 말입니까?","So now have I become your enemy by telling you the truth?","Am I therefore become your enemy, because I tell you the truth?","Have I now become your enemy by telling you the truth?","Ergo inimicus vobis factus sum, verum dicens vobis?","ועתה הנהייתי לכם לאיב בדברי אמת אליכם׃"],["55","4","17","그들은 여러분에게 열성을 기울이고 있지만 좋은 뜻으로 하는 것이 아닙니다. 오히려 여러분을 따로 떼어 놓아 여러분이 자기들에게만 열성을 기울이게 하려는 것입니다.","그 사람들이 여러분에게 열성을 보이는 것은 결코 선의에서 나온 것이 아니라 여러분을 나에게서 떼어내어 여러분으로 하여금 그들에게 열성을 품도록 하려는 술책입니다.","그들이 너희에게 대하여 열심 내는 것은 좋은 뜻이 아니요 오직 너희를 이간시켜 너희로 그들에게 대하여 열심을 내게 하려 함이라","저희가 너희를 대하여 열심 내는 것이 좋은 뜻이 아니요 오직 너희를 이간 붙여 너희로 저희를 대하여 열심 내게 하려 함이라","여러분의 호감을 사려고 거짓 교사들이 열성을 보이는 것은 여러분의 유익을 위해서 그러는 것이 아닙니다. 그들은 여러분을 내게서 떼어 내서 자기들에게로 관심을 돌리려고 하는 것입니다.","They show interest in you, but not in a good way; they want to isolate you, so that you may show interest in them.","They zealously affect you, but not well; yea, they would exclude you, that ye might affect them.","Those people are zealous to win you over, but for no good. What they want is to alienate you from us, so that you may be zealous for them.","Aemulantur vos non bene, sed excludere vos volunt, ut illos aemulemini.","אינם מקנאים לכם לטובה כי חפצם להפריד אתכם מעלינו למען תהיו מקנאים להם׃"],["55","4","18","남들이 좋은 뜻으로 열성을 기울여 주는 것은 언제나 좋은 일입니다. 내가 여러분과 함께 있을 때에만 그런 것이 아닙니다.","그들이 좋은 동기로 여러분에게 열성을 보인다면야 얼마나 좋겠습니까? 내가 여러분과 함께 있을 때뿐만 아니라 언제나 그랬으면 좋겠습니다.","좋은 일에 대하여 열심으로 사모함을 받음은 내가 너희를 대하였을 때뿐 아니라 언제든지 좋으니라","좋은 일에 대하여 열심으로 사모함을 받음은 내가 너희를 대하였을 때뿐 아니라 언제든지 좋으니라","그들이 선한 동기와 진실한 마음으로 여러분에게 친절을 베푼다면 왜 나쁘다고 하겠습니까? 더구나 내가 여러분과 같이 있을 때뿐 아니라 없을 때도 한결같이 그렇게 행동한다면 더욱 훌륭한 일이겠지요.","Now it is good to be shown interest for good reason at all times, and not only when I am with you.","But it is good to be zealously affected always in a good thing, and not only when I am present with you.","It is fine to be zealous, provided the purpose is good, and to be so always and not just when I am with you.","Bonum est autem aemulari in bono semper, et non tantum cum praesens sum apud vos,","אבל טוב לקנא תמיד לטובה ולא לבד בהיותו אצלכם׃"],["55","4","19","나의 자녀 여러분, 그리스도께서 여러분 안에 모습을 갖추실 때까지 나는 다시 산고를 겪고 있습니다.","나의 자녀인 여러분, 여러분 속에 그리스도가 형성될 때까지 나는 또다시 해산의 고통을 겪어야겠습니다.","나의 자녀들아 너희 속에 그리스도의 형상을 이루기까지 다시 너희를 위하여 해산하는 수고를 하노니","나의 자녀들아 너희 속에 그리스도의 형상이 이루기까지 다시 너희를 위하여 해산하는 수고를 하노니","오, 나의 형제들이여, 여러분이 내 마음을 얼마나 아프게 했는지 여러분은 모를 것입니다. 나는 여러분 속에 그리스도의 형상이 온전히 이루어질 때를 기다리면서 태어날 아기를 기다리는 산모의 해산의 고통을 다시 한 번 겪고 있습니다.","My children, for whom I am again in labor until Christ be formed in you!","My little children, of whom I travail in birth again until Christ be formed in you,","My dear children, for whom I am again in the pains of childbirth until Christ is formed in you,","filioli mei, quos iterum parturio, donec formetur Christus in vobis!","בני אשר אני מחולל שנית עד כי יוצר בכם המשיח׃"],["55","4","20","내가 지금 여러분과 함께 있으면서 다른 어조로 말할 수 있다면 참 좋겠습니다. 나는 여러분의 일을 어찌해야 할지 모르겠습니다.","지금이라도 내가 여러분과 만나서 어조를 바꾸어서 이야기를 나눌 수 있다면 얼마나 좋겠습니까? 나는 여러분의 일이 걱정스러워 안절부절못하고 있습니다.","내가 이제라도 너희와 함께 있어 내 언성을 높이려 함은 너희에 대하여 의혹이 있음이라","내가 이제라도 너희와 함께 있어 내 음성을 변하려 함은 너희를 대하여 의심이 있음이라","지금이라도 내가 여러분과 만나서 이런 것이 아닌 다른 이야기를 할 수 있다면 얼마나 좋겠습니까? 이렇게 멀리 떨어져 있으니 정녕 어떻게 해야 할지 모르겠습니다.","I would like to be with you now and to change my tone, for I am perplexed because of you.","I desire to be present with you now, and to change my voice; for I stand in doubt of you.","how I wish I could be with you now and change my tone, because I am perplexed about you!","Vellem autem esse apud vos modo et mutare vocem meam, quoniam incertus sum in vobis.","אמנה חפצתי להיות עתה אצלכם לשנות את קול דברי כי נבוך אני בכם׃"],["55","4","21","율법 아래 있기를 바라는 여러분, 나에게 말해 보십시오. 여러분은 율법이 말하는 것을 듣지 못합니까?","율법으로 살기를 원하는 여러분, 한 가지 물어보겠습니다. 여러분은 율법을 들어보지 못했습니까?","내게 말하라 율법 아래에 있고자 하는 자들아 율법을 듣지 못하였느냐","내게 말하라 율법 아래 있고자 하는 자들아 율법을 듣지 못하였느냐","유대교의 율법을 지켜야 구원을 얻는다고 생각하는 형제들이여, 내 말을 들어 보십시오. 여러분은 왜 율법이 정말 의미하고자 하는 것이 무엇인지를 모르십니까?","Tell me, you who want to be under the law, do you not listen to the law?","Tell me, ye that desire to be under the law, do ye not hear the law?","Tell me, you who want to be under the law, are you not aware of what the law says?","Dicite mihi, qui sub lege vultis esse: Legem non auditis?","אמרו לי אתם החפצים להיות משעבדים לתורה הלא שמעתם את התורה׃"],["55","4","22","아브라함에게 두 아들이 있었는데 하나는 여종에게서 났고 하나는 자유의 몸인 부인에게서 났다고 기록되어 있습니다.","율법서에 이런 기록이 있습니다. 아브라함이 아들 둘을 두었는데 하나는 여종의 몸에서 났고 하나는 종이 아닌 본부인의 몸에서 났습니다.","기록된 바 ㄱ)아브라함에게 두 아들이 있으니 하나는 여종에게서, 하나는 자유 있는 여자에게서 났다 하였으며","기록된바 ㄱ)아브라함이 두 아들이 있으니 하나는 계집 종에게서, 하나는 자유하는 여자에게서 났다 하였으나 창 16:15","율법서에 보면 아브라함은 두 아들을 두었는데 하나는 여종의 몸에서 낳고 또 하나는 부인의 몸에서 낳았다고 기록되어 있습니다.","For it is written that Abraham had two sons, one by the slave woman and the other by the freeborn woman.","For it is written, that Abraham had two sons, the one by a bondmaid, the other by a freewoman.","For it is written that Abraham had two sons, one by the slave woman and the other by the free woman.","Scriptum est enim quoniam Abraham duos filios habuit, unum de ancilla et unum de libera.","כי כתוב שהיו לאברהם שני בנים האחד מן האמה והשני מן החפשיה׃"],["55","4","23","그런데 여종에게서 난 아들은 육에 따라 태어났고, 자유의 몸인 부인에게서 난 아들은 약속의 결과로 태어났습니다.","여종에게서 난 아들은 인간적인 육정의 소생이었고 본부인에게서 난 아들은 하느님의 약속으로 얻은 아들이었습니다.","ㄴ)여종에게서는 육체를 따라 났고 자유 있는 여자에게서는 약속으로 말미암았느니라","ㄴ)계집 종에게서는 육체를 따라 났고 자유하는 여자에게서는 약속으로 말미암았느니라 창 21:2","여종의 몸에서 태어난 아들은 인간의 육신이 맺어져 낳았지만, 부인의 몸에서 태어난 아들은 하나님의 특별한 약속에 따라 난 아들입니다.","The son of the slave woman was born naturally, the son of the freeborn through a promise.","But he who was of the bondwoman was born after the flesh; but he of the freewoman was by promise.","His son by the slave woman was born in the ordinary way; but his son by the free woman was born as the result of a promise.","Sed qui de ancilla, secundum carnem natus est; qui autem de libera, per promissionem.","ואשר לאמה הוא נולד לפי הבשר ואשר לחפשיה על פי ההבטחה׃"],["55","4","24","여기에는 우의적인 뜻이 있습니다. 이 여자들은 두 계약을 가리킵니다. 하나는 시나이 산에서 나온 여자로 종살이할 자식을 낳는데, 바로 하가르입니다.","이것은 비유로 한 말인데 그 두 여자는 두 계약을 가리킵니다. 하나는 시나이 산에서 나와서 노예가 될 자식들을 낳았습니다. 그것이 하갈입니다.","이것은 비유니 이 여자들은 두 언약이라 하나는 시내 산으로부터 종을 낳은 자니 곧 하갈이라","이것은 비유니 이 여자들은 두 언약이라 하나는 시내산으로부터 종을 낳은 자니 곧 하가라","이 이야기는 하나님께서 인간을 도우시려고 열어 놓으신 두 길을 가리킵니다. 하나는 율법을 주시어 이 율법에 복종하라고 하신 길입니다. 하나님께서는 시내산에서 십계명을 주시어 이 길을 보이셨습니다. 아라비아 사람들은 이 시내산을 \"하갈산\"이라고 부릅니다. 내가 비유를 사용하여 말하려고 하는 것이 바로 이것입니다. 곧 아브라함의 여종인 하갈은 유대인의 어머니라고 말할 수 있는 예루살렘을 가리킵니다. 다시 말해서 계명을 지켜 하나님을 기쁘시게 해드리는 제도를 상징적으로 보여주는 곳이 바로 이 예루살렘입니다. 따라서 이러한 제도를 따라 가는 유대인들은 모두 다 하갈이 낳은 노예의 자식들입니다.","Now this is an allegory. These women represent two covenants. One was from Mount Sinai, bearing children for slavery; this is Hagar.","Which things are an allegory: for these are the two covenants; the one from the mount Sinai, which gendereth to bondage, which is Agar.","These things may be taken figuratively, for the women represent two covenants. One covenant is from Mount Sinai and bears children who are to be slaves: This is Hagar.","Quae sunt per allegoriam dicta; ipsae enim sunt duo Testamenta, unum quidem a monte Sinai, in servitutem generans, quod est Agar.","והדברים הם לרמז כי שתי הבריתות הנה האחת מן הר סיני היולדת לעבדות והיא הגר׃"],["55","4","25","하가르는 아라비아에 있는 시나이 산을 가리키는데, 지금의 예루살렘에 해당합니다. 지금의 예루살렘이 그 자녀들과 함께 종살이를 하고 있기 때문입니다.","하갈은 아라비아에 있는 시나이 산을 가리키는데 그것은 지금의 예루살렘에 해당합니다. 현재 예루살렘은 그 시민들과 함께 종노릇을 하고 있으니 말입니다.","이 하갈은 아라비아에 있는 시내 산으로서 지금 있는 예루살렘과 같은 곳이니 그가 그 자녀들과 더불어 종 노릇 하고","이 하가는 아라비아에 있는 시내산으로 지금 있는 예루살렘과 같은 데니 저가 그 자녀들로 더불어 종노릇하고","(24절에 포함되어 있음)","Hagar represents Sinai, a mountain in Arabia; it corresponds to the present Jerusalem, for she is in slavery along with her children.","For this Agar is mount Sinai in Arabia, and answereth to Jerusalem which now is, and is in bondage with her children.","Now Hagar stands for Mount Sinai in Arabia and corresponds to the present city of Jerusalem, because she is in slavery with her children.","Illud vero Agar mons est Sinai in Arabia, respondet autem Ierusalem, quae nunc est; servit enim cum filiis suis.","כי הגר סיני הר בערב הוא והוא כנגד ירושלים של עתה כי היא בעבדות עם בניה׃"],["55","4","26","그러나 하늘에 있는 예루살렘은 자유의 몸으로서 우리의 어머니입니다.","그러나 하늘의 예루살렘은 자유인이며 우리 어머니입니다.","오직 위에 있는 예루살렘은 자유자니 곧 우리 어머니라","오직 위에 있는 예루살렘은 자유자니 곧 우리 어머니라","그러나 하늘의 예루살렘은 우리의 어머니로 율법에 전혀 구애받지 않습니다.","But the Jerusalem above is freeborn, and she is our mother.","But Jerusalem which is above is free, which is the mother of us all.","But the Jerusalem that is above is free, and she is our mother.","Illa autem, quae sursum est Ierusalem, libera est, quae est mater nostra;","אבל ירושלים של מעלה היא חפשיה והיא אם כלנו׃"],["55","4","27","성경에 이렇게 기록되어 있습니다. “즐거워하여라, 아이를 낳지 못하는 여인아! 기뻐 소리쳐라, 환성을 올려라, 산고를 겪어 보지 못한 여인아! 버림받은 여인의 자녀가 남편 가진 여인의 자녀보다 더 많기 때문이다.”","성서에 이런 말씀이 기록되어 있습니다. \"3)즐거워하여라. 아기 못 낳는 여인이여, 소리 높여 외쳐라. 해산의 고통을 모르는 여인이여, 홀로 사는 여인의 자녀가 남편 있는 여인의 자녀보다 더 많으리라.\"이사 54:1.","기록된 바 ㄷ)잉태하지 못한 자여 즐거워하라 산고를 모르는 자여 소리 질러 외치라 이는 홀로 사는 자의 자녀가 남편 있는 자의 자녀보다 많음이라 하였으니","기록된바 ㄷ)잉태치 못한 자여 즐거워하라 구로치 못한 자여 소리질러 외치라 이는 2)홀로 사는 자의 자녀가 남편 있는 자의 자녀보다 많음이라 하였으니 사 54:1헬, 광야의 자녀가","이사야는 이렇게 예언하였습니다. ㄱ) \"예루살렘아, 너는 이제 기뻐하며 환호성을 질러라! 네가 버림받은 여인의 신세와 비슷하지만 오히려 남편이 있는 여자보다 더 많은 자식을 둘 것이다.\" (ㄱ. 사54:1)","For it is written: “Rejoice, you barren one who bore no children; break forth and shout, you who were not in labor; for more numerous are the children of the deserted one than of her who has a husband.”","For it is written, Rejoice, thou barren that bearest not; break forth and cry, thou that travailest not: for the desolate hath many more children than she which hath an husband.","For it is written: \"Be glad, O barren woman, who bears no children; break forth and cry aloud, you who have no labor pains; because more are the children of the desolate woman than of her who has a husband.\"","scriptum est enim:  “Laetare, sterilis, quae non paris, erumpe et exclama, quae non parturis, quia multi filii desertae magis quam eius, quae habet virum “.","כי כתוב רני עקרה לא ילדה פצחי רנה וצהלי לא חלה כי רבים בני שוממה מבני בעולה׃"],["55","4","28","형제 여러분, 여러분은 이사악과 같이 약속의 자녀입니다.","형제 여러분, 여러분은 이사악과 같은 약속의 자녀들입니다.","형제들아 너희는 이삭과 같이 약속의 자녀라","형제들아 너희는 이삭과 같이 약속의 자녀라","사랑하는 형제들이여, 여러분은 이삭과 마찬가지로 하나님의 약속으로 낳은 자녀들입니다.","Now you, brothers, like Isaac, are children of the promise.","Now we, brethren, as Isaac was, are the children of promise.","Now you, brothers, like Isaac, are children of promise.","Vos autem, fratres, secundum Isaac promissionis filii estis.","ואנחנו אחי הננו כיצחק בני ההבטחה׃"],["55","4","29","그러나 그때에 육에 따라 태어난 아들이 성령에 따라 태어난 아들을 박해한 것처럼, 지금도 그렇습니다.","그러나 그 때 육정으로 난 자식이 성령으로 난 자식을 박해하였는데 지금도 꼭 마찬가지입니다.","그러나 그 때에 육체를 따라 난 자가 성령을 따라 난 자를 박해한 것 같이 이제도 그러하도다","그러나 그 때에 육체를 따라 난 자가 성령을 따라 난 자를 핍박한 것 같이 이제도 그러하도다","그런데 성령으로 난 여러분이 율법을 지키라고 강요하는 사람들의 박해를 받고 있습니다. 마치 약속의 아들 이삭이 여종의 아들 이스마엘에게 박해를 받았던 것처럼 말입니다.","But just as then the child of the flesh persecuted the child of the spirit, it is the same now.","But as then he that was born after the flesh persecuted him that was born after the Spirit, even so it is now.","At that time the son born in the ordinary way persecuted the son born by the power of the Spirit. It is the same now.","Sed quomodo tunc, qui secundum carnem natus fuerat, persequebatur eum, qui secundum spiritum, ita et nunc.","וכאשר הנולד לפי הבשר אז היה רדף את הנולד לפי הרוח כן הוא גם עתה׃"],["55","4","30","그런데 성경은 무엇이라고 말합니까? “여종과 그 아들을 내쫓아라. 여종의 자식이 자유의 몸인 부인의 아들과 함께 상속을 받을 수는 없다.” 하였습니다.","그런데 성서에 무엇이라고 하였습니까? \"4)여종과 그의 자식을 쫓아내어라. 종의 자식은 결코 본자식과 같은 상속자가 될 수 없다.\" 하지 않았습니까? 창세 21:10.","그러나 성경이 무엇을 말하느냐 ㄹ)여종과 그 아들을 내쫓으라 여종의 아들이 자유 있는 여자의 아들과 더불어 유업을 얻지 못하리라 하였느니라","그러나 성경이 무엇을 말하느뇨 ㄹ)계집 종과 그 아들을 내어 쫓으라 계집 종의 아들이 자유하는 여자의 아들로 더불어 유업을 얻지 못하리라 하였느니라 창 21:10, 12","그러나 성경에 어떻게 적혀 있습니까? ㄴ) 하나님께서 아브라함에게 이르시기를 종의 아들은 자유인의 아들과 똑같이 상속을 받을 수 없으니 여종과 그 아들은 쫓아내라고 하지 않았습니까? (ㄴ. 창21:10)","But what does the scripture say? “Drive out the slave woman and her son! For the son of the slave woman shall not share the inheritance with the son” of the freeborn.","Nevertheless what saith the scripture? Cast out the bondwoman and her son: for the son of the bondwoman shall not be heir with the son of the freewoman.","But what does the Scripture say? \"Get rid of the slave woman and her son, for the slave woman's son will never share in the inheritance with the free woman's son.\"","Sed quid dicit Scriptura?  “Eice ancillam et filium eius; non enim heres erit filius ancillae cum filio liberae “.","אבל הכתוב מה הוא אמר גרש האמה ואת בנה כי לא יירש בן האמה עם בן החפשיה׃"],["55","4","31","그러므로 형제 여러분, 우리는 여종의 자녀가 아니라 자유의 몸인 부인의 자녀입니다.","그러므로 형제 여러분, 우리는 여종의 몸에서 난 자녀가 아니라 자유인의 몸에서 난 자녀입니다.","그런즉 형제들아 우리는 여종의 자녀가 아니요 자유 있는 여자의 자녀니라","그런즉 형제들아 우리는 계집 종의 자녀가 아니요 자유하는 여자의 자녀니라","사랑하는 형제들이여, 우리는 유대교의 율법에 묶인 노예의 자녀가 아닙니다. 우리의 믿음을 보고 하나님께서 기꺼이 받아들이실 자유인의 자녀입니다.","Therefore, brothers, we are children not of the slave woman but of the freeborn woman.","So then, brethren, we are not children of the bondwoman, but of the free.","Therefore, brothers, we are not children of the slave woman, but of the free woman.","Itaque, fratres, non sumus ancillae filii sed liberae.","על כן אחי לא בני האמה אנחנו כי אם בני החפשיה׃"],["55","5","1","그리스도께서는 우리를 자유롭게 하시려고 해방시켜 주셨습니다. 그러니 굳건히 서서 다시는 종살이의 멍에를 메지 마십시오.","그리스도께서 우리를 해방시켜 주셔서 우리는 자유의 몸이 되었습니다. 그러니 마음을 굳게 먹고 다시는 종의 멍에를 메지 마십시오.","그리스도께서 우리를 자유롭게 하려고 자유를 주셨으니 그러므로 굳건하게 서서 다시는 종의 멍에를 메지 말라","그리스도께서 우리로 자유케 하려고 자유를 주셨으니 그러므로 굳세게 서서 다시는 종의 멍에를 메지 말라","이처럼 그리스도께서는 우리를 해방시켜 자유의 몸이 되게 하셨습니다. 그러니 이제 여러분은 이 자유를 잘 보존하고 다시는 율법에 묶인 노예가 되지 마십시오.","For freedom Christ set us free; so stand firm and do not submit again to the yoke of slavery.","Stand fast therefore in the liberty wherewith Christ hath made us free, and be not entangled again with the yoke of bondage.","It is for freedom that Christ has set us free. Stand firm, then, and do not let yourselves be burdened again by a yoke of slavery.","Hac libertate nos Christus liberavit; state igitur et nolite iterum iugo servitutis detineri.","ועתה עמדו נא בחרות אשר שחרר אתנו המשיח ואל תשובו להלכד בעל העבדות׃"],["55","5","2","자, 나 바오로가 여러분에게 말합니다. 만일 여러분이 할례를 받는다면 그리스도는 여러분에게 아무 소용이 없을 것입니다.","나 바울로가 여러분에게 말합니다. 만일 여러분이 할례를 받는다면 그리스도가 여러분에게 아무런 이익도 되지 못할 것입니다.","보라 나 바울은 너희에게 말하노니 너희가 만일 할례를 받으면 그리스도께서 너희에게 아무 유익이 없으리라","보라 나 바울은 너희에게 말하노니 너희가 만일 할례를 받으면 그리스도께서 너희에게 아무 유익이 없으리라","이것은 중요한 것이니 잘 들어 두십시오. 만일 여러분이 할례를 받고 율법을 지켜서 하나님과 올바른 관계를 갖을 생각이거든 그리스도의 구원은 기대하지도 마십시오.","It is I, Paul, who am telling you that if you have yourselves circumcised, Christ will be of no benefit to you.","Behold, I Paul say unto you, that if ye be circumcised, Christ shall profit you nothing.","Mark my words! I, Paul, tell you that if you let yourselves be circumcised, Christ will be of no value to you at all.","Ecce ego Paulus dico vobis quoniam, si circumcidamini, Christus vobis nihil proderit.","הנה אני פולוס אמר לכם כי אם תמולו לא יועיל לכם המשיח׃"],["55","5","3","할례를 받는 모든 사람에게 내가 다시 분명히 말합니다. 그들은 율법 전체를 지킬 의무가 있습니다.","할례를 받는 모든 사람에게 다시 강조합니다. 할례를 받는 사람은 율법 전체를 지킬 의무를 지는 것입니다.","내가 할례를 받는 각 사람에게 다시 증언하노니 그는 율법 전체를 행할 의무를 가진 자라","내가 할례를 받는 각 사람에게 다시 증거하노니 그는 율법 전체를 행할 의무를 가진 자라","다시 한번 말합니다. 누구든지 할례를 받는 것으로 하나님의 은총을 입으려거든 모든 율법도 빠짐없이 다 지키십시오. 그렇지 않으면 파멸이 기다리고 있을 뿐입니다.","Once again I declare to every man who has himself circumcised that he is bound to observe the entire law.","For I testify again to every man that is circumcised, that he is a debtor to do the whole law.","Again I declare to every man who lets himself be circumcised that he is obligated to obey the whole law.","Testificor autem rursum omni homini circumcidenti se quoniam debitor est universae legis faciendae.","ומעיד אני עוד הפעם בכל איש אשר ימול כי מחיב הוא לשמר את כל התורה׃"],["55","5","4","율법으로 의롭게 되려는 여러분은 모두 그리스도와 인연이 끊겼습니다. 여러분은 은총에서 떨어져 나갔습니다.","율법을 지킴으로써 하느님과 올바른 관계를 맺으려는 여러분은 그리스도와 관계가 끊어졌고 은총에서 벗어났습니다.","율법 안에서 의롭다 함을 얻으려 하는 너희는 그리스도에게서 끊어지고 은혜에서 떨어진 자로다","율법 안에서 의롭다 함을 얻으려 하는 너희는 그리스도에게서 끊어지고 은혜에서 떨어진 자로다","그런데도 끝내 여러분은 하나님께 진 빚을 율법을 지켜서 갚겠다는 겁니까? 그렇다면 그리스도는 여러분에게 아무런 의미도 없습니다. 여러분은 하나님의 은혜를 잃어버린 것입니다.","You are separated from Christ, you who are trying to be justified by law; you have fallen from grace.","Christ is become of no effect unto you, whosoever of you are justified by the law; ye are fallen from grace.","You who are trying to be justified by law have been alienated from Christ; you have fallen away from grace.","Evacuati estis a Christo, qui in lege iustificamini, a gratia excidistis.","נגזרתם מן המשיח אתם המצטדקים בתורה נפלתם מן החסד׃"],["55","5","5","그러나 우리는 성령을 통하여 믿음으로 의로워지기를 간절히 희망합니다.","그러나 우리는 하느님께서 우리의 믿음을 보시고 성령을 통해서 우리를 당신과 올바른 관계에 놓아주시리라는 희망을 가지고 있습니다.","우리가 성령으로 믿음을 따라 의의 소망을 기다리노니","우리가 성령으로 믿음을 좇아 의의 소망을 기다리노니","그러나 우리는 그리스도의 죽음을 통해서만이 우리 죄가 씻기고 하나님과 올바른 관계에 놓인다는 것을 성령의 도움으로 확신하고 있습니다.","For through the Spirit, by faith, we await the hope of righteousness.","For we through the Spirit wait for the hope of righteousness by faith.","But by faith we eagerly await through the Spirit the righteousness for which we hope.","Nos enim Spiritu ex fide spem iustitiae exspectamus.","כי אנחנו ברוח ניחל מתוך האמונה לתקות הצדקה׃"],["55","5","6","사실 그리스도 예수님 안에서는 할례를 받았느냐 받지 않았느냐가 중요하지 않습니다. 사랑으로 행동하는 믿음만이 중요할 따름입니다.","그리스도 예수를 믿는 사람에게는 할례를 받았다든지 받지 않았다든지 하는 것이 중요하지 않고 오직 사랑으로 표현되는 믿음만이 중요합니다.","그리스도 예수 안에서는 할례나 무할례나 효력이 없으되 사랑으로써 역사하는 믿음뿐이니라","그리스도 예수 안에서는 할례나 무할례가 효력이 없되 사랑으로써 역사하는 믿음 뿐이니라","그리스도께 영원한 생명을 받은 우리는 할례를 받았든 받지 않았든 유대교의 의식을 지키든 지키지 않든 그런 것에 구애될 필요가 없습니다. 우리에게 필요한 것은 사랑으로 표현되는 믿음뿐입니다.","For in Christ Jesus, neither circumcision nor uncircumcision counts for anything, but only faith working through love.","For in Jesus Christ neither circumcision availeth any thing, nor uncircumcision; but faith which worketh by love.","For in Christ Jesus neither circumcision nor uncircumcision has any value. The only thing that counts is faith expressing itself through love.","Nam in Christo Iesu neque circumcisio aliquid valet neque praeputium, sed fides, quae per caritatem operatur.","כי במשיח איננה נחשבת לא המילה ולא הערלה כי אם האמונה הפעלת באהבה׃"],["55","5","7","여러분은 잘 달리고 있었습니다. 그런데 누가 여러분을 가로막아 진리를 따르지 못하게 하였습니까?","여러분이 전에는 그렇게도 잘 달리고 있었는데 누가 여러분을 가로막아 진리를 따르지 못하게 하였습니까?","너희가 달음질을 잘 하더니 누가 너희를 막아 진리를 순종하지 못하게 하더냐","너희가 달음질을 잘 하더니 누가 너희를 막아 진리를 순종치 않게 하더냐","여러분은 지금까지 잘 달려왔습니다. 그런 여러분을 방해해서 진리를 역행하게 한 게 도대체 누구입니까?","You were running well; who hindered you from following [the] truth?","Ye did run well; who did hinder you that ye should not obey the truth?","You were running a good race. Who cut in on you and kept you from obeying the truth?","Currebatis bene; quis vos impedivit veritati non oboedire?","היטבתם לרוץ מי חשך אתכם משמע אל האמת׃"],["55","5","8","여러분을 부르시는 분께서 그렇게 설득하셨을 리는 없습니다.","여러분을 부르신 분이 그렇게 꾀었을 리는 없습니다.","그 권면은 너희를 부르신 이에게서 난 것이 아니니라","그 권면이 너희를 부르신 이에게서 난 것이 아니라","하나님께서 그렇게 하셨을 리는 없습니다. 그리스도안에서 자유를 누리도록 여러분을 불러 준 분이 하나님 아니십니까?","That enticement does not come from the one who called you.","This persuasion cometh not of him that calleth you.","That kind of persuasion does not come from the one who calls you.","Haec persuasio non est ex eo, qui vocat vos.","הפתוי הזה איננו מאת הקרא אתכם׃"],["55","5","9","적은 누룩이 온 반죽을 부풀게 합니다.","적은 누룩이 온 반죽을 부풀게 합니다.","적은 누룩이 온 덩이에 퍼지느니라","적은 누룩이 온 덩이에 퍼지느니라","그러나 여러분 가운데 한 명이라도 악한 사람이 있으면 그 영향이 전체에 미치는 법입니다.","A little yeast leavens the whole batch of dough.","A little leaven leaveneth the whole lump.","\"A little yeast works through the whole batch of dough.\"","Modicum fermentum totam massam corrumpit.","מעט שאר מחמץ הוא את כל העסה׃"],["55","5","10","나는 여러분의 의견도 다르지 않으리라고 주님 안에서 확신합니다. 그러나 여러분을 교란시키는 자는 그가 누구든지 간에 심판을 받을 것입니다.","여러분과 함께 주님을 믿는 나는 여러분이 다른 생각을 품지 않으리라는 것을 확신합니다. 또 여러분의 마음을 교란시키는 자는 그가 누구든지 간에 심판을 받을 것입니다.","나는 너희가 아무 다른 마음을 품지 아니할 줄을 주 안에서 확신하노라 그러나 너희를 요동하게 하는 자는 누구든지 심판을 받으리라","나는 너희가 아무 다른 마음도 품지 아니할 줄을 주 안에서 확신하노라 그러나 너희를 요동케 하는 자는 누구든지 심판을 받으리라","주께서는 여러분이 나와 같은 신앙을 갖게 하실 수 있다고 나는 믿습니다. 또한 사람을 이간시키고 교란케 하는 자는 누구를 막론하고 하나님께서 심판하실 것입니다.","I am confident of you in the Lord that you will not take a different view, and that the one who is troubling you will bear the condemnation, whoever he may be.","I have confidence in you through the Lord, that ye will be none otherwise minded: but he that troubleth you shall bear his judgment, whosoever he be.","I am confident in the Lord that you will take no other view. The one who is throwing you into confusion will pay the penalty, whoever he may be.","Ego confido in vobis in Domino, quod nihil aliud sapietis; qui autem conturbat vos, portabit iudicium, quicumque est ille.","מבטח אני בכם באדון שלא תהיה רוח אחרת עמכם והעכר אתכם ישא את עונו יהיה מי שיהיה׃"],["55","5","11","형제 여러분, 만일 내가 아직도 할례를 선포한다면 어찌하여 아직도 박해를 받겠습니까? 그랬더라면 십자가라는 걸림돌도 이미 치워졌을 것입니다.","형제 여러분, 만일 내가 여전히 할례의 필요성을 주장하고 있다면 왜 내가 지금까지 박해를 받겠습니까? 내가 아직도 할례를 전하고 있다면 내가 전하는 십자가가 걸림돌이 되지는 않을 것입니다.","형제들아 내가 지금까지 할례를 전한다면 어찌하여 지금까지 박해를 받으리요 그리하였으면 십자가의 걸림돌이 제거되었으리니","형제들아 내가 지금까지 할례를 전하면 어찌하여 지금까지 핍박을 받으리요 그리하였으면 십자가의 거치는 것이 그쳤으리니","어떤 사람은 내가 할례를 받아야만 구원을 받을 수 있다는 따위의 설교를 하고 있다고 소문을 퍼뜨리고 다닙니다. 만일 그게 사실이라면 나는 더 이상 박해받을 일이 없을 것입니다. 그런 설교는 아무에게도 거침돌이 되지 않을 테니까 말입니다. 그런데도 내가 아직 박해를 받고 있는 것은 내가 그리스도의 십자가를 믿는 믿음을 통해서만 이 구원을 얻는다고 설교하고 있다는 증거가 아닙니까?","As for me, brothers, if I am still preaching circumcision, why am I still being persecuted? In that case, the stumbling block of the cross has been abolished.","And I, brethren, if I yet preach circumcision, why do I yet suffer persecution? then is the offence of the cross ceased.","Brothers, if I am still preaching circumcision, why am I still being persecuted? In that case the offense of the cross has been abolished.","Ego autem, fratres, si circumcisionem adhuc praedico, quid adhuc persecutionem patior? Ergo evacuatum est scandalum crucis.","ואני אחי אם אכריז עוד המילה על מה אהיה נרדף הלא אז מבטל מכשול הצלב׃"],["55","5","12","여러분을 선동하는 자들은 차라리 스스로 거세라도 하면 좋겠습니다.","할례를 주장하여 여러분을 선동하는 자들은 그 지체를 아예 잘라버리는 것이 어떻겠습니까?","너희를 어지럽게 하는 자들은 스스로 베어 버리기를 원하노라","너희를 어지럽게 하는 자들이 스스로 베어 버리기를 원하노라","오로지 나는 할례를 해서 여러분의 몸의 한 부분을 끊으려고 하는 교사들이 여러분에게서 잘려 나가기를 바라고 있습니다.","Would that those who are upsetting you might also castrate themselves!","I would they were even cut off which trouble you.","As for those agitators, I wish they would go the whole way and emasculate themselves!","Utinam et abscidantur, qui vos conturbant!","מי יתן ויכרתו המדיחים אתכם׃"],["55","5","13","형제 여러분, 여러분은 자유롭게 되라고 부르심을 받았습니다. 다만 그 자유를 육을 위하는 구실로 삼지 마십시오. 오히려 사랑으로 서로 섬기십시오.","형제 여러분, 하느님께서는 자유를 주시려고 여러분을 부르셨습니다. 그러나 그 자유를 여러분의 육정을 만족시키는 기회로 삼지 마십시오. 오히려 여러분은 사랑으로 서로 종이 되십시오.","형제들아 너희가 자유를 위하여 부르심을 입었으나 그러나 그 자유로 육체의 기회를 삼지 말고 오직 사랑으로 서로 종 노릇 하라","형제들아 너희가 자유를 위하여 부르심을 입었으나 그러나 그 자유로 육체의 기회를 삼지 말고 오직 사랑으로 서로 종노릇하라","사랑하는 형제들이여, 여러분에게는 이미 자유가 주어졌습니다. 그 자유는 서로 사랑하고 섬기는 자유입니다.","For you were called for freedom, brothers. But do not use this freedom as an opportunity for the flesh; rather, serve one another through love.","For, brethren, ye have been called unto liberty; only use not liberty for an occasion to the flesh, but by love serve one another.","You, my brothers, were called to be free. But do not use your freedom to indulge the sinful nature; rather, serve one another in love.","Vos enim in libertatem vocati estis, fratres; tantum ne libertatem in occasionem detis carni, sed per caritatem servite invicem.","כי אתם אחי לחרות נקראתם ובלבד שלא תהיה החרות תאנה לבשר אלא שתעבדו איש את רעהו באהבה׃"],["55","5","14","사실 모든 율법은 한 계명으로 요약됩니다. 곧 “네 이웃을 너 자신처럼 사랑하여라.” 하신 계명입니다.","모든 율법은 \"1)네 이웃을 네 몸같이 사랑하여라.\" 하신 한마디 말씀으로 요약됩니다. 레위 19:18.","온 율법은 ㄱ)네 이웃 사랑하기를 네 자신 같이 하라 하신 한 말씀에서 이루어졌나니","온 율법은 ㄱ)네 이웃 사랑하기를 네 몸 같이 하라 하신 한 말씀에 이루었나니 레 19:18","즉 모든 율법은 ㄱ) \"네 이웃을 네 몸과 같이 사랑하라\"는 한 말씀에 요약되어 있기 때문입니다. (ㄱ. 레19:18)","For the whole law is fulfilled in one statement, namely, “You shall love your neighbor as yourself.”","For all the law is fulfilled in one word, even in this; Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself.","The entire law is summed up in a single command: \"Love your neighbor as yourself.\"","Omnis enim lex in uno sermone impletur, in hoc: Diliges proximum tuum sicut teipsum.","כי כל התורה כלולה במצוה אחת והיא ואהבת לרעך כמוך׃"],["55","5","15","그러나 여러분이 서로 물어뜯고 잡아먹고 한다면, 서로가 파멸할 터이니 조심하십시오.","그러나 여러분이 서로 물어뜯고 삼키고 하면 피차 멸망할 터이니 조심하십시오.","만일 서로 물고 먹으면 피차 멸망할까 조심하라","만일 서로 물고 먹으면 피차 멸망할까 조심하라","여러분이 서로 사랑하지 않고 언제나 헐뜯고 비난이나 하고 있다면 피차 파멸을 당할 뿐입니다. 그러므로 조심하십시오.","But if you go on biting and devouring one another, beware that you are not consumed by one another.","But if ye bite and devour one another, take heed that ye be not consumed one of another.","If you keep on biting and devouring each other, watch out or you will be destroyed by each other.","Quod si invicem mordetis et devoratis, videte, ne ab invicem consumamini!","אבל אם תנשכו ותאכלו איש את אחיו ראו פן תכלו איש על ידי רעהו׃"],["55","5","16","내 말은 이렇습니다. 성령의 인도에 따라 살아가십시오. 그러면 육의 욕망을 채우지 않게 될 것입니다.","내 말을 잘 들으십시오. 육체의 욕정을 채우려 하지 말고 성령께서 이끄시는 대로 살아가십시오.","내가 이르노니 너희는 성령을 따라 행하라 그리하면 육체의 욕심을 이루지 아니하리라","내가 이르노니 너희는 성령을 좇아 행하라 그리하면 육체의 욕심을 이루지 아니하리라","여러분에게 권합니다. 오직 성령께서 인도하는 대로만 따르십시오. 성령께서는 여러분이 어디로 가야 할지, 또 무엇을 해야 할지를 가르쳐 주실 것입니다. 성령께서 인도하는 대로만 따라 살면 여러분은 육체의 욕망에 끌려 다니는 짓 따위는 하지 않게 될 것입니다.","I say, then: live by the Spirit and you will certainly not gratify the desire of the flesh.","This I say then, Walk in the Spirit, and ye shall not fulfil the lust of the flesh.","So I say, live by the Spirit, and you will not gratify the desires of the sinful nature.","Dico autem: Spiritu ambulate et concupiscentiam carnis ne perfeceritis.","והנני אמר התהלכו ברוח ולא תמלאו את תאות הבשר׃"],["55","5","17","육이 욕망하는 것은 성령을 거스르고, 성령께서 바라시는 것은 육을 거스릅니다. 이 둘은 서로 반대되기 때문에 여러분은 자기가 원하는 것을 할 수 없게 됩니다.","육체의 욕망은 성령을 거스르고 성령께서 원하시는 것은 육정을 거스릅니다. 이 둘은 서로 반대되는 것이기 때문에 여러분은 자기가 원하는 일을 할 수 없게 됩니다.","육체의 소욕은 성령을 거스르고 성령은 육체를 거스르나니 이 둘이 서로 대적함으로 너희가 원하는 것을 하지 못하게 하려 함이니라","육체의 소욕은 성령을 거스리고 성령의 소욕은 육체를 거스리나니 이 둘이 서로 대적함으로 너희의 원하는 것을 하지 못하게 하려 함이니라","우리는 성령께서 바라는 것과는 정반대로 악한 일 하기를 좋아하는 본성을 지니고 있습니다. 그러므로 성령께서 인도하는 길을 따라 살며 선한 일을 하고자 하는 마음은 우리 본성의 욕망과는 정반대의 것입니다. 우리 속에 있는 이 두 힘은 서로 우리를 마음대로 조종하려고 끊임없이 싸우고 있습니다. 그리고 우리는 양쪽 틈에 끼여서 자유롭게 원하는 대로 할 수가 없습니다.","For the flesh has desires against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh; these are opposed to each other, so that you may not do what you want.","For the flesh lusteth against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh: and these are contrary the one to the other: so that ye cannot do the things that ye would.","For the sinful nature desires what is contrary to the Spirit, and the Spirit what is contrary to the sinful nature. They are in conflict with each other, so that you do not do what you want.","Caro enim concupiscit adversus Spiritum, Spiritus autem adversus carnem; haec enim invicem adversantur, ut non, quaecumque vultis, illa faciatis.","כי הבשר מתאוה הפך מן הרוח והרוח הפך מן הבשר ושניהם מתקוממים זה לזה עד שלא תוכלו לעשות את אשר תחפצו׃"],["55","5","18","그러나 여러분이 성령의 인도를 받으면 율법 아래 있는 것이 아닙니다.","성령을 따라 사는 사람은 율법의 지배를 받지 않습니다.","너희가 만일 성령의 인도하시는 바가 되면 율법 아래에 있지 아니하리라","너희가 만일 성령의 인도하시는 바가 되면 율법 아래 있지 아니하리라","그러나 성령이 인도하는 대로만 따라 살면 더 이상 억지로 율법에 복종하려고 애쓸 필요가 없습니다.","But if you are guided by the Spirit, you are not under the law.","But if ye be led of the Spirit, ye are not under the law.","But if you are led by the Spirit, you are not under law.","Quod si Spiritu ducimini, non estis sub lege.","ואם תנהגו על ידי הרוח אז אינכם תחת התורה׃"],["55","5","19","육의 행실은 자명합니다. 그것은 곧 불륜, 더러움, 방탕,","육정이 빚어내는 일은 명백합니다. 곧 음행, 추행, 방탕,","육체의 일은 분명하니 곧 음행과 더러운 것과 호색과","육체의 일은 현저하니 곧 음행과 더러운 것과 호색과","여러분이 본성이 시키는 대로 육체의 욕망에 따라 살면 여러분의 생활은 다음과 같은 결과를 가져옵니다. 곧 더러운 생각, 육신의 쾌락을 찾는 마음,","Now the works of the flesh are obvious: immorality, impurity, licentiousness,","Now the works of the flesh are manifest, which are these; Adultery, fornication, uncleanness, lasciviousness,","The acts of the sinful nature are obvious: sexual immorality, impurity and debauchery;","Manifesta autem sunt opera carnis, quae sunt fornicatio, immunditia, luxuria,","וגלוים הם פעלי הבשר אשר הם נאוף זנות טמאה וזמה׃"],["55","5","20","우상 숭배, 마술, 적개심, 분쟁, 시기, 격분, 이기심, 분열, 분파,","우상 숭배, 마술, 원수 맺는 것, 싸움, 시기, 분노, 이기심, 분열, 당파심,","우상 숭배와 주술과 원수 맺는 것과 분쟁과 시기와 분냄과 당 짓는 것과 분열함과 이단과","우상 숭배와 술수와 원수를 맺는 것과 분쟁과 시기와 분냄과 당 짓는 것과 분리함과 이단과","우상숭배, 마술, 헐뜯음과 싸움, 질투와 분노, 언제나 자기 이익을 추구하는 일, 불평과 비판적인 태도, 자기의 작은 당파 외에는 모두 나쁜 것으로 인정하는 배타주의와 거기서 나오는 잘못된 교설","idolatry, sorcery, hatreds, rivalry, jealousy, outbursts of fury, acts of selfishness, dissensions, factions,","Idolatry, witchcraft, hatred, variance, emulations, wrath, strife, seditions, heresies,","idolatry and witchcraft; hatred, discord, jealousy, fits of rage, selfish ambition, dissensions, factions","idolorum servitus, veneficia, inimicitiae, contentiones, aemulationes, irae, rixae, dissensiones, sectae,","עבודת אלילים וכשוף איבות ומצות וקנאה ורגז מריבות מחלקות וכתות׃"],["55","5","21","질투, 만취, 흥청대는 술판, 그 밖에 이와 비슷한 것들입니다. 내가 여러분에게 이미 경고한 그대로 이제 다시 경고합니다. 이런 짓을 저지르는 자들은 하느님의 나라를 차지하지 못할 것입니다.","질투, 술주정, 흥청대며 먹고 마시는 것, 그 밖에 그와 비슷한 것들입니다. 내가 전에도 경고한 바 있지만 지금 또다시 경고합니다. 이런 짓을 일삼는 자들은 결코 하느님 나라를 차지하지 못할 것입니다.","투기와 술 취함과 방탕함과 또 그와 같은 것들이라 전에 너희에게 경계한 것 같이 경계하노니 이런 일을 하는 자들은 하나님의 나라를 유업으로 받지 못할 것이요","투기와 술 취함과 방탕함과 또 그와 같은 것들이라 전에 너희에게 경계한것 같이 경계하노니 이런 일을 하는 자들은 하나님의 나라를 유업으로 받지 못할 것이요","시기, 살인, 술주정, 흥청대며 먹고 마시는 것 따위입니다. 전에도 말했지만 한번 더 당부합니다. 누구든지 이런 생활을 하는 사람은 하나님 나라를 물려받을 수 없습니다.","occasions of envy, drinking bouts, orgies, and the like. I warn you, as I warned you before, that those who do such things will not inherit the kingdom of God.","Envyings, murders, drunkenness, revellings, and such like: of the which I tell you before, as I have also told you in time past, that they which do such things shall not inherit the kingdom of God.","and envy; drunkenness, orgies, and the like. I warn you, as I did before, that those who live like this will not inherit the kingdom of God.","invidiae, ebrietates, comissationes et his similia; quae praedico vobis, sicut praedixi, quoniam, qui talia agunt, regnum Dei non consequentur.","צרות עין ושפיכות דמים ושרון וזוללות ודומיהן אשר אמר עליהן כמו שאמרתי כבר כי עשי אלה לא ינחלו מלכות האלהים׃"],["55","5","22","그러나 성령의 열매는 사랑, 기쁨, 평화, 인내, 호의, 선의, 성실,","성령께서 맺어주시는 열매는 사랑, 기쁨, 평화, 인내, 친절, 선행, 진실,","오직 성령의 열매는 사랑과 희락과 화평과 오래 참음과 자비와 양선과 충성과","오직 성령의 열매는 사랑과 희락과 화평과 오래 참음과 자비와 양선과 충성과","하지만 성령께서 우리 생활을 지배하실 때 그분은 우리 속에서 다음과 같은 열매를 맺게 해주십니다. 사랑, 기쁨, 평화, 인내, 친절, 선의, 진실,","In contrast, the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, patience, kindness, generosity, faithfulness,","But the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, longsuffering, gentleness, goodness, faith,","But the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, patience, kindness, goodness, faithfulness,","Fructus autem Spiritus est caritas, gaudium, pax, longanimitas, benignitas, bonitas, fides,","ופרי הרוח אהבה שמחה ושלום ארך רוח ונדיבות וחסד ואמונה׃"],["55","5","23","온유, 절제입니다. 이러한 것들을 막는 법은 없습니다.","온유, 그리고 절제입니다. 이것을 금하는 법은 없습니다.","온유와 절제니 이같은 것을 금지할 법이 없느니라","온유와 절제니 이같은 것을 금지할 법이 없느니라","온유, 그리고 절제입니다. 여기에는 율법에 반대되는 것이 하나도 없습니다.","gentleness, self-control. Against such there is no law.","Meekness, temperance: against such there is no law.","gentleness and self-control. Against such things there is no law.","mansuetudo, continentia; adversus huiusmodi non est lex.","וענוה ופרישות אין תורה לנגד עשי אלה׃"],["55","5","24","그리스도 예수님께 속한 이들은 자기 육을 그 욕정과 욕망과 함께 십자가에 못 박았습니다.","그리스도 예수에게 속한 사람들은 육체를 그 정욕과 욕망과 함께 십자가에 못박은 사람들입니다.","그리스도 예수의 사람들은 육체와 함께 그 정욕과 탐심을 십자가에 못 박았느니라","그리스도 예수의 사람들은 육체와 함께 그 정과 욕심을 십자가에 못 박았느니라","그리스도에게 속한 사람들은 악한 욕망의 본성을 십자가에 못박은 사람들입니다.","Now those who belong to Christ [Jesus] have crucified their flesh with its passions and desires.","And they that are Christ's have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts.","Those who belong to Christ Jesus have crucified the sinful nature with its passions and desires.","Qui autem sunt Christi Iesu, carnem crucifixerunt cum vitiis et concupiscentiis.","ואשר הם למשיח צלבו את בשרם עם כל תשוקתיו ותאותיו׃"],["55","5","25","우리는 성령으로 사는 사람들이므로 성령을 따라갑시다.","성령께서 우리에게 생명을 주셨으니 우리는 성령의 지도를 따라서 살아가야 합니다.","만일 우리가 성령으로 살면 또한 성령으로 행할지니","만일 우리가 성령으로 살면 또한 성령으로 행할찌니","만일 우리가 지금 성령의 능력으로 살고 있다면 모든 생활 역시 성령의 인도를 따라야 합니다.","If we live in the Spirit, let us also follow the Spirit.","If we live in the Spirit, let us also walk in the Spirit.","Since we live by the Spirit, let us keep in step with the Spirit.","Si vivimus Spiritu, Spiritu et ambulemus.","אם נחיה ברוח נתהלכה גם ברוח׃"],["55","5","26","잘난 체하지 말고 서로 시비하지 말고 서로 시기하지 맙시다.","우리는 잘난 체하지 말고 서로 싸움을 걸지 말고 서로 질투하지 말아야 합니다.","헛된 영광을 구하여 서로 노엽게 하거나 서로 투기하지 말지니라","헛된 영광을 구하여 서로 격동하고 서로 투기하지 말찌니라","그렇게 하면 명예와 인기를 얻고자 질투하거나 악한 감정을 가지는 일은 없을 것입니다.","Let us not be conceited, provoking one another, envious of one another.","Let us not be desirous of vain glory, provoking one another, envying one another.","Let us not become conceited, provoking and envying each other.","Non efficiamur inanis gloriae cupidi, invicem provocantes, invicem invidentes.","ולא נרדף אחרי כבוד שוא להכעיס איש את רעהו ולקנא איש את רעהו׃"],["55","6","1","형제 여러분, 어떤 사람이 잘못을 저지르는 것을 보면, 영적인 사람인 여러분은 온유한 마음으로 그를 바로잡아 주어야 합니다. 그리고 그대도 유혹에 빠지지 않도록 조심하십시오.","형제 여러분, 여러분은 성령의 지도를 따라 사는 사람이니, 어떤 사람이 잘못을 저질렀을 때 온유한 마음으로 바로잡아 주어야 합니다. 그리고 여러분도 유혹에 빠지지 않도록 자신을 살피십시오.","형제들아 사람이 만일 무슨 범죄한 일이 드러나거든 신령한 너희는 온유한 심령으로 그러한 자를 바로잡고 너 자신을 살펴보아 너도 시험을 받을까 두려워하라","형제들아 사람이 만일 무슨 범죄한 일이 드러나거든 신령한 너희는 온유한 심령으로 그러한 자를 바로잡고 네 자신을 돌아보아 너도 시험을 받을까 두려워하라","사랑하는 형제들이여, 만일 어떤 그리스도인이 죄에 빠져 있거든 성령을 따라 사는 여러분이 부드럽고 겸손한 마음으로 그를 도와 바른길로 돌아오게 하십시오. 그리고 혹시 여러분 자신도 악한 길에 빠져 들지 않을까 늘 주의하십시오.","Brothers, even if a person is caught in some transgression, you who are spiritual should correct that one in a gentle spirit, looking to yourself, so that you also may not be tempted.","Brethren, if a man be overtaken in a fault, ye which are spiritual, restore such an one in the spirit of meekness; considering thyself, lest thou also be tempted.","Brothers, if someone is caught in a sin, you who are spiritual should restore him gently. But watch yourself, or you also may be tempted.","Fratres, et si praeoccupatus fuerit homo in aliquo delicto, vos, qui spiritales estis, huiusmodi instruite in spiritu lenitatis, considerans teipsum, ne et tu tenteris.","אחי גם כי יתפש איש מכם בעברה אתם אנשי הרוח תקימהו ברוח ענוה והשמר לנפשך פן תבא לידי נסיון גם אתה׃"],["55","6","2","서로 남의 짐을 져 주십시오. 그러면 그리스도의 율법을 완수하게 될 것입니다.","서로 남의 짐을 져주십시오. 그래서 그리스도의 법을 이루십시오.","너희가 짐을 서로 지라 그리하여 그리스도의 법을 성취하라","너희가 1)짐을 서로 지라 그리하여 그리스도의 법을 성취하라 혹 무거운 짐을","서로 남의 어려움과 짐을 함께 나누어 지고 주님의 명령에 복종하십시오.","Bear one another’s burdens, and so you will fulfill the law of Christ.","Bear ye one another's burdens, and so fulfil the law of Christ.","Carry each other's burdens, and in this way you will fulfill the law of Christ.","Alter alterius onera portate et sic adimplebitis legem Christi.","שאו איש את משא רעהו בזאת תמלאו את תורת המשיח׃"],["55","6","3","사실 누가 아무것도 아니면서 무엇이나 되는 듯이 생각한다면, 그는 자신을 속이는 것입니다.","사실 아무것도 아닌 사람이 무엇이나 된 것처럼 생각한다면 그는 자기 자신을 속이고 있는 것입니다.","만일 누가 아무 것도 되지 못하고 된 줄로 생각하면 스스로 속임이라","만일 누가 아무것도 되지 못하고 된줄로 생각하면 스스로 속임이니라","사실 아무 것도 아닌 처지에 무엇이나 된 것처럼 자기를 높이고 있다면 그것은 스스로를 거역하는 짓입니다. 그런 사람은 아무 값어치도 없는 인간입니다.","For if anyone thinks he is something when he is nothing, he is deluding himself.","For if a man think himself to be something, when he is nothing, he deceiveth himself.","If anyone thinks he is something when he is nothing, he deceives himself.","Nam si quis existimat se aliquid esse, cum sit nihil, ipse se seducit;","כי החשב את עצמו להיות מה ואיננו מאומה את נפשו הוא מרמה׃"],["55","6","4","저마다 자기 행동을 살펴보십시오. 그러면 자기 자신에게는 자랑거리라 하여도 남에게는 자랑거리가 못 될 것입니다.","각각 자기가 한 일을 살펴봅시다. 잘한 일이 있다면 그것은 자기 혼자 자랑스럽게 생각할 일이지 남에게까지 자랑할 것은 못 됩니다.","각각 자기의 일을 살피라 그리하면 자랑할 것이 자기에게는 있어도 남에게는 있지 아니하리니","각각 자기의 일을 살피라 그리하면 자랑할 것이 자기에게만 있고 남에게는 있지 아니하리니","각각 자기가 한 일을 살펴보십시오. 그래서 참으로 자기가 최선을 다하고 있거든 혼자만 자랑스러워할 뿐 남 앞에 드러내 놓고 자랑하지 마십시오.","Each one must examine his own work, and then he will have reason to boast with regard to himself alone, and not with regard to someone else;","But let every man prove his own work, and then shall he have rejoicing in himself alone, and not in another.","Each one should test his own actions. Then he can take pride in himself, without comparing himself to somebody else,","opus autem suum probet unusquisque et sic in semetipso tantum gloriationem habebit et non in altero.","אבל יבחן כל איש את מעשהו ואז לו לבדו תהיה תהלתו ולא לנגד אחר׃"],["55","6","5","누구나 저마다 자기 짐을 져야 할 것입니다.","각 사람은 자기 짐을 져야 하기 때문입니다.","각각 자기의 짐을 질 것이라","각각 자기의 짐을 질 것임이니라","우리는 모두 결점과 고뇌를 짊어진 불완전한 사람이기 때문입니다.","for each will bear his own load.","For every man shall bear his own burden.","for each one should carry his own load.","Unusquisque enim onus suum portabit.","כי כל איש את משאו ישא׃"],["55","6","6","말씀을 배우는 사람은 그것을 가르치는 사람과 좋은 것을 모두 함께 나누어야 합니다.","하느님의 말씀을 배우는 사람은 그것을 가르치는 사람과 모든 좋은 것을 같이 나누어야 합니다.","가르침을 받는 자는 말씀을 가르치는 자와 모든 좋은 것을 함께 하라","가르침을 받는 자는 말씀을 가르치는 자와 모든 좋은 것을 함께 하라","하나님의 말씀을 배우는 사람은 그 말씀을 가르치는 사람에게 보수를 지불하고 그를 도와야 합니다.","One who is being instructed in the word should share all good things with his instructor.","Let him that is taught in the word communicate unto him that teacheth in all good things.","Anyone who receives instruction in the word must share all good things with his instructor.","Communicet autem is, qui catechizatur verbum, ei qui se catechizat, in omnibus bonis.","המלמד בדבר יחלק מכל טובו למלמדהו׃"],["55","6","7","착각하지 마십시오. 하느님은 우롱당하실 분이 아니십니다. 사람은 자기가 뿌린 것을 거두는 법입니다.","잘못 생각하지 마십시오. 하느님은 조롱을 받으실 분이 아니십니다. 사람은 무엇을 심든지 자기가 심은 것을 그대로 거둘 것입니다.","스스로 속이지 말라 하나님은 업신여김을 받지 아니하시나니 사람이 무엇으로 심든지 그대로 거두리라","스스로 속이지 말라 하나님은 만홀히 여김을 받지 아니하시나니 사람이 무엇으로 심든지 그대로 거두리라","잘못 생각하지 마십시오. 하나님은 무시당하실 분이 아닙니다. 사람은 무엇을 심든지 자기가 심은 대로 거둔다는 것을 명심하십시오.","Make no mistake: God is not mocked, for a person will reap only what he sows,","Be not deceived; God is not mocked: for whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he also reap.","Do not be deceived: God cannot be mocked. A man reaps what he sows.","Nolite errare: Deus non irridetur. Quae enim seminaverit homo, haec et metet;","אל תתעו לא יתן אלהים להתל בו כי מה שזרע האדם אתו יקצר׃"],["55","6","8","자기의 육에 뿌리는 사람은 육에서 멸망을 거두고, 성령에게 뿌리는 사람은 성령에게서 영원한 생명을 거둘 것입니다.","자기 육체에 심는 사람은 육체에게서 멸망을 거두겠지만 성령에 심는 사람은 성령으로부터 영원한 생명을 거둡니다.","자기의 육체를 위하여 심는 자는 육체로부터 썩어질 것을 거두고 성령을 위하여 심는 자는 성령으로부터 영생을 거두리라","자기의 육체를 위하여 심는 자는 육체로부터 썩어진 것을 거두고 성령을 위하여 심는 자는 성령으로부터 영생을 거두리라","만일 자신의 악한 욕망을 만족시키고자 하는 사람은 악한 씨앗을 심은 셈이 되어 그 결과 죽음을 거두게 될 것입니다. 그러나 성령을 위하여 좋은 것을 심는 사람은 성령께서 주시는 영원한 생명을 거두게 될 것입니다.","because the one who sows for his flesh will reap corruption from the flesh, but the one who sows for the spirit will reap eternal life from the spirit.","For he that soweth to his flesh shall of the flesh reap corruption; but he that soweth to the Spirit shall of the Spirit reap life everlasting.","The one who sows to please his sinful nature, from that nature will reap destruction; the one who sows to please the Spirit, from the Spirit will reap eternal life.","quoniam, qui seminat in carne sua, de carne metet corruptionem; qui autem seminat in Spiritu, de Spiritu metet vitam aeternam.","הזרע בבשרו יקצר כליון משברו והזרע ברוח יקצר מן הרוח חיי עולם׃"],["55","6","9","낙심하지 말고 계속 좋은 일을 합시다. 포기하지 않으면 제때에 수확을 거두게 될 것입니다.","낙심하지 말고 꾸준히 선을 행합시다. 꾸준히 계속하노라면 거둘 때가 올 것입니다.","우리가 선을 행하되 낙심하지 말지니 포기하지 아니하면 때가 이르매 거두리라","우리가 선을 행하되 낙심하지 말찌니 피곤하지 아니하면 때가 이르매 거두리라","낙심하지 말고 선을 행하십시오. 실망도 포기도 하지 않고 꾸준히 선을 행하다 보면 복을 거두어 들일 날이 올 것입니다.","Let us not grow tired of doing good, for in due time we shall reap our harvest, if we do not give up.","And let us not be weary in well doing: for in due season we shall reap, if we faint not.","Let us not become weary in doing good, for at the proper time we will reap a harvest if we do not give up.","Bonum autem facientes infatigabiles, tempore enim suo metemus non deficientes.","ואנחנו בעשות הטוב אל נחת כי נקצר בעתו אם לא נרפה׃"],["55","6","10","그러므로 기회가 있는 동안 모든 사람에게, 특히 믿음의 가족들에게 좋은 일을 합시다.","그러므로 기회 있을 때마다 모든 사람에게 선을 행합시다. 믿는 식구들에게는 더욱 그렇게 해야 합니다.","그러므로 우리는 기회 있는 대로 모든 이에게 착한 일을 하되 더욱 믿음의 가정들에게 할지니라","그러므로 우리는 기회 있는대로 모든 이에게 착한 일을 하되 더욱 믿음의 가정들에게 할찌니라","기회 있을 때마다 누구에게나 친절을 베푸십시오. 그리스도인 형제들에게는 더욱 그렇게 하십시오.","So then, while we have the opportunity, let us do good to all, but especially to those who belong to the family of the faith.","As we have therefore opportunity, let us do good unto all men, especially unto them who are of the household of faith.","Therefore, as we have opportunity, let us do good to all people, especially to those who belong to the family of believers.","Ergo dum tempus habemus, operemur bonum ad omnes, maxime autem ad domesticos fidei.","לכן כאשר העת בידנו נעשה נא את הטוב עם כל אדם וביותר עם בני אמונתנו׃"],["55","6","11","보십시오, 내가 직접 이렇게 큰 글자로 여러분에게 씁니다.","보십시오. 내가 직접 여러분에게 이렇게 큰 글자로 써 보냅니다.","내 손으로 너희에게 이렇게 큰 글자로 쓴 것을 보라","내 손으로 너희에게 이렇게 큰 글자로 쓴 것을 보라","나는 이 끝맺는 말을 내 손으로 쓰려고 합니다. 얼마나 큰 글자로 쓰는가를 잘 보십시오.","See with what large letters I am writing to you in my own hand!","Ye see how large a letter I have written unto you with mine own hand.","See what large letters I use as I write to you with my own hand!","Videte qualibus litteris scripsi vobis mea manu.","ראו נא מה גדול המכתב אשר כתבתי אליכם בידי׃"],["55","6","12","겉으로만 좋게 보이려고 하는 자들, 그자들이 여러분에게 할례를 강요하고 있습니다. 그들은 오직 그리스도의 십자가 때문에 받는 박해를 면하려고 그리하는 것입니다.","인간적인 겉치레만을 일삼는 자들은 여러분에게 할례를 강요하고 있습니다. 그들은 오직 그리스도의 십자가 때문에 받는 박해를 면하려고 그러는 것뿐입니다.","무릇 육체의 모양을 내려 하는 자들이 억지로 너희에게 할례를 받게 함은 그들이 그리스도의 십자가로 말미암아 박해를 면하려 함뿐이라","무릇 육체의 모양을 내려 하는 자들이 억지로 너희로 할례 받게 함은 저희가 그리스도의 십자가를 인하여 핍박을 면하려 함 뿐이라","그 교사들이 여러분을 설득해서 할례를 받게 하려는 이유는 단하나, 인기를 얻고 박해를 면하려는 심사에서 그러는 겁니다. 그들은 그리스도의 십자가만이 구원의 길이라고 했다가 박해를 받을까봐 겁이 난 것입니다.","It is those who want to make a good appearance in the flesh who are trying to compel you to have yourselves circumcised, only that they may not be persecuted for the cross of Christ.","As many as desire to make a fair shew in the flesh, they constrain you to be circumcised; only lest they should suffer persecution for the cross of Christ.","Those who want to make a good impression outwardly are trying to compel you to be circumcised. The only reason they do this is to avoid being persecuted for the cross of Christ.","Quicumque volunt placere in carne, hi cogunt vos circumcidi, tantum ut crucis Christi persecutionem non patiantur;","החפצים להתהדר בבשר מכריחים אתכם להמול רק למען לא ירדפו על צלב המשיח׃"],["55","6","13","할례를 받은 그들 자신도 율법을 지키지 않습니다. 그들은 여러분의 몸에 한 일을 자랑하려고, 여러분이 할례 받기를 원하는 것뿐입니다.","실상 할례를 받은 사람들도 자신은 율법을 지키지 않고 다만 여러분에게 외형적인 할례를 시켰다는 것을 자랑하려고 할례를 받게 하려는 것뿐입니다.","할례를 받은 그들이라도 스스로 율법은 지키지 아니하고 너희에게 할례를 받게 하려 하는 것은 그들이 너희의 육체로 자랑하려 함이라","할례 받은 저희라도 스스로 율법은 지키지 아니하고 너희로 할례 받게 하려 하는 것은 너희의 육체로 자랑하려 함이니라","할례를 주장하는 교사들도 실은 율법을 제대로 지키지 못합니다. 그러면서도 여러분을 자기들의 제자로 삼아 큰소리 치려고 할례를 강요하는 것입니다.","Not even those having themselves circumcised observe the law themselves; they only want you to be circumcised so that they may boast of your flesh.","For neither they themselves who are circumcised keep the law; but desire to have you circumcised, that they may glory in your flesh.","Not even those who are circumcised obey the law, yet they want you to be circumcised that they may boast about your flesh.","neque enim, qui circumciduntur, legem custodiunt, sed volunt vos circumcidi, ut in carne vestra glorientur.","כי גם הם הנמולים אינם שמרים את התורה אלא רצונם שתמולו למען יתהללו בבשרכם׃"],["55","6","14","그러나 나는 우리 주 예수 그리스도의 십자가 외에는 어떠한 것도 자랑하고 싶지 않습니다. 그리스도의 십자가로 말미암아, 내 쪽에서 보면 세상이 십자가에 못 박혔고 세상 쪽에서 보면 내가 십자가에 못 박혔습니다.","그러나 나에게는 우리 주 예수 그리스도의 십자가밖에는 아무것도 자랑할 것이 없습니다. 그리스도께서 십자가에 못박히심으로써 세상은 나에 대해서 죽었고 나는 세상에 대해서 죽었습니다.","그러나 내게는 우리 주 예수 그리스도의 십자가 외에 결코 자랑할 것이 없으니 그리스도로 말미암아 세상이 나를 대하여 십자가에 못 박히고 내가 또한 세상을 대하여 그러하니라","그러나 내게는 우리 주 예수 그리스도의 십자가 외에 결코 자랑할 것이 없으니 그리스도로 말미암아 세상이 나를 대하여 십자가에 못 박히고 내가 또한 세상을 대하여 그러하니라","그러나 내게는 주 예수 그리스도의 십자가 외에 자랑할 것이 아무 것도 없습니다. 이 십자가 때문에 나는 오래 전에 이 세상의 온갖 일에 흥미를 잃어버렸고 이 세상도 나에게 관심을 갖지 않습니다.","But may I never boast except in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, through which the world has been crucified to me, and I to the world.","But God forbid that I should glory, save in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom the world is crucified unto me, and I unto the world.","May I never boast except in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, through which the world has been crucified to me, and I to the world.","Mihi autem absit gloriari, nisi in cruce Domini nostri Iesu Christi, per quem mihi mundus crucifixus est, et ego mundo.","ואנכי חלילה מהתהלל זולתי בצלב אדנינו ישוע המשיח אשר בו העולם נצלב לי ואני נצלב לעולם׃"],["55","6","15","사실 할례를 받았느냐 받지 않았느냐는 중요하지 않습니다. 새 창조만이 중요할 따름입니다.","할례를 받고 안 받는 것이 문제가 아니라 새로운 사람이 되는 것이 중요합니다.","할례나 무할례가 아무 것도 아니로되 오직 새로 지으심을 받는 것만이 중요하니라","할례나 무할례가 아무 것도 아니로되 오직 새로 지으심을 받은 자 뿐이니라","할례를 받았느냐 받지 않았느냐 하는 것은 이제 전혀 문제가 되지 않습니다. 중요한 것은 우리가 참으로 변화를 받아 새사람이 되었느냐 하는 것입니다.","For neither does circumcision mean anything, nor does uncircumcision, but only a new creation.","For in Christ Jesus neither circumcision availeth any thing, nor uncircumcision, but a new creature.","Neither circumcision nor uncircumcision means anything; what counts is a new creation.","Neque enim circumcisio aliquid est neque praeputium sed nova creatura.","כי במשיח ישוע גם המילה גם הערלה אינן נחשבות כי אם בריאה חדשה׃"],["55","6","16","이 법칙을 따르는 모든 이들에게, 그리고 하느님의 백성 이스라엘에게 평화와 자비가 내리기를 빕니다.","이 법칙을 따라서 사는 사람들에게, 그리고 하느님의 백성 이스라엘에게 평화와 자비가 있기를 빕니다.","무릇 이 규례를 행하는 자에게와 하나님의 이스라엘에게 평강과 긍휼이 있을지어다","무릇 이 규례를 행하는 자에게와 하나님의 이스라엘에게 평강과 긍휼이 있을찌어다","이 원리를 따라 사는 여러분과 또 참으로 하나님을 따르는 각처의 그리스도인들에게 하나님의 자비와 평화가 있기를 빕니다.","Peace and mercy be to all who follow this rule and to the Israel of God.","And as many as walk according to this rule, peace be on them, and mercy, and upon the Israel of God.","Peace and mercy to all who follow this rule, even to the Israel of God.","Et quicumque hanc regulam secuti fuerint, pax super illos et misericordia et super Israel Dei.","וכל המהלכים כפי השורה הזאת שלום ורחמים עליהם ועל ישראל אשר לאלהים׃"],["55","6","17","앞으로는 아무도 나를 괴롭히지 마십시오. 나는 예수님의 낙인을 내 몸에 지니고 있습니다.","앞으로는 아무도 나를 괴롭히지 마십시오. 내 몸에는 예수의 낙인이 찍혀 있습니다.","이 후로는 누구든지 나를 괴롭게 하지 말라 내가 내 몸에 예수의 흔적을 지니고 있노라","이 후로는 누구든지 나를 괴롭게 말라 내가 내 몸에 예수의 흔적을 가졌노라","이제는 두 번 다시 이런 문제로 나를 괴롭히는 일이 없기를 바랍니다. 내 몸에는 예수를 욕하는 자들에게 맞은 상처가 남아 있습니다. 이것이야말로 내가 그리스도의 노예라는 표적입니다.","From now on, let no one make troubles for me; for I bear the marks of Jesus on my body.","From henceforth let no man trouble me: for I bear in my body the marks of the Lord Jesus.","Finally, let no one cause me trouble, for I bear on my body the marks of Jesus.","De cetero nemo mihi molestus sit; ego enim stigmata Iesu in super corpore meo porto.","מעתה איש אל ילאני עוד כי את חבורות האדון ישוע אני נשא בגויתי׃"],["55","6","18","형제 여러분, 우리 주 예수 그리스도의 은총이 여러분의 영과 함께하기를 빕니다. 아멘.","형제 여러분, 우리 주 예수 그리스도의 은총이 여러분의 마음에 내리기를 빕니다. 아멘.","형제들아 우리 주 예수 그리스도의 은혜가 너희 심령에 있을지어다 아멘","형제들아 우리 주 예수 그리스도의 은혜가 너희 심령에 있을찌어다 아멘","사랑하는 형제들이여, 우리 주 예수 그리스도의 은총이 여러분 모두와 함께 하기를 빕니다. 아멘.","The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with your spirit, brothers. Amen.","Brethren, the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with your spirit. Amen.","The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with your spirit, brothers. Amen.","Gratia Domini nostri Iesu Christi cum spiritu vestro, fratres. Amen.","חסד ישוע המשיח אדנינו יהי עם רוחכם אחי אמן׃"],["56","1","1","하느님의 뜻에 따라 그리스도 예수님의 사도가 된 바오로가 에페소에 있는 성도들과 그리스도 예수님 안에서 사는 신자들에게 인사합니다.","하느님의 뜻을 따라 그리스도 예수의 사도가 된 나 바울로가 그리스도 예수를 진실하게 믿는 (에페소) 성도들에게 이 편지를 씁니다.","하나님의 뜻으로 말미암아 그리스도 예수의 사도 된 바울은 에베소에 있는 성도들과 그리스도 예수 안에 있는 신실한 자들에게 편지하노니","하나님의 뜻으로 말미암아 그리스도 예수의 사도 된 바울은 에베소에 있는 성도들과 그리스도 예수 안의 신실한 자들에게 편지하노니","하나님의 뜻에 따라 그리스도 예수의 사도가 된 바울이 언제나 주께 충성을 다하는 에베소의 사랑하는 믿음의 식구들에게 이 편지를 씁니다.","Paul, an apostle of Christ Jesus by the will of God, to the holy ones who are [in Ephesus] faithful in Christ Jesus:","Paul, an apostle of Jesus Christ by the will of God, to the saints which are at Ephesus, and to the faithful in Christ Jesus:","Paul, an apostle of Christ Jesus by the will of God, To the saints in Ephesus, the faithful in Christ Jesus:","Paulus, apostolus Christi Iesu per voluntatem Dei, sanctis, qui sunt Ephesi, et fidelibus in Christo Iesu:","פולוס שליח ישוע המשיח ברצון אלהים אל הקדשים הנמצאים באפסוס ומאמינים במשיח ישוע׃"],["56","1","2","하느님 우리 아버지와 주 예수 그리스도에게서 은총과 평화가 여러분에게 내리기를 빕니다.","하느님 우리 아버지와 주 예수 그리스도께서 은총과 평화를 여러분에게 내려주시기를 빕니다.","하나님 우리 아버지와 주 예수 그리스도로부터 은혜와 평강이 너희에게 있을지어다","하나님 우리 아버지와 주 예수 그리스도로 좇아 은혜와 평강이 너희에게 있을찌어다","하나님 우리 아버지와 우리 주 예수 그리스도께서 은총과 평화를 여러분에게 내려 주시기를 빕니다.","grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.","Grace be to you, and peace, from God our Father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ.","Grace and peace to you from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.","gratia vobis et pax a Deo Patre nostro et Domino Iesu Christo.","חסד לכם ושלום מאת האלהים אבינו ואדנינו ישוע המשיח׃"],["56","1","3","우리 주 예수 그리스도의 아버지 하느님께서 찬미받으시기를 빕니다. 하느님께서는 그리스도 안에서 하늘의 온갖 영적인 복을 우리에게 내리셨습니다.","우리 주 예수 그리스도의 아버지 하느님께 찬양을 드립니다. 하느님께서는 그리스도를 통해서 하늘의 온갖 영적 축복을 우리에게 베풀어주셨습니다.","찬송하리로다 하나님 곧 우리 주 예수 그리스도의 아버지께서 그리스도 안에서 하늘에 속한 모든 신령한 복을 우리에게 주시되","찬송하리로다 하나님 곧 우리 주 예수 그리스도의 아버지께서 그리스도 안에서 하늘에 속한 모든 신령한 복으로 우리에게 복 주시되","우리 주 예수 그리스도의 아버지 되시는 하나님께 한없는 찬양을 드립니다. 하나님께서는 하늘의 온갖 영적인 복을 그리스도께 속한 우리에게 베풀어 주셨습니다.","Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us in Christ with every spiritual blessing in the heavens,","Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who hath blessed us with all spiritual blessings in heavenly places in Christ:","Praise be to the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us in the heavenly realms with every spiritual blessing in Christ.","Benedictus Deus et Pater Domini nostri Iesu Christi, qui benedixit nos in omni benedictione spiritali in caelestibus in Christo,","ברוך הוא האלהים ואבי אדנינו ישוע המשיח אשר ברכנו בכל ברכת רוח במרומים במשיח׃"],["56","1","4","세상 창조 이전에 그리스도 안에서 우리를 선택하시어, 우리가 당신 앞에서 거룩하고 흠 없는 사람이 되게 해 주셨습니다. 사랑으로","우리를 그리스도와 함께 살게 하시려고 천지 창조 이전에 이미 우리를 뽑아주시고 당신의 사랑으로 우리를 거룩하고 흠없는 자가 되게 하셔서 당신 앞에 설 수 있게 하셨습니다.","곧 창세 전에 그리스도 안에서 우리를 택하사 우리로 사랑 안에서 그 앞에 거룩하고 흠이 없게 하시려고","곧 창세 전에 그리스도 안에서 우리를 택하사 우리로 1)사랑 안에서 그 앞에 거룩하고 흠이 없게 하시려고 혹 4절에 「사랑 안에서」를 빼고 5절에 「사랑으로 예정하사」할 수 있음","하나님께서는 이 세상을 창조하시기 전에 이미 그리스도를 통해 이룰 일을 정하시고 우리를 하나님의 것으로 택하셨습니다. 그리고 우리를 친히 보시기에 한 점 흠이 없는 거룩한 사람으로 만들려고 작정하셨습니다. 하나님 앞에 서 있는 우리는 그분의 사랑 속에 싸여 있는 것입니다.","as he chose us in him, before the foundation of the world, to be holy and without blemish before him. In love","According as he hath chosen us in him before the foundation of the world, that we should be holy and without blame before him in love:","For he chose us in him before the creation of the world to be holy and blameless in his sight. In love","sicut elegit nos in ipso ante mundi constitutionem, ut essemus sancti et immaculati in conspectu eius in caritate;","כאשר בחר אתנו בו לפני מוסדות תבל להיות קדשים ותמימים לפניו באהבה׃"],["56","1","5","예수 그리스도를 통하여 우리를 당신의 자녀로 삼으시기로 미리 정하셨습니다. 이는 하느님의 그 좋으신 뜻에 따라 이루어진 것입니다.","하느님께서는 예수 그리스도를 통하여 우리를 당신의 자녀로 삼으시기로 미리 정하신 것입니다. 이것은 하느님께서 뜻하시고 기뻐하시는 일이었습니다.","그 기쁘신 뜻대로 우리를 예정하사 예수 그리스도로 말미암아 자기의 아들들이 되게 하셨으니","그 기쁘신 뜻대로 우리를 예정하사 예수 그리스도로 말미암아 자기의 아들들이 되게 하셨으니","하나님의 뜻은 예수 그리스도를 보내 우리 대신 죽게 하시어 우리를 하나님의 가족으로 삼아 주시는 일이었습니다. 그리고 하나님께서는 원하시는 대로 이 계획을 실천하셨습니다.","he destined us for adoption to himself through Jesus Christ, in accord with the favor of his will,","Having predestinated us unto the adoption of children by Jesus Christ to himself, according to the good pleasure of his will,","he predestined us to be adopted as his sons through Jesus Christ, in accordance with his pleasure and will--","qui praedestinavit nos in adoptionem filiorum per Iesum Christum in ipsum, secundum beneplacitum voluntatis suae,","יעדנו לו לבנים על ידי ישוע המשיח כחפץ רצונו׃"],["56","1","6","그리하여 사랑하시는 아드님 안에서 우리에게 베푸신 그 은총의 영광을 찬양하게 하셨습니다.","사랑하시는 아드님을 통하여 우리에게 거저 주신 이 영광스러운 은총에 대하여 우리는 하느님을 찬양할 수밖에 없습니다.","이는 그가 사랑하시는 자 안에서 우리에게 거저 주시는 바 그의 은혜의 영광을 찬송하게 하려는 것이라","이는 그의 사랑하시는 자 안에서 우리에게 거저 주시는바 그의 은혜의 영광을 찬미하게 하려는 것이라","놀라운 은총과 사랑을 우리에게 쏟아 부어 우리를 가장 사랑하시는 아들의 사람이 되게 하신 하나님께 찬양을 드립시다.","for the praise of the glory of his grace that he granted us in the beloved.","To the praise of the glory of his grace, wherein he hath made us accepted in the beloved.","to the praise of his glorious grace, which he has freely given us in the One he loves.","in laudem gloriae gratiae suae, in qua gratificavit nos in Dilecto,","לתהלת כבוד חסדו אשר נתן אתנו בידידו׃"],["56","1","7","우리는 그리스도 안에서, 그리스도의 피를 통하여 속량을, 곧 죄의 용서를 받았습니다. 이는 하느님의 그 풍성한 은총에 따라 이루어진 것입니다.","우리는 그리스도의 죽음으로 말미암아 죄를 용서받고 죄에서 구출되었습니다. 이렇게 하느님께서는 풍성한 은총으로","우리는 그리스도 안에서 그의 은혜의 풍성함을 따라 그의 피로 말미암아 속량 곧 죄 사함을 받았느니라","우리가 그리스도 안에서 그의 은혜의 풍성함을 따라 그의 피로 말미암아 구속 곧 죄 사함을 받았으니","하나님의 사랑은 너무도 커서 우리의 죄를 없애시려고 아들의 피를 흘리게까지 하셨습니다. 그리하여 우리는 이 아들을 통해서 구원을 얻은 것입니다.","In him we have redemption by his blood, the forgiveness of transgressions, in accord with the riches of his grace","In whom we have redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of sins, according to the riches of his grace;","In him we have redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of sins, in accordance with the riches of God's grace","in quo habemus redemptionem per sanguinem eius, remissionem peccatorum, secundum divitias gratiae eius,","אשר בו לנו הפדיום בדמו וסליחת הפשעים כרב חסדו׃"],["56","1","8","하느님께서는 이 은총을 우리에게 넘치도록 베푸셨습니다. 당신의 지혜와 통찰력을 다하시어,","우리에게 온갖 지혜와 총명을 넘치도록 주셔서","이는 그가 모든 지혜와 총명을 우리에게 넘치게 하사","이는 그가 모든 지혜와 총명으로 우리에게 넘치게 하사","그리고 하나님께서는 모든 지혜와 총명을 갖게 하는 풍성한 은혜를 주셨습니다.","that he lavished upon us. In all wisdom and insight,","Wherein he hath abounded toward us in all wisdom and prudence;","that he lavished on us with all wisdom and understanding.","quam superabundare fecit in nobis in omni sapientia et prudentia,","אשר השפיעו עלינו בכל חכמה והשכל׃"],["56","1","9","그리스도 안에서 미리 세우신 당신 선의에 따라 우리에게 당신 뜻의 신비를 알려 주셨습니다.","당신의 심오한 뜻을 알게 해주셨습니다. 이것은 그리스도를 시켜 이루시려고 하느님께서 미리 세워놓으셨던 계획대로 된 것으로서","그 뜻의 비밀을 우리에게 알리신 것이요 그의 기뻐하심을 따라 그리스도 안에서 때가 찬 경륜을 위하여 예정하신 것이니","그 뜻의 비밀을 우리에게 알리셨으니 곧 그 기쁘심을 따라 그리스도 안에서 때가 찬 경륜을 위하여 예정하신 것이니","그리스도를 보내신 심오한 뜻을 우리에게 알리셨습니다. 하나님이 은혜로 오래 전에 정하신 그 계획은","he has made known to us the mystery of his will in accord with his favor that he set forth in him","Having made known unto us the mystery of his will, according to his good pleasure which he hath purposed in himself:","And he made known to us the mystery of his will according to his good pleasure, which he purposed in Christ,","notum faciens nobis mysterium voluntatis suae, secundum beneplacitum eius, quod proposuit in eo,","והודיענו את סוד רצונו כעצתו היעוצה בו׃"],["56","1","10","그것은 때가 차면 하늘과 땅에 있는 만물을 그리스도 안에서 그분을 머리로 하여 한데 모으는 계획입니다.","때가 차면 이 계획이 이루어져서 하늘과 땅에 있는 모든 것이 그리스도를 머리로 하고 하나가 될 것입니다.","하늘에 있는 것이나 땅에 있는 것이 다 그리스도 안에서 통일되게 하려 하심이라","하늘에 있는 것이나 땅에 있는 것이 다 그리스도 안에서 통일되게 하려 하심이라","때가 차면 하나님께서 우리를 하늘에 있든지 땅에 있든지 사방에서 모아 영원히 그리스도 안에서 하나님과 함께 있게 하시려는 것입니다.","as a plan for the fullness of times, to sum up all things in Christ, in heaven and on earth.","That in the dispensation of the fulness of times he might gather together in one all things in Christ, both which are in heaven, and which are on earth; even in him:","to be put into effect when the times will have reached their fulfillment--to bring all things in heaven and on earth together under one head, even Christ.","in dispensationem plenitudinis temporum: recapitulare omnia in Christo, quae in caelis et quae in terra, in ipso;","על דבר הנהגתו במלאת העתים לקבץ את הכל תחת המשיח הן מה שבשמים הן מה שבארץ׃"],["56","1","11","만물을 당신의 결정과 뜻대로 이루시는 분의 의향에 따라 미리 정해진 우리도 그리스도 안에서 한몫을 얻게 되었습니다.","모든 것을 뜻하신 대로 이루시는 하느님께서 당신의 계획을 따라 우리를 미리 정하시고 택하셔서 그리스도를 믿게 하셨습니다.","모든 일을 그의 뜻의 결정대로 일하시는 이의 계획을 따라 우리가 예정을 입어 그 안에서 기업이 되었으니","모든 일을 그 마음의 원대로 역사하시는 자의 뜻을 따라 우리가 예정을 입어 그 안에서 기업이 되었으니","이처럼 모든 일을 뜻대로 이루시는 하나님의 그 계획에 따라 우리는 처음부터 하나님의 것으로 선택되었습니다.","In him we were also chosen, destined in accord with the purpose of the One who accomplishes all things according to the intention of his will,","In whom also we have obtained an inheritance, being predestinated according to the purpose of him who worketh all things after the counsel of his own will:","In him we were also chosen, having been predestined according to the plan of him who works out everything in conformity with the purpose of his will,","in quo etiam sorte vocati sumus, praedestinati secundum propositum eius, qui omnia operatur secundum consilium voluntatis suae,","אשר גם לקחנו בו נחלתנו אנחנו המיעדים לה מאז במחשבת פעל הכל כעצת חפצו׃"],["56","1","12","그리하여 하느님께서는 이미 그리스도께 희망을 둔 우리가 당신의 영광을 찬양하는 사람이 되게 하셨습니다.","그러므로 맨 먼저 그리스도께 희망을 둔 우리는 하느님의 영광을 찬양할 수밖에 없습니다.","이는 우리가 그리스도 안에서 전부터 바라던 그의 영광의 찬송이 되게 하려 하심이라","이는 그리스도 안에서 전부터 바라던 우리로 그의 영광의 찬송이 되게 하려 하심이라","하나님께서 이런 계획을 세우신 것은 우리가 하나님을 찬양하고, 우리를 위해 이와 같이 위대한 일을 하신 분이 하나님임을 깨달아 하나님께 영광을 돌리게 하시려는 것입니다.","so that we might exist for the praise of his glory, we who first hoped in Christ.","That we should be to the praise of his glory, who first trusted in Christ.","in order that we, who were the first to hope in Christ, might be for the praise of his glory.","ut simus in laudem gloriae eius, qui ante speravimus in Christo;","להיותנו לתהלת כבודו אנחנו אשר יחלנו אל המשיח מאז׃"],["56","1","13","여러분도 그리스도 안에서 진리의 말씀, 곧 여러분을 위한 구원의 복음을 듣고 그리스도 안에서 믿게 되었을 때, 약속된 성령의 인장을 받았습니다.","여러분도 그리스도를 통하여 여러분에게 구원을 가져다 주는 복음 곧 진리의 말씀을 듣고 믿어서 하느님의 백성이 되었습니다. 이것을 확인하는 표로 하느님께서는 여러분에게 약속하셨던 성령을 주셨습니다.","그 안에서 너희도 진리의 말씀 곧 너희의 구원의 복음을 듣고 그 안에서 또한 믿어 약속의 성령으로 인치심을 받았으니","그 안에서 너희도 2)진리의 말씀 곧 너희의 구원의 복음을 듣고 그 안에서 또한 믿어 3)약속의 성령으로 인치심을 받았으니 헬, 참혹 약속의 성령에","그리스도께서 구원의 성업을 이루어 놓으셨기 때문에 여러분은 구원을 얻는 복음을 듣고 그리스도를 믿게 되었으며, 그리스도의 사람이라는 표로 하나님께서는 여러분에게 약속하신 성령을 주셨습니다. 이 성령은 이미 오래 전에 우리 모든 그리스도인에게 오시기로 약속된 분입니다.","In him you also, who have heard the word of truth, the gospel of your salvation, and have believed in him, were sealed with the promised holy Spirit,","In whom ye also trusted, after that ye heard the word of truth, the gospel of your salvation: in whom also after that ye believed, ye were sealed with that holy Spirit of promise,","And you also were included in Christ when you heard the word of truth, the gospel of your salvation. Having believed, you were marked in him with a seal, the promised Holy Spirit,","in quo et vos cum audissetis verbum veritatis, evangelium salutis vestrae, in quo et credentes signati estis Spiritu promissionis Sancto,","ואשר גם אתם נטועים בו אחרי שמעכם דבר האמת את בשורת ישועתכם ואשר בו כשהאמנתם גם נחתמתם ברוח ההבטחה רוח הקדש׃"],["56","1","14","우리가 하느님의 소유로서 속량될 때까지, 이 성령께서 우리가 받을 상속의 보증이 되어 주시어, 하느님의 영광을 찬양하게 하십니다.","성령께서는 우리가 받을 상속을 보증해 주시고 하느님의 백성인 우리에게 완전한 자유를 누리게 하여주십니다. 그러므로 우리는 하느님의 영광을 찬양할 수밖에 없습니다.","이는 우리 기업의 보증이 되사 그 얻으신 것을 속량하시고 그의 영광을 찬송하게 하려 하심이라","이는 우리의 기업에 보증이 되사 그 얻으신 것을 구속하시고 그의 영광을 찬미하게 하려 하심이라","우리 속에 성령께서 임재하시는 것은 하나님께서 우리에게 약속한 모든 것을 실제로 주신다는 보증입니다. 그리고 우리에게 인쳐 주신 성령의 인은 하나님께서 이미 우리를 값을 치르고 사서 하나님의 것으로 만드셨음을 보증하는 것입니다. 이것이 바로 영광스러운 하나님을 찬양하는 또 하나의 이유입니다.","which is the first installment of our inheritance toward redemption as God’s possession, to the praise of his glory.","Which is the earnest of our inheritance until the redemption of the purchased possession, unto the praise of his glory.","who is a deposit guaranteeing our inheritance until the redemption of those who are God's possession--to the praise of his glory.","qui est arrabo hereditatis nostrae in redemptionem acquisitionis, in laudem gloriae ipsius.","כי זה ערבון ירשתנו לפדות לו עם סגלה לתהלת כבודו׃"],["56","1","15","그래서 나도 주 예수님에 대한 여러분의 믿음과 모든 성도를 향한 여러분의 사랑을 전해 듣고,","나는 여러분이 주 예수를 충실히 믿으며 모든 성도들을 사랑한다는 소식을 듣고","이로 말미암아 주 예수 안에서 너희 믿음과 모든 성도를 향한 사랑을 나도 듣고","이를 인하여 주 예수 안에서 너희 믿음과 모든 성도를 향한 사랑을 나도 듣고","이런 까닭에, 나는 여러분이 주 예수를 충실히 믿을 뿐 아니라 모든 그리스도인을 사랑하고 있다는 말씀을 듣고","Therefore, I, too, hearing of your faith in the Lord Jesus and of your love for all the holy ones,","Wherefore I also, after I heard of your faith in the Lord Jesus, and love unto all the saints,","For this reason, ever since I heard about your faith in the Lord Jesus and your love for all the saints,","Propterea et ego audiens fidem vestram, quae est in Domino Iesu, et dilectionem in omnes sanctos,","בעבור זאת גם אנכי אחרי שמעי אמונתכם באדנינו ישוע והאהבה אשר אהבתם את כל הקדשים׃"],["56","1","16","기도 중에 여러분을 기억하며 여러분 때문에 끊임없이 감사를 드립니다.","기도할 때마다 언제나 여러분을 기억하며 하느님께 감사를 드리고 있습니다.","내가 기도할 때에 기억하며 너희로 말미암아 감사하기를 그치지 아니하고","너희를 인하여 감사하기를 마지아니하고 내가 기도할 때에 너희를 말하노라","하나님께 한없는 감사를 드려 왔습니다. 그리고 우리 주 예수 그리스도의 하나님, 영광의 아버지께서 여러분에게 지혜를 주셔서 그리스도가 어떤 분이며 또 여러분을 위해 무엇을 해주셨는가를 분명히 알게 해주시기를 끊임없이 기도하고 있습니다.","do not cease giving thanks for you, remembering you in my prayers,","Cease not to give thanks for you, making mention of you in my prayers;","I have not stopped giving thanks for you, remembering you in my prayers.","non cesso gratias agens pro vobis memoriam faciens in orationibus meis,","לא אחדל מהודות בעבורכם בהזכירי אתכם בתפלתי׃"],["56","1","17","그 기도는 우리 주 예수 그리스도의 하느님, 영광의 아버지께서 여러분에게 지혜와 계시의 영을 주시어 여러분이 그분을 알게 되고,","나는 우리 주 예수 그리스도의 하느님, 영광스러운 아버지께서 여러분에게 영적인 지혜와 통찰력을 내려주셔서 하느님을 참으로 알게 하시고","우리 주 예수 그리스도의 하나님, 영광의 아버지께서 지혜와 계시의 영을 너희에게 주사 하나님을 알게 하시고","우리 주 예수 그리스도의 하나님, 영광의 아버지께서 지혜와 계시의 4)정신을 너희에게 주사 하나님을 알게 하시고 헬, 영","(16절에 포함되어 있음)","that the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of glory, may give you a spirit of wisdom and revelation resulting in knowledge of him.","That the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of glory, may give unto you the spirit of wisdom and revelation in the knowledge of him:","I keep asking that the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the glorious Father, may give you the Spirit of wisdom and revelation, so that you may know him better.","ut Deus Domini nostri Iesu Christi, Pater gloriae, det vobis Spiritum sapientiae et revelationis in agnitione eius,","כי יתן לכם אלהי אדנינו ישוע המשיח אבי הכבוד את רוח החכמה והחזון לדעת אתו׃"],["56","1","18","여러분 마음의 눈을 밝혀 주시어, 그분의 부르심으로 여러분이 지니게 된 희망이 어떠한 것인지, 성도들 사이에서 받게 될 그분 상속의 영광이 얼마나 풍성한지 여러분이 알게 되기를 비는 것입니다.","또 여러분의 마음의 눈을 밝혀주셔서 하느님의 백성이 된 여러분이 무엇을 바랄 것인지 또 성도들과 함께 여러분이 물려받을 축복이 얼마나 놀랍고 큰 것인지를 알게 하여주시기 바랍니다.","너희 마음의 눈을 밝히사 그의 부르심의 소망이 무엇이며 성도 안에서 그 기업의 영광의 풍성함이 무엇이며","너희 마음눈을 밝히사 그의 부르심의 소망이 무엇이며 성도 안에서 그 기업의 영광의 풍성이 무엇이며","나는 또 하나님께서 여러분의 마음의 눈을 밝히시길 바랍니다. 그래서 하나님께서 여러분을 불러 장차 나누어 주시려는 것이 무엇인지 알게 되기를 기도합니다. 그리고 우리를 그리스도의 것으로 하나님께 드렸기 때문에 하나님께서 우리의 삶을 풍부하게 해주셨다는 것을 알고","May the eyes of [your] hearts be enlightened, that you may know what is the hope that belongs to his call, what are the riches of glory in his inheritance among the holy ones,","The eyes of your understanding being enlightened; that ye may know what is the hope of his calling, and what the riches of the glory of his inheritance in the saints,","I pray also that the eyes of your heart may be enlightened in order that you may know the hope to which he has called you, the riches of his glorious inheritance in the saints,","illuminatos oculos cordis vestri, ut sciatis quae sit spes vocationis eius, quae divitiae gloriae hereditatis eius in sanctis,","ויאר עיני לבבכם למען תדעו אי זו היא תוחלת קריאתו ואי זה הוא עשר כבוד נחלתו בקדשים׃"],["56","1","19","또 우리 믿는 이들을 위한 그분의 힘이 얼마나 엄청나게 큰지를 그분의 강한 능력의 활동으로 알게 되기를 비는 것입니다.","그리고 우리 믿는 사람들 속에서 강한 힘으로 활동하시는 하느님의 능력이 얼마나 위대한지를 여러분에게 알게 하여주시기를 빕니다.","그의 힘의 위력으로 역사하심을 따라 믿는 우리에게 베푸신 능력의 지극히 크심이 어떠한 것을 너희로 알게 하시기를 구하노라","그의 힘의 강력으로 역사하심을 따라 믿는 우리에게 베푸신 능력의 지극히 크심이 어떤 것을 너희로 알게 하시기를 구하노라","또 믿음을 가진 사람을 도와주시는 하나님의 능력이 얼마나 위대한가를 깨달을 수 있게 해주시기를 기도합니다.","and what is the surpassing greatness of his power for us who believe, in accord with the exercise of his great might,","And what is the exceeding greatness of his power to us-ward who believe, according to the working of his mighty power,","and his incomparably great power for us who believe. That power is like the working of his mighty strength,","et quae sit supereminens magnitudo virtutis eius in nos, qui credimus, secundum operationem potentiae virtutis eius,","ואי זה הוא יתרון גדלת גבורתו בנו המאמינים כפי פעלת עצת כחו׃"],["56","1","20","하느님께서는 그리스도 안에서 그 능력을 펼치시어, 그분을 죽은 이들 가운데에서 일으키시고 하늘에 올리시어 당신 오른쪽에 앉히셨습니다.","1)하느님께서는 그 능력을 떨치시어 그리스도를 죽은 자들 가운데서 다시 살려내시고 하늘 나라에 불러 올리셔서 당신의 오른편에 앉히시고 시편 110:1.","그의 능력이 그리스도 안에서 역사하사 죽은 자들 가운데서 다시 살리시고 하늘에서 자기의 오른편에 앉히사","그 능력이 그리스도 안에서 역사하사 죽은 자들 가운데서 다시 살리시고 하늘에서 자기의 오른편에 앉히사","이 위대한 능력이 ㄱ) 그리스도를 죽은 자 가운데서 살리셔서 어떤 왕이나 지배자나 권력자나 지도자보다도 훨씬 높은 하늘의 하나님 오른편에 앉게 하신 것입니다. 참으로 그리스도께서 받으신 영예는 이 세상뿐만 아니라 오는 세상에서도 어느 누구에 견줄 수 없을 만큼 영광스러운 것입니다. (ㄱ. 시110:1)","which he worked in Christ, raising him from the dead and seating him at his right hand in the heavens,","Which he wrought in Christ, when he raised him from the dead, and set him at his own right hand in the heavenly places,","which he exerted in Christ when he raised him from the dead and seated him at his right hand in the heavenly realms,","quam operatus est in Christo, suscitans illum a mortuis et constituens ad dexteram suam in caelestibus","אשר פעל במשיח בהעיר אתו מן המתים ויושיבנו לימינו במרומים׃"],["56","1","21","모든 권세와 권력과 권능과 주권 위에, 그리고 현세만이 아니라 내세에서도 불릴 모든 이름 위에 뛰어나게 하신 것입니다.","권세와 세력과 능력과 주권의 여러 천신들을 지배하게 하시고 또 현세와 내세의 모든 권력자들 위에 올려놓으셨습니다.","모든 통치와 권세와 능력과 주권과 이 세상뿐 아니라 오는 세상에 일컫는 모든 이름 위에 뛰어나게 하시고","모든 정사와 권세와 능력과 주관하는 자와 이 세상뿐 아니라 오는 세상에 일컫는 모든 이름 위에 뛰어나게 하시고","(20절에 포함되어 있음)","far above every principality, authority, power, and dominion, and every name that is named not only in this age but also in the one to come.","Far above all principality, and power, and might, and dominion, and every name that is named, not only in this world, but also in that which is to come:","far above all rule and authority, power and dominion, and every title that can be given, not only in the present age but also in the one to come.","supra omnem principatum et potestatem et virtutem et dominationem et omne nomen, quod nominatur non solum in hoc saeculo sed et in futuro;","ממעל לכל שררה ושלטן וגבורה וממשלה וכל הנקרא בשם לא לבד בעולם הזה כי אם גם בעולם הבא׃"],["56","1","22","또한 만물을 그리스도의 발아래 굴복시키시고, 만물 위에 계신 그분을 교회에 머리로 주셨습니다.","2)하느님께서는 만물을 그리스도의 발 아래 굴복시키셨으며 그분을 교회의 머리로 삼으셔서 모든 것을 지배하게 하셨습니다. 시편 8:6.","또 만물을 그의 발 아래에 복종하게 하시고 그를 만물 위에 교회의 머리로 삼으셨느니라","또 만물을 그 발 아래 복종하게 하시고 그를 만물 위에 교회의 머리로 주셨느니라","ㄴ) 하나님께서는 만물을 그리스도의 발 아래 굴복시키고 그리스도를 교회의 머리가 되게 하셨습니다.","And he put all things beneath his feet and gave him as head over all things to the church,","And hath put all things under his feet, and gave him to be the head over all things to the church,","And God placed all things under his feet and appointed him to be head over everything for the church,","et omnia subiecit sub pedibus eius et ipsum dedit caput supra omnia ecclesiae,","וישת כל תחת רגליו ויתן אתו לראש על הכל אל העדה׃"],["56","1","23","교회는 그리스도의 몸으로서, 모든 면에서 만물을 충만케 하시는 그리스도로 충만해 있습니다.","교회는 그리스도의 몸이며 만물을 완성하시는 분의 계획이 그 안에서 완전히 이루어집니다.","교회는 그의 몸이니 만물 안에서 만물을 충만하게 하시는 이의 충만함이니라","교회는 그의 몸이니 만물 안에서 만물을 충만케 하시는 자의 충만이니라","교회는 그리스도의 몸이며 만물을 만드시고 충만하게 하시는 그리스도께서 임재하시는 곳입니다.","which is his body, the fullness of the one who fills all things in every way.","Which is his body, the fulness of him that filleth all in all.","which is his body, the fullness of him who fills everything in every way.","quae est corpus ipsius, plenitudo eius, qui omnia in omnibus adimpletur.","אשר היא גופו מלוא הממלא את הכל בכל׃"],["56","2","1","여러분도 전에는 잘못과 죄를 저질러 죽었던 사람입니다.","여러분도 전에는 죄와 잘못을 저질러서 죽었던 사람들입니다.","그는 허물과 죄로 죽었던 너희를 살리셨도다","너희의 허물과 죄로 죽었던 너희를 살리셨도다","여러분도 전에는 하나님의 저주 아래 있었던 사람들입니다. 죄에서 헤어나지 못해 영원한 파멸을 코앞에 두고 살던 사람들입니다.","You were dead in your transgressions and sins","And you hath he quickened, who were dead in trespasses and sins;","As for you, you were dead in your transgressions and sins,","Et vos, cum essetis mortui de lictis et peccatis vestris,","גם אתכם המתים לפנים בפשעיכם וחטאתיכם׃"],["56","2","2","그 안에서 여러분은 한때 이 세상의 풍조에 따라, 공중을 다스리는 지배자, 곧 지금도 순종하지 않는 자들 안에서 작용하는 영을 따라 살았습니다.","여러분이 죄에 얽매여 있던 때에는 이 세상 풍조를 따라 살았고 허공을 다스리는 세력의 두목이 지시하는 대로 살았으며 오늘날 하느님을 거역하는 자들을 조종하는 악령의 지시대로 살았습니다.","그 때에 너희는 그 가운데서 행하여 이 세상 풍조를 따르고 공중의 권세 잡은 자를 따랐으니 곧 지금 불순종의 아들들 가운데서 역사하는 영이라","그 때에 너희가 그 가운데서 행하여 이 1)세상 풍속을 좇고 공중의 권세 잡은 자를 따랐으니 곧 지금 불순종의 아들들 가운데서 역사하는 영이라 헬, 세대","세상 사람들과 마찬가지로 세속적인 풍조에 젖어 살았고 마음에는 죄악만이 가득 찼습니다. 공중을 다스리는 세력자인 사단에게 붙잡혀 그가 시키는 대로 따라 할뿐이었습니다. 이 사단은 지금도 주님을 대항하는 자들의 마음속에서 활동하고 있습니다.","in which you once lived following the age of this world, following the ruler of the power of the air, the spirit that is now at work in the disobedient.","Wherein in time past ye walked according to the course of this world, according to the prince of the power of the air, the spirit that now worketh in the children of disobedience:","in which you used to live when you followed the ways of this world and of the ruler of the kingdom of the air, the spirit who is now at work in those who are disobedient.","in qui bus aliquando ambulastis secundum saeculum mundi huius, secundum principem potestatis aeris, spiritus, qui nunc operatur in filios diffidentiae;","אשר התהלכתם בהם לפי דור העולם הזה כרצון שר ממשלת האויר והוא הרוח הפעל כעת בבני המרי׃"],["56","2","3","우리도 다 한때 그들 가운데에서 우리 육의 욕망에 이끌려 살면서, 육과 감각이 원하는 것을 따랐습니다. 그리하여 우리도 본디 다른 사람들과 마찬가지로 하느님의 진노를 살 수밖에 없었습니다.","실상 우리도 다 그들과 같아서 전에는 본능적인 욕망을 따라서 육정에 끌려 살았던 사람들로서 본래 다른 사람들과 마찬가지로 하느님의 진노를 살 수밖에 없었던 것입니다.","전에는 우리도 다 그 가운데서 우리 육체의 욕심을 따라 지내며 육체와 마음의 원하는 것을 하여 다른 이들과 같이 본질상 진노의 자녀이었더니","전에는 우리도 다 그 가운데서 우리 육체의 욕심을 따라 지내며 육체와 마음의 원하는 것을 하여 다른이들과 같이 본질상 진노의 자녀이었더니","우리 역시 과거에는 그들과 다를 게 없는 사람들이었습니다. 우리의 생활은 곧 우리가 품고 있는 악을 나타내는 것이었습니다. 우리의 욕망, 아니 악한 생각이 이끌어 가는 대로 우리는 악한 일만 저질렀습니다. 날 때부터 육신이 원하는 대로 행하여 악한 데로만 달려 나갔습니다. 다른 사람들과 마찬가지로 하나님의 진노를 면하지 못할 처지였습니다.","All of us once lived among them in the desires of our flesh, following the wishes of the flesh and the impulses, and we were by nature children of wrath, like the rest.","Among whom also we all had our conversation in times past in the lusts of our flesh, fulfilling the desires of the flesh and of the mind; and were by nature the children of wrath, even as others.","All of us also lived among them at one time, gratifying the cravings of our sinful nature and following its desires and thoughts. Like the rest, we were by nature objects of wrath.","in quibus et nos omnes aliquando conversati sumus in concupiscentiis carnis nostrae, facientes voluntates carnis et cogitationum, et eramus natura filii irae, sicut et ceteri.","וגם אנחנו כלנו בתוכם הלכנו לפנים בתאות הבשר לעשות חפצי בשרנו ומחשבותינו ונהי אך בני רגז בטבענו כאשר בני אדם׃"],["56","2","4","그러나 자비가 풍성하신 하느님께서는 우리를 사랑하신 그 큰 사랑으로,","그러나 한없이 자비로우신 하느님께서는 그 크신 사랑으로 우리를 사랑하셔서","긍휼이 풍성하신 하나님이 우리를 사랑하신 그 큰 사랑을 인하여","긍휼에 풍성하신 하나님이 우리를 사랑하신 그 큰 사랑을 인하여","그러나 더없이 자비로운 하나님께서는 크나큰 사랑을 베풀어","But God, who is rich in mercy, because of the great love he had for us,","But God, who is rich in mercy, for his great love wherewith he loved us,","But because of his great love for us, God, who is rich in mercy,","Deus autem, qui dives est in misericordia, propter nimiam caritatem suam, qua dilexit nos,","אבל האלהים המלא רחמים ברב אהבתו אשר אהב אתנו׃"],["56","2","5","잘못을 저질러 죽었던 우리를 그리스도와 함께 살리셨습니다. ─ 여러분은 이렇게 은총으로 구원을 받은 것입니다. ─","잘못을 저지르고 죽었던 우리를 그리스도와 함께 다시 살려주셨습니다. 여러분은 이렇듯 은총으로 구원을 받았습니다.","허물로 죽은 우리를 그리스도와 함께 살리셨고 (너희는 은혜로 구원을 받은 것이라)","허물로 죽은 우리를 그리스도와 함께 살리셨고 (너희가 은혜로 구원을 얻은 것이라)","죄 때문에 죽었던 우리를 그리스도를 죽은 자 가운데서 다시 살리신 것처럼 다시 살려 주셨습니다. 오로지 하나님의 넘치는 은총으로 우리가 구원을 받은 것입니다.","even when we were dead in our transgressions, brought us to life with Christ (by grace you have been saved),","Even when we were dead in sins, hath quickened us together with Christ, (by grace ye are saved;)","made us alive with Christ even when we were dead in transgressions--it is by grace you have been saved.","et cum essemus mortui peccatis, convivificavit nos Christo - gratia estis salvati -","אחרי היותנו מתים בפשעים החינו עם המשיח בחסד נושעתם׃"],["56","2","6","하느님께서는 그리스도 예수님 안에서 우리를 그분과 함께 일으키시고 그분과 함께 하늘에 앉히셨습니다.","하느님께서는 우리를 그리스도 예수와 함께 살리셔서 하늘에서도 한자리에 앉게 하여주셨습니다.","또 함께 일으키사 그리스도 예수 안에서 함께 하늘에 앉히시니","또 함께 일으키사 그리스도 예수 안에서 함께 하늘에 앉히시니","그리고 그리스도를 그렇게 하셨듯이 우리를 무덤 속에서 일으켜 영광가운데로 인도하였고 그리스도와 한자리에 앉게 하셨습니다. 모두가 그리스도 예수께서 이루어 놓으신 일에서 비롯되었습니다.","raised us up with him, and seated us with him in the heavens in Christ Jesus,","And hath raised us up together, and made us sit together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus:","And God raised us up with Christ and seated us with him in the heavenly realms in Christ Jesus,","et conresuscitavit et consedere fecit in caelestibus in Christo Iesu,","ויעירנו אתו אף הושיבנו במרומים במשיח ישוע׃"],["56","2","7","하느님께서는 이렇게 그리스도 예수님 안에서 우리에게 베푸신 호의로, 당신의 은총이 얼마나 엄청나게 풍성한지를 앞으로 올 모든 시대에 보여 주려고 하셨습니다.","하느님께서는 당신의 은총이 얼마나 풍성한지를 앞으로 올 모든 세대에 보여주시려고 그리스도 예수를 통하여 이렇게 우리에게 자비를 베풀어주셨습니다.","이는 그리스도 예수 안에서 우리에게 자비하심으로써 그 은혜의 지극히 풍성함을 오는 여러 세대에 나타내려 하심이라","이는 그리스도 예수 안에서 우리에게 자비하심으로써 그 은혜의 지극히 풍성함을 오는 여러 세대에 나타내려 하심이니라","하나님께서 그리스도 예수를 통해서 이루신 이 모든 일은 우리에게 하나님의 은혜가 얼마나 풍성한가를 깨닫게 하였습니다. 앞으로 오는 모든 세대에게 알리려고 그리스도 예수를 통해서 우리에게 이처럼 은총을 베푸신 것입니다.","that in the ages to come he might show the immeasurable riches of his grace in his kindness to us in Christ Jesus.","That in the ages to come he might shew the exceeding riches of his grace in his kindness toward us through Christ Jesus.","in order that in the coming ages he might show the incomparable riches of his grace, expressed in his kindness to us in Christ Jesus.","ut ostenderet in saeculis supervenientibus abundantes divitias gratiae suae in bonitate super nos in Christo Iesu.","להראות בדרות הבאים את גדלת עשר חסדו בטובתו עלינו במשיח ישוע׃"],["56","2","8","여러분은 믿음을 통하여 은총으로 구원을 받았습니다. 이는 여러분에게서 나온 것이 아니라 하느님의 선물입니다.","여러분이 구원을 받은 것은 하느님의 은총을 입고 그리스도를 믿어서 된 것이지 여러분 자신의 힘으로 된 것이 아닙니다. 이 구원이야말로 하느님께서 주신 선물입니다.","너희는 그 은혜에 의하여 믿음으로 말미암아 구원을 받았으니 이것은 너희에게서 난 것이 아니요 하나님의 선물이라","너희가 그 은혜를 인하여 믿음으로 말미암아 구원을 얻었나니 이것이 너희에게서 난 것이 아니요 하나님의 선물이라","여러분이 그리스도를 믿음으로 구원받은 것은 순전히 하나님의 은혜입니다. 여러분이 그리스도를 믿게 된 것조차도 여러분의 자발적인 의지로 된 것이 아니라 하나님께서 주신 선물인 것입니다.","For by grace you have been saved through faith, and this is not from you; it is the gift of God;","For by grace are ye saved through faith; and that not of yourselves: it is the gift of God:","For it is by grace you have been saved, through faith--and this not from yourselves, it is the gift of God--","Gratia enim estis salvati per fidem; et hoc non ex vobis, Dei donum est:","כי בחסד נושעתם על ידי האמונה ולא מידכם היתה זאת כי מתת אלהים היא׃"],["56","2","9","인간의 행위에서 나오는 것이 아니니 아무도 자기 자랑을 할 수 없습니다.","이렇게 구원은 사람의 공로로 이루어지는 것이 아니기 때문에 아무도 자기 자랑을 할 수 없을 것입니다.","행위에서 난 것이 아니니 이는 누구든지 자랑하지 못하게 함이라","행위에서 난 것이 아니니 이는 누구든지 자랑치 못하게 함이니라","이렇게 구원은 우리가 선한 일을 하여 받은 보수가 아니므로 아무도 자신의 선행을 내세워 자랑할 수 없습니다.","it is not from works, so no one may boast.","Not of works, lest any man should boast.","not by works, so that no one can boast.","non ex operibus, ut ne quis glorietur.","לא מתוך המעשים שלא יתהלל איש׃"],["56","2","10","우리는 하느님의 작품입니다. 우리는 선행을 하도록 그리스도 예수님 안에서 창조되었습니다. 하느님께서는 우리가 선행을 하며 살아가도록 그 선행을 미리 준비하셨습니다.","우리는 하느님의 작품입니다. 곧 하느님께서 미리 마련하신 대로 선한 생활을 하도록 그리스도 예수를 통해서 창조하신 작품입니다.","우리는 그가 만드신 바라 그리스도 예수 안에서 선한 일을 위하여 지으심을 받은 자니 이 일은 하나님이 전에 예비하사 우리로 그 가운데서 행하게 하려 하심이니라","우리는 그의 만드신바라 그리스도 예수 안에서 선한 일을 위하여 지으심을 받은 자니 이 일은 하나님이 전에 예비하사 우리로 그 가운데서 행하게 하려 하심이니라","우리를 이렇게 만들어 주고 그리스도 예수로 인해 새롭게 시작된 생활을 하게 하신 분은 하나님이십니다. 하나님께서는 이미 오래 전에 우리가 서로 남을 도우면서 살도록 새로운 일을 계획하신 것입니다.","For we are his handiwork, created in Christ Jesus for the good works that God has prepared in advance, that we should live in them.","For we are his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good works, which God hath before ordained that we should walk in them.","For we are God's workmanship, created in Christ Jesus to do good works, which God prepared in advance for us to do.","Ipsius enim sumus factura, creati in Christo Iesu in opera bona, quae praeparavit Deus, ut in illis ambulemus.","כי פעל אלהים אנחנו נבראים במשיח ישוע למעשים טובים אשר הכין האלהים מקדם למען נתהלך בהם׃"],["56","2","11","그러므로 이민족으로 태어난 여러분은 한때, 사람 손으로 몸에다 행하는 이른바 ‘할례를 받은 자들’에게 ‘할례 받지 않은 자들’이라고 불렸다는 사실을 기억하십시오.","이방인으로 태어난 여러분, 지난 날을 생각해 보십시오. 여러분은 단지 몸에다 사람의 손으로 행하는 할례를 받은 소위 할례자들로부터 할례받지 않은 사람들이라는 말을 들었습니다.","그러므로 생각하라 너희는 그 때에 육체로는 이방인이요 손으로 육체에 행한 할례를 받은 무리라 칭하는 자들로부터 할례를 받지 않은 무리라 칭함을 받는 자들이라","그러므로 생각하라 너희는 그 때에 육체로 이방인이요 손으로 육체에 행한 할례당이라 칭하는 자들에게 무할례당이라 칭함을 받는 자들이라","여러분은 전에는 다만 이교도에 불과하였습니다. 게다가 유대 사람들로부터 하나님을 믿지 않는 더러운 자라고 손가락질을 당하였습니다. 그러한 사실을 결코 잊지 마십시오. 그러나 그렇게 말하는 유대인들도 아직 더러운 상태에 있기는 마찬가지입니다. 비록 하나님을 섬기는 표로 할례를 받고 경건하게 의식을 행하고 예배를 드린다고 하지만","Therefore, remember that at one time you, Gentiles in the flesh, called the uncircumcision by those called the circumcision, which is done in the flesh by human hands,","Wherefore remember, that ye being in time past Gentiles in the flesh, who are called Uncircumcision by that which is called the Circumcision in the flesh made by hands;","Therefore, remember that formerly you who are Gentiles by birth and called \"uncircumcised\" by those who call themselves \"the circumcision\" (that done in the body by the hands of men)--","Propter quod memores estote, quod aliquando vos gentes in carne, qui dicimini praeputium ab ea, quae dicitur circumcisio in carne manufacta,","על כן זכרו כי אתם הגוים בבשר הנקראים ערלים בפי הנקראים בני המילה שהיא מעשה ידים בבשר׃"],["56","2","12","그때에는 여러분이 그리스도와 관계가 없었고, 이스라엘 공동체에서 멀리 떨어져 있었으며, 약속의 계약과도 무관하였고, 이 세상에서 아무 희망도 가지지 못한 채 하느님 없이 살았다는 사실을 기억하십시오.","그 때 여러분은 그리스도와는 아무 관계도 없었고 이스라엘 시민권도 없는 외국인으로서 약속의 계약에서 제외된 채 이 세상에서 희망도 하느님도 없이 살아온 사람들이었습니다.","그 때에 너희는 그리스도 밖에 있었고 이스라엘 나라 밖의 사람이라 약속의 언약들에 대하여는 외인이요 세상에서 소망이 없고 하나님도 없는 자이더니","그 때에 너희는 그리스도 밖에 있었고 이스라엘 나라 밖의 사람이라 약속의 언약들에 대하여 외인이요 세상에서 소망이 없고 하나님도 없는 자이더니","여러분이 그리스도를 전혀 모르던 시절을 생각하여 보십시오. 그때 여러분은 하나님의 자녀들과 원수가 되어 있었으므로 하나님께서는 여러분에게 아무런 도움을 약속하지 않으셨습니다. 여러분은 하나님도 모르고 희망도 없는 멸망할 수밖에 없는 존재였습니다.","were at that time without Christ, alienated from the community of Israel and strangers to the covenants of promise, without hope and without God in the world.","That at that time ye were without Christ, being aliens from the commonwealth of Israel, and strangers from the covenants of promise, having no hope, and without God in the world:","remember that at that time you were separate from Christ, excluded from citizenship in Israel and foreigners to the covenants of the promise, without hope and without God in the world.","quia eratis illo in tempore sine Christo, alienati a conversatione Israel et extranei testamentorum promissionis, spem non habentes et sine Deo in mundo.","כי אתם בעת ההיא הייתם בלי משיח מוזרים לעדת ישראל ונכרים לבריתות ההבטחה באין תקוה ובאין לכם אלהים בעולם׃"],["56","2","13","그러나 이제, 한때 멀리 있던 여러분이 그리스도 예수님 안에서 그리스도의 피로 하느님과 가까워졌습니다.","이렇게 여러분이 전에는 하느님과 멀리 떨어져 있었지만 이제는 그리스도께서 피를 흘리심으로써 그리스도 예수로 말미암아 하느님과 가까워졌습니다.","이제는 전에 멀리 있던 너희가 그리스도 예수 안에서 그리스도의 피로 가까워졌느니라","이제는 전에 멀리 있던 너희가 그리스도 예수 안에서 그리스도의 피로 가까와졌느니라","그러나 지금 여러분은 그리스도 예수께 속한 사람들입니다. 비록 전에는 하나님과 멀리 떨어져 있었으나 그리스도 예수께서 피를 흘려 이루신 그 구원의 성업으로 이제는 하나님과 가까워졌습니다.","But now in Christ Jesus you who once were far off have become near by the blood of Christ.","But now in Christ Jesus ye who sometimes were far off are made nigh by the blood of Christ.","But now in Christ Jesus you who once were far away have been brought near through the blood of Christ.","Nunc autem in Christo Iesu vos, qui aliquando eratis longe, facti estis prope in sanguine Christi.","ועתה בישוע המשיח אתם הרחוקים מאז הייתם קרובים בדם המשיח׃"],["56","2","14","그리스도는 우리의 평화이십니다. 그분께서는 당신의 몸으로 유다인과 이민족을 하나로 만드시고 이 둘을 가르는 장벽인 적개심을 허무셨습니다.","그리스도야말로 우리의 평화이십니다. 그분은 자신의 몸을 바쳐서 유다인과 이방인이 서로 원수가 되어 갈리게 했던 담을 헐어버리시고 그들을 화해시켜 하나로 만드시고","그는 우리의 화평이신지라 둘로 하나를 만드사 원수 된 것 곧 중간에 막힌 담을 자기 육체로 허시고","그는 우리의 화평이신지라 둘로 하나를 만드사 중간에 막힌 담을 허시고","그리스도는 우리의 평화이십니다. 그분은 우리 유대 사람과 여러분 이방 사람들을 한 가족으로 만들고 우리 사이를 갈라 놓았던 벽을 허물어뜨리셨습니다.","For he is our peace, he who made both one and broke down the dividing wall of enmity, through his flesh,","For he is our peace, who hath made both one, and hath broken down the middle wall of partition between us;","For he himself is our peace, who has made the two one and has destroyed the barrier, the dividing wall of hostility,","Ipse est enim pax nostra, qui fecit utraque unum et medium parietem maceriae solvit, inimicitiam, in carne sua,","כי הוא שלומנו אשר עשה השנים לאחד והרס מחיצת הגדר׃"],["56","2","15","또 그 모든 계명과 조문과 함께 율법을 폐지하셨습니다. 그렇게 하여 당신 안에서 두 인간을 하나의 새 인간으로 창조하시어 평화를 이룩하시고,","율법 조문과 규정을 모두 폐지하셨습니다. 그리스도께서는 자신을 희생하여 유다인과 이방인을 하나의 새 민족으로 만들어 평화를 이룩하시고","법조문으로 된 계명의 율법을 폐하셨으니 이는 이 둘로 자기 안에서 한 새 사람을 지어 화평하게 하시고","원수 된 것 곧 의문에 속한 계명의 율법을 자기 육체로 폐하셨으니 이는 이 둘로 자기의 안에서 한 새 사람을 지어 화평하게 하시고","그분은 자신의 죽음으로 우리 사이의 강한 적대감을 제거해 주신 것입니다. 그 적대감은 유대인만을 특별히 사랑하고 이방인들을 배제시킨 율법 때문에 생겨났습니다. 그래서 그리스도께서 이 율법 전체를 쓸어 없애고자 죽으신 것입니다. 그리스도께서는 그때까지 서로 대립해 있던 두 무리를 한데 융화시켜 자기 몸의 지체로 삼으심으로써 하나의 새 인간을 만드셨습니다. 드디어 평화를 이룩하신 것입니다.","abolishing the law with its commandments and legal claims, that he might create in himself one new person in place of the two, thus establishing peace,","Having abolished in his flesh the enmity, even the law of commandments contained in ordinances; for to make in himself of twain one new man, so making peace;","by abolishing in his flesh the law with its commandments and regulations. His purpose was to create in himself one new man out of the two, thus making peace,","legem mandatorum in decretis evacuans, ut duos condat in semetipso in unum novum hominem, faciens pacem,","בבטלו האיבה בבשרו את תורת המצות בגזרותיהן לברא בנפשו את השנים לאיש אחד חדש ויעש שלום׃"],["56","2","16","십자가를 통하여 양쪽을 한 몸 안에서 하느님과 화해시키시어, 그 적개심을 당신 안에서 없애셨습니다.","또 십자가에서 죽으심으로써 둘을 한 몸으로 만드셔서 하느님과 화해시키시고 원수되었던 모든 요소를 없이하셨습니다.","또 십자가로 이 둘을 한 몸으로 하나님과 화목하게 하려 하심이라 원수 된 것을 십자가로 소멸하시고","또 십자가로 이 둘을 한 몸으로 하나님과 화목하게 하려 하심이라 원수 된것을 십자가로 소멸하시고","우리는 이제 한 몸이 되었습니다. 서로간의 분노는 사라져 버리고 양쪽이 다 하나님과 화해하였습니다. 불화는 십자가에서 드디어 끝이 난 것입니다.","and might reconcile both with God, in one body, through the cross, putting that enmity to death by it.","And that he might reconcile both unto God in one body by the cross, having slain the enmity thereby:","and in this one body to reconcile both of them to God through the cross, by which he put to death their hostility.","et reconciliet ambos in uno corpore Deo per crucem, interficiens inimicitiam in semetipso.","וירצה את שניהם בגוף אחד לאלהים על ידי צליבתו בהמיתו בנפשו את האיבה׃"],["56","2","17","이렇게 그리스도께서는 세상에 오시어, 멀리 있던 여러분에게도 평화를 선포하시고 가까이 있던 이들에게도 평화를 선포하셨습니다.","1)이렇게 그리스도께서는 세상에 오셔서 하느님과 멀리 떨어져 있던 여러분에게나 가까이 있던 유다인들에게나 다 같이 평화의 기쁜 소식을 전해 주셨습니다. 칠십인역 이사 57:19, 52:7; 즈가 9:10.","또 오셔서 먼 데 있는 너희에게 평안을 전하시고 가까운 데 있는 자들에게 평안을 전하셨으니","또 오셔서 먼데 있는 너희에게 평안을 전하고 가까운데 있는 자들에게 평안을 전하셨으니","ㄱ) 그리스도께서는 하나님과 멀리 떨어져 있던 여러분 이방 사람들에게나 가까이 있던 우리 유대 사람들에게나 다 같이 평화의 복음을 가져다 주셨습니다. (ㄱ. 70인역 사57:19)","He came and preached peace to you who were far off and peace to those who were near,","And came and preached peace to you which were afar off, and to them that were nigh.","He came and preached peace to you who were far away and peace to those who were near.","Et veniens evangelizavit pacem vobis, qui longe fuistis, et pacem his, qui prope;","ויבא ויבשר שלום לכם הרחוקים והקרובים׃"],["56","2","18","그래서 그분을 통하여 우리 양쪽이 한 성령 안에서 아버지께 나아가게 되었습니다.","그래서 이방인 여러분과 우리 유다인들은 모두 그리스도로 말미암아 같은 성령을 받아 아버지께로 가까이 나아가게 되었습니다.","이는 그로 말미암아 우리 둘이 한 성령 안에서 아버지께 나아감을 얻게 하려 하심이라","이는 저로 말미암아 우리 둘이 한 성령 안에서 아버지께 나아감을 얻게 하려 하심이라","이제 우리는 유대 사람이든 이방 사람이든 모두 그리스도께서 베푸신 그 구원의 성업에 따라 성령의 도움을 받아 아버지 하나님께 나아갈 수 있습니다.","for through him we both have access in one Spirit to the Father.","For through him we both have access by one Spirit unto the Father.","For through him we both have access to the Father by one Spirit.","quoniam per ipsum habemus accessum ambo in uno Spiritu ad Patrem.","כי על ידו יש לשנינו מבוא ברוח אחד אל אבינו׃"],["56","2","19","그러므로 여러분은 이제 더 이상 외국인도 아니고 이방인도 아닙니다. 성도들과 함께 한 시민이며 하느님의 한 가족입니다.","이제 여러분은 외국인도 아니고 나그네도 아닙니다. 성도들과 같은 한 시민이며 하느님의 한 가족입니다.","그러므로 이제부터 너희는 외인도 아니요 나그네도 아니요 오직 성도들과 동일한 시민이요 하나님의 권속이라","그러므로 이제부터 너희가 외인도 아니요 손도 아니요 오직 성도들과 동일한 시민이요 하나님의 권속이라","이제 여러분은 하나님 보시기에 더는 낯선 나그네도 이방인도 아닙니다. 여러분은 하나님의 가족이며 하나님 나라의 백성입니다. 다른 그리스도인들과 함께 하나님의 집안을 이루고 있는 것입니다.","So then you are no longer strangers and sojourners, but you are fellow citizens with the holy ones and members of the household of God,","Now therefore ye are no more strangers and foreigners, but fellowcitizens with the saints, and of the household of God;","Consequently, you are no longer foreigners and aliens, but fellow citizens with God's people and members of God's household,","Ergo iam non estis extranei et advenae, sed estis concives sanctorum et domestici Dei,","לכן אינכם עוד גרים ותושבים כי אתם בני עיר אחת עם הקדשים ובני בית אלהים׃"],["56","2","20","여러분은 사도들과 예언자들의 기초 위에 세워진 건물이고, 그리스도 예수님께서는 바로 모퉁잇돌이십니다.","여러분이 건물이라면 그리스도께서는 그 건물의 가장 요긴한 모퉁잇돌이 되시며 사도들과 예언자들은 그 건물의 기초가 됩니다.","너희는 사도들과 선지자들의 터 위에 세우심을 입은 자라 그리스도 예수께서 친히 모퉁잇돌이 되셨느니라","너희는 사도들과 선지자들의 터 위에 세우심을 입은 자라 그리스도 예수께서 친히 모퉁이 돌이 되셨느니라","여러분은 바로 사도들과 예언자들이라는 기초 위에 세워진 건물입니다. 그리고 이 건물의 머릿돌은 그리스도 예수이십니다.","built upon the foundation of the apostles and prophets, with Christ Jesus himself as the capstone.","And are built upon the foundation of the apostles and prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner stone;","built on the foundation of the apostles and prophets, with Christ Jesus himself as the chief cornerstone.","superaedificati super fundamentum apostolorum et prophetarum, ipso summo angulari lapide Christo Iesu,","בנוים על יסוד השליחים והנביאים וישוע המשיח הוא אבן הפנה׃"],["56","2","21","그리스도 안에서 전체가 잘 결합된 이 건물이 주님 안에서 거룩한 성전으로 자라납니다.","온 건물은 이 모퉁잇돌을 중심으로 서로 연결되고 점점 커져서 주님의 거룩한 성전이 됩니다.","그의 안에서 건물마다 서로 연결하여 주 안에서 성전이 되어 가고","그의 안에서 건물마다 서로 연결하여 주 안에서 성전이 되어가고","이처럼 우리는 하나님의 성전을 이루는 한 부분으로 아름답게 점점 커가며 그리스도와 한 몸이 되었습니다.","Through him the whole structure is held together and grows into a temple sacred in the Lord;","In whom all the building fitly framed together groweth unto an holy temple in the Lord:","In him the whole building is joined together and rises to become a holy temple in the Lord.","in quo omnis aedificatio compacta crescit in templum sanctum in Domino,","אשר חבר בו יחד הבנין כלו עדי יגבה להיכל קדש ליהוה׃"],["56","2","22","여러분도 그리스도 안에서 성령을 통하여 하느님의 거처로 함께 지어지고 있습니다.","여러분도 이 모퉁잇돌을 중심으로 함께 세워져서 신령한 하느님의 집이 되는 것입니다.","너희도 성령 안에서 하나님이 거하실 처소가 되기 위하여 그리스도 예수 안에서 함께 지어져 가느니라","너희도 성령 안에서 하나님의 거하실 처소가 되기 위하여 예수 안에서 함께 지어져 가느니라","여러분도 성령에 의해서 그리스도와 연합하고 또 서로가 연합하여 하나님께서 사시는 이 집의 한 부분을 이루는 것입니다.","in him you also are being built together into a dwelling place of God in the Spirit.","In whom ye also are builded together for an habitation of God through the Spirit.","And in him you too are being built together to become a dwelling in which God lives by his Spirit.","in quo et vos coaedificamini in habitaculum Dei in Spiritu.","ובו נבנים גם אתם להיות משכן אלהים ברוח׃"],["56","3","1","그래서, 그리스도 예수님 때문에 이민족 여러분을 위하여 수인이 된 나 바오로가 말합니다.","그러므로 이방인 여러분들을 위하여 그리스도 예수의 포로가 된 나 바울로는 하느님께 기도 드립니다.","이러므로 그리스도 예수의 일로 너희 이방인을 위하여 갇힌 자 된 나 바울이 말하거니와","이러하므로 그리스도 예수의 일로 너희 이방을 위하여 갇힌 자 된 나 바울은……","그리스도의 종인 나 바울은 여러분 이방인들도 하나님의 가족이라고 가르쳤다는 죄로 여기 감옥에 갇혀 있습니다.","Because of this, I, Paul, a prisoner of Christ [Jesus] for you Gentiles—","For this cause I Paul, the prisoner of Jesus Christ for you Gentiles,","For this reason I, Paul, the prisoner of Christ Jesus for the sake of you Gentiles--","Huius rei gratia, ego Paulus, vinctus Christi Iesu pro vobis gentibus -","בעבור זאת אני פולוס אסיר המשיח למענכם הגוים׃"],["56","3","2","하느님께서 여러분을 위하여 나에게 주신 은총의 직무를 여러분은 이미 들었을 줄 압니다.","하느님께서 나에게 은총을 베풀어 여러분의 일꾼으로 삼으신 것을 여러분도 잘 알고 있습니다.","너희를 위하여 내게 주신 하나님의 그 은혜의 경륜을 너희가 들었을 터이라","너희를 위하여 내게 주신 하나님의 그 은혜의 경륜을 너희가 들었을 터이라","내가 전에 쓴 편지에서도 간단히 말한 일이 있어 이미 알고 있겠지만, 하나님께서는 이방인 여러분에게 하나님의 은총을 드러내시려고 내게 특별한 임무를 맡기셨습니다. 하나님께서는 이방인들도 하나님의 은총의 대상 속에 포함시키셨다고 하는 심오한 계획을 내게 알려 주셨습니다.","if, as I suppose, you have heard of the stewardship of God’s grace that was given to me for your benefit,","If ye have heard of the dispensation of the grace of God which is given me to you-ward:","Surely you have heard about the administration of God's grace that was given to me for you,","si tamen audistis dispensationem gratiae Dei, quae data est mihi pro vobis,","כי אמנם שמעתם הנהגת חסד האלהים אשר נתן לי אליכם׃"],["56","3","3","앞에서 간단히 적은 바와 같이, 나는 계시를 통하여 그 신비를 알게 되었습니다.","하느님께서는 당신의 심오한 계획을 나에게 계시해 주셨습니다. 이에 대해서는 내가 앞서 간단히 적은 바 있으므로","곧 계시로 내게 비밀을 알게 하신 것은 내가 먼저 간단히 기록함과 같으니","곧 계시로 내게 비밀을 알게 하신 것은 내가 이미 대강 기록함과 같으니","(2절에 포함되어 있음)","[namely, that] the mystery was made known to me by revelation, as I have written briefly earlier.","How that by revelation he made known unto me the mystery; (as I wrote afore in few words,","that is, the mystery made known to me by revelation, as I have already written briefly.","quoniam secundum revelationem notum mihi factum est mysterium, sicut supra scripsi in brevi,","כי בחזון גלה לי הסוד אשר למעלה כתבתי לכם במעט׃"],["56","3","4","그래서 그 부분을 읽으면, 내가 그리스도의 신비에 관하여 깨달은 것을 여러분도 이해할 수 있을 것입니다.","그것을 읽으면 여러분은 내가 그리스도에 관한 심오한 계획을 이해하고 있다는 것을 알 수 있을 것입니다.","그것을 읽으면 내가 그리스도의 비밀을 깨달은 것을 너희가 알 수 있으리라","이것을 읽으면 그리스도의 비밀을 내가 깨달은 것을 너희가 알 수 있으리라","내가 이런 말을 새삼스럽게 하는 것은 이 심오한 계획에 대해 내가 깨달은 것을 여러분에게 알리기 위한 것입니다.","When you read this you can understand my insight into the mystery of Christ,","Whereby, when ye read, ye may understand my knowledge in the mystery of Christ)","In reading this, then, you will be able to understand my insight into the mystery of Christ,","prout potestis legentes intellegere prudentiam meam in mysterio Christi,","ובקראכם תוכלו להכיר בזאת את בינתי בסוד המשיח׃"],["56","3","5","그 신비가 과거의 모든 세대에서는 사람들에게 알려지지 않았지만, 지금은 성령을 통하여 그분의 거룩한 사도들과 예언자들에게 계시되었습니다.","지금은 하느님께서 성령의 힘을 빌려 그 심오한 계획을 당신의 거룩한 사도들과 예언하는 사람들에게 나타내 보이셨지만 전에는 지금처럼 인간에게 알려주시지 않았었습니다.","이제 그의 거룩한 사도들과 선지자들에게 성령으로 나타내신 것 같이 다른 세대에서는 사람의 아들들에게 알리지 아니하셨으니","이제 그의 거룩한 사도들과 선지자들에게 성령으로 나타내신것 같이 다른 세대에서는 사람의 아들들에게 알게 하지 아니하셨으니","옛날에는 하나님께서 이 계획을 아무에게도 알려주시지 않았습니다. 그러나 지금은 성령을 통해서 사도들과 예언자들에게 계시해 주고 계십니다.","which was not made known to human beings in other generations as it has now been revealed to his holy apostles and prophets by the Spirit,","Which in other ages was not made known unto the sons of men, as it is now revealed unto his holy apostles and prophets by the Spirit;","which was not made known to men in other generations as it has now been revealed by the Spirit to God's holy apostles and prophets.","quod aliis generationibus non innotuit filiis hominum, sicuti nunc revelatum est sanctis apostolis eius et prophetis in Spiritu,","אשר בדורת הראשנים לא נודע לבני אדם כאשר נגלה עתה לשליחיו הקדשים ולנביאיו ברוח׃"],["56","3","6","곧 다른 민족들도 그리스도 예수님 안에서 복음을 통하여, 공동 상속자가 되고 한 몸의 지체가 되며 약속의 공동 수혜자가 된다는 것입니다.","그 심오한 계획이란 이방인들도 복음을 듣고 그리스도 예수와 함께 살면서 유다인들과 함께 하느님의 축복을 받고 한 몸의 지체가 되어 하느님께서 약속하신 것을 함께 받는 사람들이 된다는 것입니다.","이는 이방인들이 복음으로 말미암아 그리스도 예수 안에서 함께 상속자가 되고 함께 지체가 되고 함께 약속에 참여하는 자가 됨이라","이는 이방인들이 복음으로 말미암아 그리스도 예수 안에서 함께 후사가 되고 함께 지체가 되고 함께 약속에 참예하는 자가 됨이라","그 심오한 계획이란 이방 사람들이라도 하나님의 자녀만 되면 유대 사람들처럼 모든 상속을 다 받을 수 있다는 것입니다. 그리고 그들이 복음을 통해서 그리스도께서 그들을 위해 이루신 구원의 은총을 받아들이기만 하면 그리스도를 통해서 크나큰 복을 내리겠다는 하나님의 약속을 다 같이 주시리라는 것입니다.","that the Gentiles are coheirs, members of the same body, and copartners in the promise in Christ Jesus through the gospel.","That the Gentiles should be fellowheirs, and of the same body, and partakers of his promise in Christ by the gospel:","This mystery is that through the gospel the Gentiles are heirs together with Israel, members together of one body, and sharers together in the promise in Christ Jesus.","esse gentes coheredes et concorporales et comparticipes promissionis in Christo Iesu per evangelium,","להיות הגוים גם הם בני ירשתו וגוף אחד אתו וחברי הבטחתו במשיח על ידי הבשרה׃"],["56","3","7","하느님께서 당신의 힘을 펼치시어 나에게 주신 은총의 선물에 따라, 나는 이 복음의 일꾼이 되었습니다.","나는 하느님께서 거저 주신 은총을 받고 내 속에서 활동하시는 하느님의 능력에 힘입어 이 복음을 전하는 일꾼이 되었습니다.","이 복음을 위하여 그의 능력이 역사하시는 대로 내게 주신 하나님의 은혜의 선물을 따라 내가 일꾼이 되었노라","이 복음을 위하여 그의 능력이 역사하시는대로 내게 주신 하나님의 은혜의 선물을 따라 내가 일군이 되었노라","하나님께서는 이 계획을 모든 사람에게 전하는 특권을 내게 주셨습니다. 또한 이 일을 충분히 해낼 수 있는 하나님의 능력과 특별할 재능도 주셨습니다.","Of this I became a minister by the gift of God’s grace that was granted me in accord with the exercise of his power.","Whereof I was made a minister, according to the gift of the grace of God given unto me by the effectual working of his power.","I became a servant of this gospel by the gift of God's grace given me through the working of his power.","cuius factus sum minister secundum donum gratiae Dei, quae data est mihi secundum operationem virtutis eius.","אשר הייתי לה למשרת במתנת חסד אלהים הנתונה לי כפי פעלת גבורתו׃"],["56","3","8","모든 성도들 가운데에서 가장 보잘것없는 나에게 그러한 은총을 주시어, 그리스도의 헤아릴 수 없는 풍요를 다른 민족들에게 전하고,","나는 모든 성도들 중에서 가장 보잘것없는 사람입니다. 아니 그보다도 못한 사람입니다. 그런데도 하느님께서는 나에게 이 은총을 주셔서 헤아릴 수 없이 풍요하신 그리스도에 관한 복음을 이방인들에게 전하게 하셨고","모든 성도 중에 지극히 작은 자보다 더 작은 나에게 이 은혜를 주신 것은 측량할 수 없는 그리스도의 풍성함을 이방인에게 전하게 하시고","모든 성도 중에 지극히 작은 자보다 더 작은 나에게 이 은혜를 주신 것은 측량할 수 없는 그리스도의 풍성을 이방인에게 전하게 하시고","생각해 보십시오. 나야말로 그런 일을 할만한 자격도 없는 그리스도인 가운데서도 가장 쓸모 없는 인간이었습니다. 그런 내가 그리스도의 헤아릴 수 없는 보화를 이방인들에게도 나누어 주신다는 기쁜 소식을 전하는 자가 되었습니다.","To me, the very least of all the holy ones, this grace was given, to preach to the Gentiles the inscrutable riches of Christ,","Unto me, who am less than the least of all saints, is this grace given, that I should preach among the Gentiles the unsearchable riches of Christ;","Although I am less than the least of all God's people, this grace was given me: to preach to the Gentiles the unsearchable riches of Christ,","Mihi omnium sanctorum minimo data est gratia haec: gentibus evangelizare investigabiles divitias Christi","לי צעיר הצעירים שבכל הקדשים נתן החסד הזה לבשר בגוים את עשר המשיח אשר לא יחקר׃"],["56","3","9","과거의 모든 시대에 만물을 창조하신 하느님 안에 감추어져 있던 그 신비의 계획이 어떠한 것인지 모든 사람에게 밝혀 주게 하셨습니다.","또 만물의 창조주이신 하느님께서 과거에 감추고 계시던 심오한 계획을 어떻게 실현하시는지를 모든 사람에게 분명히 알려주게 하셨습니다.","영원부터 만물을 창조하신 하나님 속에 감추어졌던 비밀의 경륜이 어떠한 것을 드러내게 하려 하심이라","1)영원부터 만물을 창조하신 하나님 속에 감취었던 비밀의 경륜이 어떠한 것을 드러내게 하려 하심이라 어떤 사본에, 9절 처음에 「모든 사람에게」가 있음","만물을 만드신 하나님께서 처음부터 세상을 세운 계획대로 하나님이 이방인에게도 구세주가 되신다는 것을 모든 사람에게 설명하기 위해 나를 쓰신 것입니다.","and to bring to light [for all] what is the plan of the mystery hidden from ages past in God who created all things,","And to make all men see what is the fellowship of the mystery, which from the beginning of the world hath been hid in God, who created all things by Jesus Christ:","and to make plain to everyone the administration of this mystery, which for ages past was kept hidden in God, who created all things.","et illuminare omnes, quae sit dispensatio mysterii absconditi a saeculis in Deo, qui omnia creavit,","ולהאיר עיני כל מה היא הנהגת הסוד הנסתר מדרת עולם באלהים יוצר הכל על ידי ישוע המשיח׃"],["56","3","10","그리하여 이제는 하늘에 있는 권세와 권력들에게도 교회를 통하여 하느님의 매우 다양한 지혜가 알려지게 되었습니다.","이렇게 되어 결국 하늘에 있는 권세의 천신들과 세력의 천신들까지도 교회를 통하여 하느님의 무궁무진한 지혜를 알게 되는 것입니다.","이는 이제 교회로 말미암아 하늘에 있는 통치자들과 권세들에게 하나님의 각종 지혜를 알게 하려 하심이니","이는 이제 교회로 말미암아 하늘에서 정사와 권세들에게 하나님의 각종 지혜를 알게 하려 하심이니","하나님께서 그렇게 하신 까닭이 무엇이겠습니까? 그것은 바로 하늘에 있는 지배자들에게 하나님의 모든 가족이 유대인이나 이방인이나 가릴 것 없이 하나가 되어 교회 안에서 굳게 연합된 것을 보이시기 위한 것입니다. 그래서 하나님의 완전한 지혜를 나타내려 하신 것입니다.","so that the manifold wisdom of God might now be made known through the church to the principalities and authorities in the heavens.","To the intent that now unto the principalities and powers in heavenly places might be known by the church the manifold wisdom of God,","His intent was that now, through the church, the manifold wisdom of God should be made known to the rulers and authorities in the heavenly realms,","ut innotescat nunc principatibus et potestatibus in caelestibus per ecclesiam multiformis sapientia Dei,","למען אשר תודע עתה על ידי העדה לשרים לשליטים אשר במרומים חכמת אלהים המפליאה דתכיה׃"],["56","3","11","이는 하느님께서 우리 주 그리스도 예수님 안에서 이루신 영원한 계획에 따른 것입니다.","이 모든 것은 우리 주 그리스도 예수를 내세워 이루시려고 작정하신 하느님의 영원한 계획입니다.","곧 영원부터 우리 주 그리스도 예수 안에서 예정하신 뜻대로 하신 것이라","곧 영원부터 우리 주 그리스도 예수 안에서 예정하신 뜻대로 하신 것이라","이 모든 것은 하나님께서 우리 주 예수 그리스도를 통해 이루려고 계획하신 일입니다.","This was according to the eternal purpose that he accomplished in Christ Jesus our Lord,","According to the eternal purpose which he purposed in Christ Jesus our Lord:","according to his eternal purpose which he accomplished in Christ Jesus our Lord.","secundum propositum saeculorum, quod fecit in Christo Iesu Domino nostro,","על פי עצת עולמים אשר יעץ במשיח ישוע אדנינו׃"],["56","3","12","우리는 그리스도 안에서 그분에 대한 믿음으로, 확신을 가지고 하느님께 담대히 나아갈 수 있습니다.","우리는 그리스도를 믿음으로써 그분과 함께 살게 되어 확신을 가지고 서슴지 않고 하느님께 나아갈 수가 있습니다.","우리가 그 안에서 그를 믿음으로 말미암아 담대함과 확신을 가지고 하나님께 나아감을 얻느니라","우리가 그 안에서 그를 믿음으로 말미암아 담대함과 하나님께 당당히 나아감을 얻느니라","우리가 그리스도와 함께 또 그리스도에 의지하여 하나님께 나아갈 때 하나님께서는 반갑게 우리를 영접해 주실 것을 믿기에 우리는 두려움이 없습니다.","in whom we have boldness of speech and confidence of access through faith in him.","In whom we have boldness and access with confidence by the faith of him.","In him and through faith in him we may approach God with freedom and confidence.","in quo habemus fiduciam et accessum in confidentia per fidem eius.","אשר פתחון פינו ממנו וקרבתנו בבטחה על יד אמונתו׃"],["56","3","13","그러므로 내가 여러분을 위하여 겪는 환난 때문에 낙심하는 일이 없기를 바랍니다. 이 환난이 여러분에게는 영광이 됩니다.","나는 지금 여러분에게 복음을 전하느라고 고통을 당하고 있지만 이것은 여러분에게 오히려 영광을 가져오는 것이니 나 때문에 낙심하는 일이 없기를 바랍니다.","그러므로 너희에게 구하노니 너희를 위한 나의 여러 환난에 대하여 낙심하지 말라 이는 너희의 영광이니라","그러므로 너희에게 구하노니 너희를 위한 나의 여러 환난에 대하여 낙심치 말라 이는 너희의 영광이니라","그러므로 내가 여기서 고난을 받고 있다고 해서 낙심하지 마십시오. 내가 당하는 고난은 여러분을 위한 것이니 여러분에게는 오히려 영광과 격려가 되어야 합니다.","So I ask you not to lose heart over my afflictions for you; this is your glory.","Wherefore I desire that ye faint not at my tribulations for you, which is your glory.","I ask you, therefore, not to be discouraged because of my sufferings for you, which are your glory.","Propter quod peto, ne deficiatis in tribulationibus meis pro vobis, quae est gloria vestra.","בעבור זאת אבקש שלא תחתו בצרותי למענכם יען כי היא תפארתכם׃"],["56","3","14","이 때문에, 나는 아버지 앞에 무릎을 꿇습니다.","나는 하늘과 땅에 있는 모든 가족에게 이름을 주신 하느님 아버지 앞에 무릎을 꿇고 기도 드립니다.","이러므로 내가 하늘과 땅에 있는 각 족속에게","이러하므로 내가 하늘과 땅에 있는 각 족속에게","이미 하늘에 있거나 아직도 땅 위에 있는 당신의 가족들에게 베푸신 하나님의 계획이 얼마나 지혜롭고 엄청난 것인가를 생각할 때, 나는 무릎을 꿇고 기도드리지 않을 수 없습니다.","For this reason I kneel before the Father,","For this cause I bow my knees unto the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,","For this reason I kneel before the Father,","Huius rei gratia flecto genua mea ad Patrem,","על כן אכרעה על ברכי לאבי אדנינו ישוע המשיח׃"],["56","3","15","하늘과 땅에 있는 모든 종족이 아버지에게서 이름을 받습니다.",null,"이름을 주신 아버지 앞에 무릎을 꿇고 비노니","이름을 주신 아버지 앞에 무릎을 꿇고 비노니","(14절에 포함되어 있음)","from whom every family in heaven and on earth is named,","Of whom the whole family in heaven and earth is named,","from whom his whole family in heaven and on earth derives its name.","ex quo omnis paternitas in caelis et in terra nominatur,","אשר נקרא על שמו כל בית אבות שבשמים ושבארץ׃"],["56","3","16","아버지께서 당신의 풍성한 영광에 따라 성령을 통하여 여러분의 내적 인간이 당신 힘으로 굳세어지게 하시고,","넘쳐 흐르는 영광의 아버지께서 성령으로 여러분의 힘을 돋우어 내적 인간으로 굳세게 하여주시기를 빕니다.","그의 영광의 풍성함을 따라 그의 성령으로 말미암아 너희 속사람을 능력으로 강건하게 하시오며","그 영광의 풍성을 따라 그의 성령으로 말미암아 너희 속 사람을 능력으로 강건하게 하옵시며","아버지 하나님께서 넘쳐 흐르는 영광으로 성령을 통하여 여러분의 속사람을 굳세게 해주시기를 기도합니다.","that he may grant you in accord with the riches of his glory to be strengthened with power through his Spirit in the inner self,","That he would grant you, according to the riches of his glory, to be strengthened with might by his Spirit in the inner man;","I pray that out of his glorious riches he may strengthen you with power through his Spirit in your inner being,","ut det vobis secundum divitias gloriae suae virtute corroborari per Spiritum eius in interiorem hominem,","לתת לכם לפי עשר כבודו להתחזק בגבורה על ידי רוחו לאדם הפנימי׃"],["56","3","17","여러분의 믿음을 통하여 그리스도께서 여러분의 마음 안에 사시게 하시며, 여러분이 사랑에 뿌리를 내리고 그것을 기초로 삼게 하시기를 빕니다.","그리고 아버지께서 여러분의 믿음을 보시고 그리스도로 하여금 여러분의 마음속에 들어가 사실 수 있게 하여주시기를 빕니다. 그래서 여러분이 사랑에 뿌리를 박고 사랑을 기초로 하여 살아감으로써","믿음으로 말미암아 그리스도께서 너희 마음에 계시게 하시옵고 너희가 사랑 가운데서 뿌리가 박히고 터가 굳어져서","믿음으로 말미암아 그리스도께서 너희 마음에 계시게 하옵시고 너희가 사랑 가운데서 뿌리가 박히고 터가 굳어져서","그리스도를 믿는 여러분의 마음속에 그리스도께서 더욱더 친밀한 분으로 계시기를 기도합니다. 여러분이 하나님의 놀라운 사랑의 토양 속에 깊이 뿌리를 내리게 되기를 기도합니다.","and that Christ may dwell in your hearts through faith; that you, rooted and grounded in love,","That Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith; that ye, being rooted and grounded in love,","so that Christ may dwell in your hearts through faith. And I pray that you, being rooted and established in love,","habitare Christum per fidem in cordibus vestris, in caritate radicati et fundati,","שישכן המשיח בלבבכם באמונה והייתם משרשים ומיסדים באהבה׃"],["56","3","18","그리하여 여러분이 모든 성도와 함께 너비와 길이와 높이와 깊이가 어떠한지 깨닫는 능력을 지니고,","모든 성도들과 함께 하느님의 신비가 얼마나 넓고 길고 높고 깊은지를 깨달아 알고","능히 모든 성도와 함께 지식에 넘치는 그리스도의 사랑을 알고","능히 모든 성도와 함께 지식에 넘치는 그리스도의 사랑을 알아","모든 하나님의 자녀들이 그러하듯이 여러분도 하나님의 사랑이 참으로 얼마나 한없고 넓으며, 얼마나 깊고 높은가를 깨닫기를 기도합니다. 그리고 그 사랑이 너무도 커서 여러분은 그 끝을 볼 수도 없고 또 그 사랑을 다 헤아릴 수도 없음을 스스로 체험할 수 있기를 기도합니다. 그래서 마침내 하나님의 모든 충만하신 것으로 여러분도 충만하게 되기를 기도합니다.","may have strength to comprehend with all the holy ones what is the breadth and length and height and depth,","May be able to comprehend with all saints what is the breadth, and length, and depth, and height;","may have power, together with all the saints, to grasp how wide and long and high and deep is the love of Christ,","ut valeatis comprehendere cum omnibus sanctis quae sit latitudo et longitudo et sublimitas et profundum,","למען תוכלו להשיג עם כל הקדשים מה הוא הרחב והארך והעמק והגבה׃"],["56","3","19","인간의 지각을 뛰어넘는 그리스도의 사랑을 알게 해 주시기를 빕니다. 이렇게 하여 여러분이 하느님의 온갖 충만하심으로 충만하게 되기를 빕니다.","인간의 모든 지식을 초월한 그리스도의 사랑을 알 수 있게 되기를 바랍니다. 이렇게 해서 여러분이 완성되고 하느님의 계획이 완전히 이루어지기를 빕니다.","그 너비와 길이와 높이와 깊이가 어떠함을 깨달아 하나님의 모든 충만하신 것으로 너희에게 충만하게 하시기를 구하노라","그 넓이와 길이와 높이와 깊이가 어떠함을 깨달아 하나님의 모든 충만하신 것으로 너희에게 충만하게 하시기를 구하노라","(18절에 포함되어 있음)","and to know the love of Christ that surpasses knowledge, so that you may be filled with all the fullness of God.","And to know the love of Christ, which passeth knowledge, that ye might be filled with all the fulness of God.","and to know this love that surpasses knowledge--that you may be filled to the measure of all the fullness of God.","scire etiam supereminentem scientiae caritatem Christi, ut impleamini in omnem plenitudinem Dei.","וידעתם את אהבת המשיח הנעלה על כל דעת ונמלאתם את כל מלוא האלהים׃"],["56","3","20","우리 안에서 활동하시는 힘으로, 우리가 청하거나 생각하는 모든 것보다 훨씬 더 풍성히 이루어 주실 수 있는 분,","하느님께서는 우리 안에서 힘차게 활동하시면서 우리가 바라거나 생각하는 것보다 훨씬 더 풍성하게 베풀어주실 수 있는 분이십니다.","우리 가운데서 역사하시는 능력대로 우리가 구하거나 생각하는 모든 것에 더 넘치도록 능히 하실 이에게","우리 가운데서 역사하시는 능력대로 우리의 온갖 구하는 것이나 생각하는 것에 더 넘치도록 능히 하실 이에게","우리가 기도나 소원이나 생각과 희망으로도 감히 꿈꿀 수 없는 것을 위대한 능력으로 우리 가운데서 역사하시는 하나님께 영광을 돌립니다.","Now to him who is able to accomplish far more than all we ask or imagine, by the power at work within us,","Now unto him that is able to do exceeding abundantly above all that we ask or think, according to the power that worketh in us,","Now to him who is able to do immeasurably more than all we ask or imagine, according to his power that is at work within us,","Ei autem, qui potens est supra omnia facere superabundanter quam petimus aut intellegimus, secundum virtutem, quae operatur in nobis,","ולו אשר יכל להרבות גמוליו עלינו יותר מכל משאלותינו ומחשבותינו לפי הכח הפעל בקרבנו׃"],["56","3","21","그분께 교회 안에서, 그리고 그리스도 예수님 안에서 세세 대대로 영원무궁토록 영광이 있기를 빕니다. 아멘.","하느님께서 교회와 그리스도 예수를 통하여 세세무궁토록 영광을 받으시기를 빕니다. 아멘.","교회 안에서와 그리스도 예수 안에서 영광이 대대로 영원무궁하기를 원하노라 아멘","교회 안에서와 그리스도 예수 안에서 영광이 대대로 영원 무궁하기를 원하노라 아멘","교회와 예수 그리스도를 통하여 구원의 계획을 이루어 가시는 하나님께 영원 무궁한 영광을 돌립니다. 아멘.","to him be glory in the church and in Christ Jesus to all generations, forever and ever. Amen.","Unto him be glory in the church by Christ Jesus throughout all ages, world without end. Amen.","to him be glory in the church and in Christ Jesus throughout all generations, for ever and ever! Amen.","ipsi gloria in ecclesia et in Christo Iesu in omnes generationes saeculi saeculorum. Amen.","לו הכבוד בקרב הקהל במשיח ישוע לדר ודר עד עולמי עולמים אמן׃"],["56","4","1","그러므로 주님 안에서 수인이 된 내가 여러분에게 권고합니다. 여러분이 받은 부르심에 합당하게 살아가십시오.","주님을 위해서 일하다가 감옥에 갇힌 내가 여러분에게 권고합니다. 하느님께서 여러분을 불러주셨으니 그 불러주신 목적에 합당하게 살아가십시오.","그러므로 주 안에서 갇힌 내가 너희를 권하노니 너희가 부르심을 받은 일에 합당하게 행하여","그러므로 주 안에서 갇힌 내가 너희를 권하노니 너희가 부르심을 입은 부름에 합당하게 행하여","주님을 섬기다가 이렇게 감옥에 갇혀 있는 죄수인 내가 여러분에게 간청합니다. 여러분은 놀라운 복을 받도록 선택된 사람들입니다. 그러니 그에 합당한 생활과 행동을 해야 합니다.","I, then, a prisoner for the Lord, urge you to live in a manner worthy of the call you have received,","I therefore, the prisoner of the Lord, beseech you that ye walk worthy of the vocation wherewith ye are called,","As a prisoner for the Lord, then, I urge you to live a life worthy of the calling you have received.","Obsecro itaque vos ego, vinctus in Domino, ut digne ambuletis vocatione, qua vocati estis,","לכן אזהירכם אני האסור באדון להתהלך כאשר יאתה למשמרתכם אשר נקראתם לה׃"],["56","4","2","겸손과 온유를 다하고, 인내심을 가지고 사랑으로 서로 참아 주며,","겸손과 온유와 인내를 다하여 사랑으로 서로 너그럽게 대하십시오.","모든 겸손과 온유로 하고 오래 참음으로 사랑 가운데서 서로 용납하고","모든 겸손과 온유로 하고 오래 참음으로 사랑 가운데서 서로 용납하고","겸손하고 온유한 사람이 되며, 사랑으로 서로 결점을 덮어 주고 서로 참아 주는 너그러운 사람이 되어야 합니다.","with all humility and gentleness, with patience, bearing with one another through love,","With all lowliness and meekness, with longsuffering, forbearing one another in love;","Be completely humble and gentle; be patient, bearing with one another in love.","cum omni humilitate et mansuetudine, cum longanimitate, supportantes invicem in caritate,","בכל נמיכות וענוה ובארך רוח לשאת איש את רעהו באהבה׃"],["56","4","3","성령께서 평화의 끈으로 이루어 주신 일치를 보존하도록 애쓰십시오.","성령께서 평화의 줄로 여러분을 묶어 하나가 되게 하여주신 것을 그대로 보존하도록 노력하십시오.","평안의 매는 줄로 성령이 하나 되게 하신 것을 힘써 지키라","평안의 매는 줄로 성령의 하나 되게 하신 것을 힘써 지키라","성령에 의지하여 하나가 되도록 항상 힘쓰고 서로 평화롭게 살아야 합니다.","striving to preserve the unity of the spirit through the bond of peace:","Endeavouring to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace.","Make every effort to keep the unity of the Spirit through the bond of peace.","solliciti servare unitatem spiritus in vinculo pacis;","ושקדו לשמר את אחדות הרוח באגדת השלום׃"],["56","4","4","하느님께서 여러분을 부르실 때에 하나의 희망을 주신 것처럼, 그리스도의 몸도 하나이고 성령도 한 분이십니다.","그리스도의 몸도 하나이며 성령도 하나입니다. 이와 같이 하느님께서 여러분을 당신의 백성으로 부르셔서 안겨주시는 희망도 하나입니다.","몸이 하나요 성령도 한 분이시니 이와 같이 너희가 부르심의 한 소망 안에서 부르심을 받았느니라","몸이 하나이요 성령이 하나이니 이와 같이 너희가 부르심의 한 소망 안에서 부르심을 입었느니라","우리는 모두 한 몸의 지체들입니다. 우리는 같은 성령을 받았으며 부르심을 받은 우리의 소망도 하나입니다.","one body and one Spirit, as you were also called to the one hope of your call;","There is one body, and one Spirit, even as ye are called in one hope of your calling;","There is one body and one Spirit--just as you were called to one hope when you were called--","unum corpus et unus Spiritus, sicut et vocati estis in una spe vocationis vestrae;","גוף אחד ורוח אחד כאשר גם נקראתם בתקות משמרתכם האחת׃"],["56","4","5","주님도 한 분이시고 믿음도 하나이며 세례도 하나이고,","주님도 한 분이시고 믿음도 하나이고 세례도 하나이며","주도 한 분이시요 믿음도 하나요 세례도 하나요","주도 하나이요 믿음도 하나이요 세례도 하나이요","우리의 주님은 한 분이며, 믿음도 하나고, 침례도 하나입니다.","one Lord, one faith, one baptism;","One Lord, one faith, one baptism,","one Lord, one faith, one baptism;","unus Dominus, una fides, unum baptisma;","אדון אחד אמונה אחת טבילה אחת׃"],["56","4","6","만물의 아버지이신 하느님도 한 분이십니다. 그분은 만물 위에, 만물을 통하여, 만물 안에 계십니다.","만민의 아버지이신 하느님도 한 분이십니다. 그분은 만물 위에 계시고 만물을 꿰뚫어 계시며 만물 안에 계십니다.","하나님도 한 분이시니 곧 만유의 아버지시라 만유 위에 계시고 만유를 통일하시고 만유 가운데 계시도다","하나님도 하나이시니 곧 만유의 아버지시라 만유 위에 계시고 만유를 통일하시고 만유 가운데 계시도다","또 우리 모든 사람 위에 계시고 우리 안에 계시고 우리 모든 지체들을 꿰뚫어 계시는 하나님 아버지도 한 분입니다.","one God and Father of all, who is over all and through all and in all.","One God and Father of all, who is above all, and through all, and in you all.","one God and Father of all, who is over all and through all and in all.","unus Deus et Pater omnium, qui super omnes et per omnia et in omnibus.","אל ואב אחד לכל שהוא על כל ובכל ובתוך כלכם׃"],["56","4","7","그러나 그리스도께서 나누어 주시는 은혜의 양에 따라, 우리는 저마다 은총을 받았습니다.","그리스도께서는 우리들에게 각각 다른 은총을 알맞게 나누어주셨습니다.","우리 각 사람에게 그리스도의 선물의 분량대로 은혜를 주셨나니","우리 각 사람에게 그리스도의 선물의 분량대로 은혜를 주셨나니","그리스도께서는 우리들 한 사람 한 사람에게 특별한 능력을 주셨습니다. 그분의 풍성한 은사의 창고에서 알맞게 나누어 주신 것입니다.","But grace was given to each of us according to the measure of Christ’s gift.","But unto every one of us is given grace according to the measure of the gift of Christ.","But to each one of us grace has been given as Christ apportioned it.","Unicuique autem nostrum data est gratia secundum mensuram donationis Christi.","אבל לכל אחד ואחד ממנו נתן החסד כמדת מתנת המשיח׃"],["56","4","8","그래서 성경도 이렇게 말합니다. “그분께서는 높은 데로 오르시어 포로들을 사로잡으시고 사람들에게 선물을 주셨다.”","성서에도     \"1)그가 높은 곳으로 올라가면서 사로잡은 자들을 데리고 가셨고 사람들에게 선물을 나누어주셨다.\"라는 말씀이 있지 않습니까? 시편 68:18.","그러므로 이르기를 ㄱ)그가 위로 올라가실 때에 사로잡혔던 자들을 사로잡으시고 사람들에게 선물을 주셨다 하였도다","그러므로 이르기를 ㄱ)그가 위로 올라가실 때에 사로잡힌 자를 사로잡고 사람들에게 선물을 주셨다 하였도다 시 68:18","시편 기자도 이렇게 말하였습니다. ㄱ) \"사로잡은 포로들을 이끌고 높은 곳으로 올라가시며 수많은 사람들이 또 반역하던 무리들이 주께 바치는 선물을 모두 받으시는구나.\" (ㄱ. 시68:18)","Therefore, it says: “He ascended on high and took prisoners captive; he gave gifts to men.”","Wherefore he saith, When he ascended up on high, he led captivity captive, and gave gifts unto men.","This is why it says: \"When he ascended on high, he led captives in his train and gave gifts to men.\"","Propter quod dicit:  “Ascendens in altum captivam duxit captivitatem, dedit dona hominibus “.","על כן הוא אומר עלה למרום שבה שבי ויתן מתנות לאדם׃"],["56","4","9","“그분께서 올라가셨다.”는 것은 그분께서 아주 낮은 곳 곧 땅으로 내려와 계셨다는 말이 아니고 무엇이겠습니까?","그런데 올라가셨다는 말은 또한 땅 아래의 세계에까지 내려가셨다는 말이 아니고 무엇이겠습니까?","올라가셨다 하였은즉 땅 아래 낮은 곳으로 내리셨던 것이 아니면 무엇이냐","올라가셨다 하였은즉 땅 아랫 곳으로 내리셨던 것이 아니면 무엇이냐","올라가셨다는 말은 무슨 뜻이겠습니까? 이는 곧 하늘의 가장 높은 곳에 계시던 그리스도께서 땅의 가장 낮은 곳까지 내려오셨다는 것을 뜻합니다.","What does “he ascended” mean except that he also descended into the lower [regions] of the earth?","(Now that he ascended, what is it but that he also descended first into the lower parts of the earth?","(What does \"he ascended\" mean except that he also descended to the lower, earthly regions?","Illud autem  “ascendit “ quid est, nisi quia et descendit in inferiores partes terrae?","ועלה שאמר מה הוא אם לא שירד ירד מקדם לתחתיות ארץ׃"],["56","4","10","내려오셨던 그분이 바로 만물을 충만케 하시려고 가장 높은 하늘로 올라가신 분이십니다.","그리로 내려가셨던 바로 그분이 모든 것을 완성하시려고 하늘 위로 올라가셨습니다.","내리셨던 그가 곧 모든 하늘 위에 오르신 자니 이는 만물을 충만하게 하려 하심이라","내리셨던 그가 곧 모든 하늘 위에 오르신 자니 이는 만물을 충만케 하려 하심이니라","가장 낮은 곳에 내려오셨던 그분은 이제 다시 가장 높은 곳으로 올라가셨습니다. 모든 것을 완성하려고 하늘 위로 올라가신 것입니다.","The one who descended is also the one who ascended far above all the heavens, that he might fill all things.","He that descended is the same also that ascended up far above all heavens, that he might fill all things.)","He who descended is the very one who ascended higher than all the heavens, in order to fill the whole universe.)","Qui descendit, ipse est et qui ascendit super omnes caelos, ut impleret omnia.","הירד הוא אשר גם עלה למעלה מכל השמים למען ימלא את הכל׃"],["56","4","11","그분께서 어떤 이들은 사도로, 어떤 이들은 예언자로, 어떤 이들은 복음 선포자로, 어떤 이들은 목자나 교사로 세워 주셨습니다.","바로 그분이 사람들에게 각각 다른 선물을 은총으로 주셔서 어떤 사람들은 사도로, 어떤 사람들은 예언하는 사람으로, 어떤 사람들은 전도자로, 어떤 사람들은 목자와 교사로 삼으셨습니다.","그가 어떤 사람은 사도로, 어떤 사람은 선지자로, 어떤 사람은 복음 전하는 자로, 어떤 사람은 목사와 교사로 삼으셨으니","그가 혹은 사도로, 혹은 선지자로, 혹은 복음 전하는 자로, 혹은 목사와 교사로 주셨으니","우리 가운데 어떤 사람은 사도로서 특별한 능력을 받았습니다. 어떤 사람은 설교를 잘할 수 있는 능력을 받았습니다. 또한 사람들을 인도하여 그리스도를 그들의 구주로 믿게 하는 특별한 능력을 받은 사람이 있는가 하면, 양을 먹이는 목자처럼 하나님의 백성을 돌보며 하나님의 법도안에서 인도하고 가르치는 은사를 받은 사람도 있습니다.","And he gave some as apostles, others as prophets, others as evangelists, others as pastors and teachers,","And he gave some, apostles; and some, prophets; and some, evangelists; and some, pastors and teachers;","It was he who gave some to be apostles, some to be prophets, some to be evangelists, and some to be pastors and teachers,","Et ipse dedit quosdam quidem apostolos, quosdam autem prophetas, alios vero evangelistas, alios autem pastores et doctores","והוא נתן את אלה שליחים ואת אלה נביאים ואת אלה מבשרים ואת אלה רעים ומלמדים׃"],["56","4","12","성도들이 직무를 수행하고 그리스도의 몸을 성장시키는 일을 하도록, 그들을 준비시키시려는 것이었습니다.","그것은 성도들을 준비시켜서 봉사 활동을 하게 하여 그리스도의 몸을 자라게 하시려는 것입니다.","이는 성도를 온전하게 하여 봉사의 일을 하게 하며 그리스도의 몸을 세우려 하심이라","이는 성도를 온전케 하며 봉사의 일을 하게 하며 그리스도의 몸을 세우려 하심이라","하나님께서 이렇게 우리들에게 최선을 다할 수 있는 특별한 능력을 주신 까닭이 무엇이겠습니까? 그것은 우리들 하나님의 백성이 하나님을 위해서 더 열심히 일할 수 있게 하여 그리스도의 몸인 교회를 힘있고 성숙하게 하시려는 것입니다.","to equip the holy ones for the work of ministry, for building up the body of Christ,","For the perfecting of the saints, for the work of the ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ:","to prepare God's people for works of service, so that the body of Christ may be built up","ad instructionem sanctorum in opus ministerii, in aedificationem corporis Christi,","להשלים את הקדשים למעשה העבודה לבנין גוף המשיח׃"],["56","4","13","그리하여 우리가 모두 하느님의 아드님에 대한 믿음과 지식에서 일치를 이루고 성숙한 사람이 되며 그리스도의 충만한 경지에 다다르게 됩니다.","마침내 우리 모두가 하느님의 아드님에 대한 믿음과 지식에 있어서 하나가 되어 성숙한 인간으로서 그리스도의 완전성에 도달하게 되는 것입니다.","우리가 다 하나님의 아들을 믿는 것과 아는 일에 하나가 되어 온전한 사람을 이루어 그리스도의 장성한 분량이 충만한 데까지 이르리니","우리가 다 하나님의 아들을 믿는 것과 아는 일에 하나가 되어 온전한 사람을 이루어 그리스도의 1)장성한 분량이 충만한데까지 이르리니 헬, 충만의 신장의 분량이","그러면 마침내 우리 모두가 자신의 구원뿐 아니라 구주이신 하나님의 아들에 대한 믿음으로 하나가 되어 주 안에서 완전히 성숙한 인간이 될 것입니다. 그렇습니다. 우리는 그리스도로 완전히 충만한 상태에까지 이르게 될 것입니다.","until we all attain to the unity of faith and knowledge of the Son of God, to mature manhood, to the extent of the full stature of Christ,","Till we all come in the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fulness of Christ:","until we all reach unity in the faith and in the knowledge of the Son of God and become mature, attaining to the whole measure of the fullness of Christ.","donec occurramus omnes in unitatem fidei et agnitionis Filii Dei, in virum perfectum, in mensuram aetatis plenitudinis Christi,","עד כי נגיע כלנו לאחדות האמונה ודעת בן האלהים כאיש אחד שלם לשעור קומת מלוא המשיח׃"],["56","4","14","그러면 우리는 더 이상 어린아이가 아닐 것입니다. 어린아이들은 사람들의 속임수나 간교한 계략에서 나온 가르침의 온갖 풍랑에 흔들리고 이리저리 밀려다닙니다.","그 때에는 우리가 이미 어린아이가 아니어서 인간의 간교한 유혹이나 속임수로써 사람들을 잘못에 빠뜨리는 교설의 풍랑에 흔들리거나 이리저리 밀려다니는 일이 있어서는 안 될 것입니다.","이는 우리가 이제부터 어린 아이가 되지 아니하여 사람의 속임수와 간사한 유혹에 빠져 온갖 교훈의 풍조에 밀려 요동하지 않게 하려 함이라","이는 우리가 이제부터 어린 아이가 되지 아니하여 사람의 궤술과 간사한 유혹에 빠져 모든 교훈의 풍조에 밀려 요동치 않게 하려 함이라","이제 우리는 더 이상 새로운 것을 배우려고 다른 사람을 따라다니는 어린아이 같은 짓을 하거나 거짓이 진실처럼 보이는 것에 속아서 자신의 믿음을 바꾸는 짓을 해서는 안됩니다.","so that we may no longer be infants, tossed by waves and swept along by every wind of teaching arising from human trickery, from their cunning in the interests of deceitful scheming.","That we henceforth be no more children, tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind of doctrine, by the sleight of men, and cunning craftiness, whereby they lie in wait to deceive;","Then we will no longer be infants, tossed back and forth by the waves, and blown here and there by every wind of teaching and by the cunning and craftiness of men in their deceitful scheming.","ut iam non simus parvuli fluctuantes et circumacti omni vento doctrinae in fallacia hominum, in astutia ad circumventionem erroris;","ולא נהיה עוד ילדים נגרשים ונדפים בכל רוח הלמוד בתרמית בני אדם ומקשותם אשר שתו להתעות׃"],["56","4","15","우리는 사랑으로 진리를 말하고 모든 면에서 자라나 그분에게까지 이르러야 합니다. 그분은 머리이신 그리스도이십니다.","도리어 우리는 사랑 가운데서 진리대로 살면서 여러 면에서 자라나, 머리이신 그리스도와 한 몸이 되어야 합니다.","오직 사랑 안에서 참된 것을 하여 범사에 그에게까지 자랄지라 그는 머리니 곧 그리스도라","오직 2)사랑 안에서 3)참된 것을 하여 범사에 그에게까지 자랄찌라 그는 머리니 곧 그리스도라 사랑 안에서 자라자혹 참된 생활을 하여","오히려 우리는 언제나 진리를 따라 진실하게 말하고 행동하고 생활하여 교회의 머리이신 그리스도를 더욱더 닮은 자가 되어야 합니다. 그리스도의 지휘에 따라 온몸이 서로 완전히 어울려서 각 지체는 각기 다른 지체를 도와야 합니다. 그러면 온몸이 건강하게 성장하여 사랑으로 충만하게 될 것입니다.","Rather, living the truth in love, we should grow in every way into him who is the head, Christ,","But speaking the truth in love, may grow up into him in all things, which is the head, even Christ:","Instead, speaking the truth in love, we will in all things grow up into him who is the Head, that is, Christ.","veritatem autem facientes in caritate crescamus in illum per omnia, qui est caput Christus,","כי אם נדבר האמת באהבה ונגדלה בכל דבר לו למשיח שהוא הראש׃"],["56","4","16","그분 덕분에, 영양을 공급하는 각각의 관절로 온몸이 잘 결합되고 연결됩니다. 또한 각 기관이 알맞게 기능을 하여 온몸이 자라나게 됩니다. 그리하여 사랑으로 성장하는 것입니다.","우리의 몸은 각 부분이 자기 구실을 다함으로써 각 마디로 서로 연결되고 얽혀서 영양분을 받아 자라납니다. 그리스도를 머리로 하는 교회도 이와 같이 하여 사랑으로 자체를 완성해 나가는 것입니다.","그에게서 온 몸이 각 마디를 통하여 도움을 받음으로 연결되고 결합되어 각 지체의 분량대로 역사하여 그 몸을 자라게 하며 사랑 안에서 스스로 세우느니라","그에게서 온 몸이 각 마디를 통하여 도움을 입음으로 연락하고 상합하여 각 지체의 분량대로 역사하여 그 몸을 자라게 하며 사랑 안에서 스스로 세우느니라","(15절에 포함되어 있음)","from whom the whole body, joined and held together by every supporting ligament, with the proper functioning of each part, brings about the body’s growth and builds itself up in love.","From whom the whole body fitly joined together and compacted by that which every joint supplieth, according to the effectual working in the measure of every part, maketh increase of the body unto the edifying of itself in love.","From him the whole body, joined and held together by every supporting ligament, grows and builds itself up in love, as each part does its work.","ex quo totum corpus compactum et conexum per omnem iuncturam subministrationis secundum operationem in mensura uniuscuiusque partis augmentum corporis facit in aedificationem sui in caritate.","אשר ממנו כל הגוף בהיותו מרכב ומדבק בכל חבור השמוש כפי מדת הפעלה הנתונה לכל אבר ואבר ירבה ויגדל להשלמת בנינו באהבה׃"],["56","4","17","그러므로 나는 주님 안에서 분명하게 말합니다. 여러분은 더 이상 헛된 마음을 가지고 살아가는 다른 민족들처럼 살아가지 마십시오.","그러므로 나는 주님의 이름으로 여러분에게 간곡히 권고합니다. 이제부터 여러분은 이방인들처럼 살지 마십시오. 그들은 헛된 생각을 하고","그러므로 내가 이것을 말하며 주 안에서 증언하노니 이제부터 너희는 이방인이 그 마음의 허망한 것으로 행함 같이 행하지 말라","그러므로 내가 이것을 말하며 주 안에서 증거하노니 이제부터는 이방인이 그 마음의 허망한 것으로 행함 같이 너희는 행하지 말라","이제 나는 주님의 이름으로 여러분에게 말합니다. 더 이상 구원받지 못할 자들이 사는 방식대로 살지 마십시오. 그들은 분별력을 잃어버리고 혼란에 빠져 있습니다. 그들은 마음을 닫고 깜깜한 어둠에 갇혀 지냅니다. 하나님을 향해 마음을 닫아 버렸기 때문에 하나님이 주시는 생명에서 멀리 떨어져 있습니다. 그들은 하나님의 길을 깨닫지 못합니다.","So I declare and testify in the Lord that you must no longer live as the Gentiles do, in the futility of their minds;","This I say therefore, and testify in the Lord, that ye henceforth walk not as other Gentiles walk, in the vanity of their mind,","So I tell you this, and insist on it in the Lord, that you must no longer live as the Gentiles do, in the futility of their thinking.","Hoc igitur dico et testificor in Domino, ut iam non ambuletis, sicut et gentes ambulant in vanitate sensus sui","והנה זאת אני אמר ומעיד באדון כי מעתה לא תלכו עוד כיתר הגוים ההלכים בהבלי שכלם׃"],["56","4","18","그들 안에 자리 잡은 무지와 완고한 마음 때문에, 그들은 정신이 어두워져 있고 하느님의 생명에서 멀어져 있습니다.","마음이 어두워져서 하느님께서 주시는 생명을 받지 못할 사람이 되었습니다. 그것은 그들이 무지하고 마음이 완고하기 때문입니다.","그들의 총명이 어두워지고 그들 가운데 있는 무지함과 그들의 마음이 굳어짐으로 말미암아 하나님의 생명에서 떠나 있도다","저희 총명이 어두워지고 저희 가운데 있는 무지함과 저희 마음이 굳어짐으로 말미암아 하나님의 생명에서 떠나 있도다","(17절에 포함되어 있음)","darkened in understanding, alienated from the life of God because of their ignorance, because of their hardness of heart,","Having the understanding darkened, being alienated from the life of God through the ignorance that is in them, because of the blindness of their heart:","They are darkened in their understanding and separated from the life of God because of the ignorance that is in them due to the hardening of their hearts.","tenebris obscuratum habentes intellectum, alienati a vita Dei propter ignorantiam, quae est in illis propter caecitatem cordis ipsorum;","חשכי הדעת ומוזרים לחיי אלהים מפני אולתם אשר בהם כי טח מהשכיל לבבם׃"],["56","4","19","감각이 없어진 그들은 자신을 방탕에 내맡겨 온갖 더러운 일을 탐욕스럽게 해 댑니다.","그들은 도덕적인 감각을 잃고 제멋대로 방탕에 빠져서 온갖 더러운 짓을 하고 있습니다.","그들이 감각 없는 자가 되어 자신을 방탕에 방임하여 모든 더러운 것을 욕심으로 행하되","저희가 감각 없는 자 되어 자신을 방탕에 방임하여 모든 더러운 것을 욕심으로 행하되","그들은 선과 악도 구별하지 못하고 자신을 불결한 생활 속에 내맡기고 있습니다. 그들은 악한 생각과 무분별한 욕망에 이끌려 그런 생활을 멈추려고 하지 않습니다.","they have become callous and have handed themselves over to licentiousness for the practice of every kind of impurity to excess.","Who being past feeling have given themselves over unto lasciviousness, to work all uncleanness with greediness.","Having lost all sensitivity, they have given themselves over to sensuality so as to indulge in every kind of impurity, with a continual lust for more.","qui indolentes semetipsos tradiderunt impudicitiae in operationem immunditiae omnis in avaritia.","אשר השמינו ויתנו את נפשם לזמה לעשות כל תועבה באהבת הבצע׃"],["56","4","20","그러나 여러분은 그리스도를 그렇게 배우지 않았습니다.","그러나 여러분은 그리스도를 그렇게 배우지는 않았습니다.","오직 너희는 그리스도를 그같이 배우지 아니하였느니라","오직 너희는 그리스도를 이같이 배우지 아니하였느니라","그러나 그리스도께서는 여러분에게 그렇게 살라고 가르쳐 주시지 않았습니다.","That is not how you learned Christ,","But ye have not so learned Christ;","You, however, did not come to know Christ that way.","Vos autem non ita didicistis Christum,","ואתם לא כן למדתם את המשיח׃"],["56","4","21","여러분은 예수님 안에 있는 진리대로, 그분에 관하여 듣고 또 가르침을 받았을 줄 압니다.","그리스도 예수 안에는 진리가 있을 따름인데 여러분이 그의 가르침을 그대로 듣고 배웠다면","진리가 예수 안에 있는 것 같이 너희가 참으로 그에게서 듣고 또한 그 안에서 가르침을 받았을진대","4)진리가 예수 안에 있는 것 같이 너희가 과연 그에게서 듣고 또한 그 안에서 가르침을 받았을찐대 헬, 참","만일 여러분이 참으로 그리스도의 음성을 듣고 그리스도에 대한 진리를 배우고자 한다면","assuming that you have heard of him and were taught in him, as truth is in Jesus,","If so be that ye have heard him, and have been taught by him, as the truth is in Jesus:","Surely you heard of him and were taught in him in accordance with the truth that is in Jesus.","si tamen illum audistis et in ipso edocti estis, sicut est veritas in Iesu:","אם אמנם אתו שמעתם ובו למדתם כפי האמת בישוע׃"],["56","4","22","곧 지난날의 생활 방식에 젖어 사람을 속이는 욕망으로 멸망해 가는 옛 인간을 벗어 버리고,","옛 생활을 청산하고, 정욕에 말려들어 썩어져 가는 낡은 인간성을 벗어버리고,","너희는 유혹의 욕심을 따라 썩어져 가는 구습을 따르는 옛 사람을 벗어 버리고","너희는 유혹의 욕심을 따라 썩어져 가는 구습을 좇는 옛 사람을 벗어 버리고","여러분의 그 낡고 악한 옛 사람을 뽑아 던지십시오. 여러분의 그 낡고 악한 옛 사람이야 말로 육욕과 속임수로 가득 차서 속속들이 다 썩어 버린 지난날 여러분의 자화상입니다.","that you should put away the old self of your former way of life, corrupted through deceitful desires,","That ye put off concerning the former conversation the old man, which is corrupt according to the deceitful lusts;","You were taught, with regard to your former way of life, to put off your old self, which is being corrupted by its deceitful desires;","deponere vos secundum pristinam conversationem veterem hominem, qui corrumpitur secundum desideria erroris,","אשר תסורו מדרכיכם הראשנים ותפשטו את האדם הישן הנשחת בתאות התרמית׃"],["56","4","23","여러분의 영과 마음이 새로워져,","마음과 생각이 새롭게 되어","오직 너희의 심령이 새롭게 되어","오직 심령으로 새롭게 되어","이제 여러분은 태도와 생각을 새롭게 바꾸어야 합니다.","and be renewed in the spirit of your minds,","And be renewed in the spirit of your mind;","to be made new in the attitude of your minds;","renovari autem spiritu mentis vestrae","ותתחדשו ברוח שכלכם׃"],["56","4","24","진리의 의로움과 거룩함 속에서 하느님의 모습에 따라 창조된 새 인간을 입어야 한다는 것입니다.","하느님의 형상대로 창조된 새 사람으로 갈아 입어야 합니다. 새 사람은 올바르고 거룩한 진리의 생활을 하는 사람입니다.","하나님을 따라 의와 진리의 거룩함으로 지으심을 받은 새 사람을 입으라","하나님을 따라 의와 진리의 거룩함으로 지으심을 받은 새 사람을 입으라","여러분은 전혀 다른 새 사람, 거룩하고 선한 사람이 되어야 합니다. 여러분은 새사람이 되십시오.","and put on the new self, created in God’s way in righteousness and holiness of truth.","And that ye put on the new man, which after God is created in righteousness and true holiness.","and to put on the new self, created to be like God in true righteousness and holiness.","et induere novum hominem, qui secundum Deum creatus est in iustitia et sanctitate veritatis.","ותלבשו את האדם החדש הנברא כדמות אלהים בצדקה וקדשת האמת׃"],["56","4","25","그러므로 거짓을 벗어 버리고 “저마다 이웃에게 진실을 말하십시오.” 우리는 서로 지체입니다.","그러므로 거짓말을 하지 말고 2)이웃에게 진실을 말하십시오. 우리는 서로 한 몸의 지체들입니다. 즈가 8:16.","그런즉 거짓을 버리고 ㄴ)각각 그 이웃과 더불어 참된 것을 말하라 이는 우리가 서로 지체가 됨이라","그런즉 거짓을 버리고 ㄴ)각각 그 이웃으로 더불어 참된 것을 말하라 이는 우리가 서로 지체가 됨이니라 슥 8:16","ㄴ) 거짓말을 하지 말고 진실만을 말하십시오. 한 몸의 지체인 우리가 서로 거짓말을 하면 우리 자신에게 상처를 입히는 셈입니다. (ㄴ. 슥8:16)","Therefore, putting away falsehood, speak the truth, each one to his neighbor, for we are members one of another.","Wherefore putting away lying, speak every man truth with his neighbour: for we are members one of another.","Therefore each of you must put off falsehood and speak truthfully to his neighbor, for we are all members of one body.","Propter quod deponentes mendacium loquimini veritatem unusquisque cum proximo suo, quoniam sumus invicem membra.","על כן הסירו מכם את השקר ודברו אמת איש את רעהו כי אברים כלנו יחד איש לאיש׃"],["56","4","26","“화가 나더라도 죄는 짓지 마십시오.” 해가 질 때까지 노여움을 품고 있지 마십시오.","3)화나는 일이 있더라도 죄를 짓지 마십시오. 해 질 때까지 화를 풀지 않으면 안 됩니다. 칠십인역 시편 4:4.","ㄷ)분을 내어도 죄를 짓지 말며 해가 지도록 분을 품지 말고","ㄷ)분을 내어도 죄를 짓지 말며 해가 지도록 분을 품지 말고 시 4:4","혹시 분한 일을 당하더라도 원한을 품어서 죄를 짓는 일이 없도록 하십시오. 해가 지기 전에는 다 잊어버리고 냉정을 되찾으십시오.","Be angry but do not sin; do not let the sun set on your anger,","Be ye angry, and sin not: let not the sun go down upon your wrath:","\"In your anger do not sin\": Do not let the sun go down while you are still angry,","Irascimini et nolite peccare; sol non occidat super iracundiam vestram,","רגזו ואל תחטאו אל תשקע החמה על רגזכם׃"],["56","4","27","악마에게 틈을 주지 마십시오.","악마에게 발붙일 기회를 주지 마십시오.","마귀에게 틈을 주지 말라","마귀로 틈을 타지 못하게 하라","여러분이 화를 내면 악마에게 발붙일 기회를 주기 쉽습니다.","and do not leave room for the devil.","Neither give place to the devil.","and do not give the devil a foothold.","et nolite locum dare Diabolo.","גם לא תתנו מקום לשטן׃"],["56","4","28","도둑질하던 사람은 더 이상 도둑질을 하지 말고, 자기 손으로 애써 좋은 일을 하여 곤궁한 이들에게 나누어 줄 수 있어야 합니다.","도둑질하던 사람은 이제부터 그런 짓을 그만두고 제 손으로 일하여 떳떳하게 살며 가난한 사람들을 도와줄 수 있도록 노력하십시오.","도둑질하는 자는 다시 도둑질하지 말고 돌이켜 가난한 자에게 구제할 수 있도록 자기 손으로 수고하여 선한 일을 하라","도적질하는 자는 다시 도적질하지 말고 돌이켜 빈궁한 자에게 구제할 것이 있기 위하여 제 손으로 수고하여 선한 일을 하라","만일 도둑질로 살아온 사람이 있거든 당장에 그 일에서 손을 떼고 그 손으로 정직한 일을 해서 어려운 사람을 도와주십시오.","The thief must no longer steal, but rather labor, doing honest work with his [own] hands, so that he may have something to share with one in need.","Let him that stole steal no more: but rather let him labour, working with his hands the thing which is good, that he may have to give to him that needeth.","He who has been stealing must steal no longer, but must work, doing something useful with his own hands, that he may have something to share with those in need.","Qui furabatur, iam non furetur, magis autem laboret operando manibus bonum, ut habeat unde tribuat necessitatem patienti.","מי שגנב אל יסף לגנב כי אם ייגע ובידיו יעשה את הטוב למען יהיה לו לתת לאיש מחסור׃"],["56","4","29","여러분의 입에서는 어떠한 나쁜 말도 나와서는 안 됩니다. 필요할 때에 다른 이의 성장에 좋은 말을 하여, 그 말이 듣는 이들에게 은총을 가져다줄 수 있도록 하십시오.","남을 해치는 말은 입 밖에도 내지 마십시오. 오히려 기회 있는 대로 남에게 이로운 말을 하여 도움을 주고 듣는 사람에게 기쁨을 주도록 하십시오.","무릇 더러운 말은 너희 입 밖에도 내지 말고 오직 덕을 세우는 데 소용되는 대로 선한 말을 하여 듣는 자들에게 은혜를 끼치게 하라","무릇 더러운 말은 너희 입밖에도 내지 말고 오직 덕을 세우는데 소용되는대로 선한 말을 하여 듣는 자들에게 은혜를 끼치게 하라","악담을 하지 말고 상대방에게 유익하고 도움이 되고 복이 되는 말만을 하십시오.","No foul language should come out of your mouths, but only such as is good for needed edification, that it may impart grace to those who hear.","Let no corrupt communication proceed out of your mouth, but that which is good to the use of edifying, that it may minister grace unto the hearers.","Do not let any unwholesome talk come out of your mouths, but only what is helpful for building others up according to their needs, that it may benefit those who listen.","Omnis sermo malus ex ore vestro non procedat, sed si quis bonus ad aedificationem opportunitatis, ut det gratiam audientibus.","כל דבר נבול לא יצא מפיכם כי אם הטוב והמועיל לבנות לפי הצרך למען יתן חן לשמעיו׃"],["56","4","30","하느님의 성령을 슬프게 하지 마십시오. 여러분은 속량의 날을 위하여 성령의 인장을 받았습니다.","마지막 날에 여러분을 해방하여 하느님의 백성으로 삼으실 것을 보증해 주신 하느님의 성령을 슬프게 하여드리지 마십시오.","하나님의 성령을 근심하게 하지 말라 그 안에서 너희가 구원의 날까지 인치심을 받았느니라","하나님의 성령을 근심하게 하지 말라 그 안에서 너희가 구속의 날까지 인치심을 받았느니라","성령을 슬프게 하지 마십시오. 성령께서는 구원이 완성되는 날 여러분에게 구원의 보증을 인쳐 주실 분이라는 것을 잊지 마십시오.","And do not grieve the holy Spirit of God, with which you were sealed for the day of redemption.","And grieve not the holy Spirit of God, whereby ye are sealed unto the day of redemption.","And do not grieve the Holy Spirit of God, with whom you were sealed for the day of redemption.","Et nolite contristare Spiritum Sanctum Dei, in quo signati estis in diem redemptionis.","ולא תעצבו את רוח הקדש של אלהים אשר נחתמתם בו אל יום הגאלה׃"],["56","4","31","모든 원한과 격분과 분노와 폭언과 중상을 온갖 악의와 함께 내버리십시오.","모든 독설과 격정과 분노와 고함 소리와 욕설 따위는 온갖 악의와 더불어 내어버리십시오.","너희는 모든 악독과 노함과 분냄과 떠드는 것과 비방하는 것을 모든 악의와 함께 버리고","너희는 모든 악독과 노함과 분냄과 떠드는 것과 훼방하는 것을 모든 악의와 함께 버리고","심술궂고 불쾌한 태도와 성내는 버릇과 싸움과 가시 돋친 말과 남을 멸시하는 태도를 버리고","All bitterness, fury, anger, shouting, and reviling must be removed from you, along with all malice.","Let all bitterness, and wrath, and anger, and clamour, and evil speaking, be put away from you, with all malice:","Get rid of all bitterness, rage and anger, brawling and slander, along with every form of malice.","Omnis amaritudo et ira et indignatio et clamor et blasphemia tollatur a vobis cum omni malitia.","כל מרירות וחמה ורגז וצעקה וגדוף תסירו מכם עם כל הרשעה׃"],["56","4","32","서로 너그럽고 자비롭게 대하고, 하느님께서 그리스도 안에서 여러분을 용서하신 것처럼 여러분도 서로 용서하십시오.","여러분은 서로 너그럽고 따뜻하게 대해 주며 하느님께서 그리스도를 통해서 여러분을 용서하신 것처럼 서로 용서하십시오.","서로 친절하게 하며 불쌍히 여기며 서로 용서하기를 하나님이 그리스도 안에서 너희를 용서하심과 같이 하라","서로 인자하게 하며 불쌍히 여기며 서로 용서하기를 하나님이 그리스도 안에서 너희를 용서하심과 같이 하라","친절하고 부드러운 마음을 가지십시오. 여러분이 그리스도의 사람들이라는 이유만으로 하나님께서 여러분을 용서한 것같이 여러분도 서로 용서하십시오.","[And] be kind to one another, compassionate, forgiving one another as God has forgiven you in Christ.","And be ye kind one to another, tenderhearted, forgiving one another, even as God for Christ's sake hath forgiven you.","Be kind and compassionate to one another, forgiving each other, just as in Christ God forgave you.","Estote autem invicem benigni, misericordes, donantes invicem, sicut et Deus in Christo donavit vobis.","והיו טובים איש אל רעהו ורחמנים וסלחים איש לאחיו כאשר סלח לכם האלהים במשיח׃"],["56","5","1","그러므로 사랑받는 자녀답게 하느님을 본받는 사람이 되십시오.","여러분은 하느님의 사랑을 받는 자녀답게 하느님을 닮으십시오.","그러므로 사랑을 받는 자녀 같이 너희는 하나님을 본받는 자가 되고","그러므로 사랑을 입은 자녀 같이 너희는 하나님을 본받는 자가 되고","사랑받는 아이가 그의 아버지를 닮는 것같이 여러분도 모든 일에 하나님을 닮은 사람이 되십시오.","So be imitators of God, as beloved children,","Be ye therefore followers of God, as dear children;","Be imitators of God, therefore, as dearly loved children","Estote ergo imitatores Dei, sicut filii carissimi,","לכן לכו בדרך האלהים כבנים חביבים׃"],["56","5","2","그리스도께서 우리를 사랑하시고 또 우리를 위하여 당신 자신을 하느님께 바치는 향기로운 예물과 제물로 내놓으신 것처럼, 여러분도 사랑 안에서 살아가십시오.","그리스도를 본받아 여러분은 사랑의 생활을 하십시오. 그리스도께서는 우리를 사랑하신 나머지 우리를 위하여 당신 자신을 바치셔서 하느님 앞에 향기로운 예물과 희생제물이 되셨습니다.","그리스도께서 너희를 사랑하신 것 같이 너희도 사랑 가운데서 행하라 그는 우리를 위하여 자신을 버리사 향기로운 제물과 희생제물로 하나님께 드리셨느니라","그리스도께서 너희를 사랑하신 것 같이 너희도 사랑 가운데서 행하라 그는 우리를 위하여 자신을 버리사 향기로운 제물과 생축으로 하나님께 드리셨느니라","여러분을 사랑하신 나머지 여러분의 죄를 없애려고 자신을 향기로운 희생제물로 하나님께 바치신 그리스도를 본받아 다른 사람을 한마음으로 사랑하십시오.","and live in love, as Christ loved us and handed himself over for us as a sacrificial offering to God for a fragrant aroma.","And walk in love, as Christ also hath loved us, and hath given himself for us an offering and a sacrifice to God for a sweetsmelling savour.","and live a life of love, just as Christ loved us and gave himself up for us as a fragrant offering and sacrifice to God.","et ambulate in dilectione, sicut et Christus dilexit nos et tradidit seipsum pro nobis oblationem et hostiam Deo in odorem suavitatis.","והתהלכו באהבה כאשר גם המשיח אהב אתנו והקריב את נפשו בעדנו לקרבן וזבח לאלהים לריח ניחוח׃"],["56","5","3","성도들에게 걸맞게, 여러분 사이에서는 불륜이나 온갖 더러움이나 탐욕은 입에 올리는 일조차 없어야 합니다.","음행이나 온갖 추행이나 탐욕에 찬 말은 입에 담지도 마십시오. 그래야 성도로서 부끄럽지 않을 것입니다.","음행과 온갖 더러운 것과 탐욕은 너희 중에서 그 이름조차도 부르지 말라 이는 성도에게 마땅한 바니라","음행과 온갖 더러운 것과 탐욕은 너희 중에서 그 이름이라도 부르지 말라 이는 성도의 마땅한 바니라","성적 범죄나 불결한 행동이나 탐욕 때문에 불미스러운 일을 저지르거나 남을 비난하지 마십시오.","Immorality or any impurity or greed must not even be mentioned among you, as is fitting among holy ones,","But fornication, and all uncleanness, or covetousness, let it not be once named among you, as becometh saints;","But among you there must not be even a hint of sexual immorality, or of any kind of impurity, or of greed, because these are improper for God's holy people.","Fornicatio autem et omnis immunditia aut avaritia nec nominetur in vobis, sicut decet sanctos,","אבל זנות וכל טמאה ואהבת בצע בל יזכר ביניכם כאשר נאוה לקדשים׃"],["56","5","4","추잡한 말이나 어리석은 말이나 상스러운 농담처럼 온당치 못한 것들도 마찬가지입니다. 여러분은 감사의 말만 해야 합니다.","추잡한 말과 어리석은 이야기나 점잖지 못한 농담 따위도 하지 마십시오. 성도들에게는 어울리지 않습니다. 성도들에게 어울리는 것은 하느님께 대한 감사의 말입니다.","누추함과 어리석은 말이나 희롱의 말이 마땅치 아니하니 오히려 감사하는 말을 하라","누추함과 어리석은 말이나 희롱의 말이 마땅치 아니하니 돌이켜 감사하는 말을 하라","여러분에게 어울리지 않는 추잡하고 난잡한 말이나 저속한 농담을 입에 담기보다는 하나님이 얼마나 선한 분인지를 서로 이야기하고 감사를 드리십시오.","no obscenity or silly or suggestive talk, which is out of place, but instead, thanksgiving.","Neither filthiness, nor foolish talking, nor jesting, which are not convenient: but rather giving of thanks.","Nor should there be obscenity, foolish talk or coarse joking, which are out of place, but rather thanksgiving.","et turpitudo et stultiloquium aut scurrilitas, quae non decent, sed magis gratiarum actio.","גם לא נבול פה ודברי סכלות ולעג אשר לא כהגן כי אם קול תודה׃"],["56","5","5","이것을 꼭 알아 두십시오. 불륜을 저지르는 자나 더러운 자나 탐욕을 부리는 자 곧 우상 숭배자는 그리스도와 하느님의 나라에서 받을 몫이 없습니다.","음행하는 자와 더러운 짓을 하는 자와 탐욕을 부리는 자는 그리스도와 하느님의 나라에서 상속을 받지 못한다는 것을 명심하십시오. 탐욕을 부리는 자는 우상을 숭배하는 자입니다.","너희도 정녕 이것을 알거니와 음행하는 자나 더러운 자나 탐하는 자 곧 우상 숭배자는 다 그리스도와 하나님의 나라에서 기업을 얻지 못하리니","너희도 이것을 정녕히 알거니와 음행하는 자나 더러운 자나 탐하는 자 곧 우상 숭배자는 다 그리스도와 하나님 나라에서 기업을 얻지 못하리니","여러분은 그리스도와 하나님의 나라에는 불결하거나 탐욕스런 사람은 들어 갈 수 없다는 것을 잘 알고 있을 것입니다. 탐욕스런 사람은 우상 숭배자이므로 하나님보다도 이 세상의 것을 더 사랑하고 숭배하고 있습니다.","Be sure of this, that no immoral or impure or greedy person, that is, an idolater, has any inheritance in the kingdom of Christ and of God.","For this ye know, that no whoremonger, nor unclean person, nor covetous man, who is an idolater, hath any inheritance in the kingdom of Christ and of God.","For of this you can be sure: No immoral, impure or greedy person--such a man is an idolater--has any inheritance in the kingdom of Christ and of God.","Hoc enim scitote intellegentes quod omnis fornicator aut immundus aut avarus, id est idolorum cultor, non habet hereditatem in regno Christi et Dei.","כי זאת ידע תדעו כי כל זנה וטמא ואהב בצע שהוא עבד אלילים אין לו חלק ונחלה במלכות המשיח והאלהים׃"],["56","5","6","여러분은 어느 누구의 허황한 말에도 속아 넘어가지 마십시오. 그러한 것 때문에 하느님의 진노가 순종하지 않는 자들에게 내립니다.","여러분은 아무한테도 허황된 이론에 속아 넘어가지 마십시오. 이런 일 때문에 하느님의 진노가 당신을 거역하는 자들에게 내리는 것입니다.","누구든지 헛된 말로 너희를 속이지 못하게 하라 이로 말미암아 하나님의 진노가 불순종의 아들들에게 임하나니","누구든지 헛된 말로 너희를 속이지 못하게 하라 이를 인하여 하나님의 진노가 불순종의 아들들에게 임하나니","이런 죄를 짓고도 그것이 옳다고 변명하는 자들에게 속아 넘어가지 마십시오. 하나님의 무서운 진노가 이런 자들에게 내릴 것입니다.","Let no one deceive you with empty arguments, for because of these things the wrath of God is coming upon the disobedient.","Let no man deceive you with vain words: for because of these things cometh the wrath of God upon the children of disobedience.","Let no one deceive you with empty words, for because of such things God's wrath comes on those who are disobedient.","Nemo vos decipiat inanibus verbis; propter haec enim venit ira Dei in filios diffidentiae.","אל ישיא איש אתכם בדברי ריק כי בגלל אלה חרון אלהים בא על בני המרי׃"],["56","5","7","그러므로 그런 자들과 상종하지 마십시오.","그러므로 여러분은 그런 사람들과 상종하지 마십시오.","그러므로 그들과 함께 하는 자가 되지 말라","그러므로 저희와 함께 참예하는 자 되지 말라","이들과는 상종도 하지 마십시오.","So do not be associated with them.","Be not ye therefore partakers with them.","Therefore do not be partners with them.","Nolite ergo effici comparticipes eorum;","על כן אל יהי חלקכם עמהם׃"],["56","5","8","여러분은 한때 어둠이었지만 지금은 주님 안에 있는 빛입니다. 빛의 자녀답게 살아가십시오.","여러분이 전에는 어둠의 세계에서 살았지만 지금은 주님을 믿고 빛의 세계에서 살고 있습니다. 그러니 빛의 자녀답게 살아야 합니다.","너희가 전에는 어둠이더니 이제는 주 안에서 빛이라 빛의 자녀들처럼 행하라","너희가 전에는 어두움이더니 이제는 주 안에서 빛이라 빛의 자녀들처럼 행하라","과거에는 여러분의 마음이 어둠에 싸여 있었으나 지금은 주께서 주시는 빛으로 가득 차 있으니 생활로 그것을 증명해 보여야 합니다.","For you were once darkness, but now you are light in the Lord. Live as children of light,","For ye were sometimes darkness, but now are ye light in the Lord: walk as children of light:","For you were once darkness, but now you are light in the Lord. Live as children of light","eratis enim aliquando tenebrae, nunc autem lux in Domino. Ut filii lucis ambulate","כי מלפנים הייתם חשך ועתה הנכם אור באדנינו התהלכו נא כבני אור׃"],["56","5","9","빛의 열매는 모든 선과 의로움과 진실입니다.","빛은 모든 선과 정의와 진실을 열매 맺습니다.","빛의 열매는 모든 착함과 의로움과 진실함에 있느니라","빛의 열매는 모든 착함과 의로움과 1)진실함에 있느니라 헬, 참","이 빛을 간직한 여러분은 선한 일과 옳은 일과 진실한 일만을 하십시오.","for light produces every kind of goodness and righteousness and truth.","(For the fruit of the Spirit is in all goodness and righteousness and truth;)","(for the fruit of the light consists in all goodness, righteousness and truth)","- fructus enim lucis est in omni bonitate et iustitia et veritate -","כי פרי הרוח כל מעשי חסד וצדק ואמת׃"],["56","5","10","무엇이 주님 마음에 드는 것인지 가려내십시오.","주님을 기쁘게 하여드리는 일이 무엇인지를 가려내십시오.","주를 기쁘시게 할 것이 무엇인가 시험하여 보라","주께 기쁘시게 할 것이 무엇인가 시험하여 보라","여러분이 과연 어떤 생활을 해야 주님이 기뻐하실지를 생각해 보십시오.","Try to learn what is pleasing to the Lord.","Proving what is acceptable unto the Lord.","and find out what pleases the Lord.","probantes quid sit beneplacitum Domino;","ובחנו מה הוא רצוי בעיני אדנינו׃"],["56","5","11","열매를 맺지 못하는 어둠의 일에 가담하지 말고 오히려 그것을 밖으로 드러내십시오.","그래서 열매를 맺지 못하는 어둠의 행위에 끼여들지 말고 오히려 그런 일을 폭로하십시오.","너희는 열매 없는 어둠의 일에 참여하지 말고 도리어 책망하라","너희는 열매 없는 어두움의 일에 참예하지 말고 도리어 책망하라","악과 어둠의 무가치한 쾌락에 몸을 맡길 수 있겠습니까? 그럴 수 없습니다. 오히려 그런 일을 폭로하십시오.","Take no part in the fruitless works of darkness; rather expose them,","And have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, but rather reprove them.","Have nothing to do with the fruitless deeds of darkness, but rather expose them.","et nolite communicare operibus infructuosis tenebrarum, magis autem et redarguite;","ואל תשתתפו עם מעשי החשך אשר לא יעשו פרי כי אם הוכח תוכיחו אותם׃"],["56","5","12","사실 그들이 은밀히 저지르는 일들은 말하기조차 부끄러운 것입니다.","사람들은 그런 일들을 숨어서 하는데 그것들은 말하기조차 부끄러운 일들입니다.","그들이 은밀히 행하는 것들은 말하기도 부끄러운 것들이라","저희의 은밀히 행하는 것들은 말하기도 부끄러움이라","하나님을 믿지 않는 자들이 어둠 속에서 행하는 쾌락은 입에 담기에도 부끄러운 일입니다.","for it is shameful even to mention the things done by them in secret;","For it is a shame even to speak of those things which are done of them in secret.","For it is shameful even to mention what the disobedient do in secret.","quae enim in occulto fiunt ab ipsis, turpe est et dicere;","כי מה שהם עשים בסתר חרפה היא אך לספר׃"],["56","5","13","밖으로 드러나는 것은 모두 빛으로 밝혀집니다.","모든 것은 폭로되면 빛을 받아 드러나고","그러나 책망을 받는 모든 것은 빛으로 말미암아 드러나나니 드러나는 것마다 빛이니라","그러나 책망을 받는 모든 것이 빛으로 나타나나니 나타나지는 것마다 빛이니라","그러나 여러분이 그것들을 폭로할 때 빛이 그 정체를 밝혀 줄 것입니다. 그러면 스스로 잘못을 깨우쳐 그 중의 몇 사람은 빛의 자녀가 될 수 있을 것입니다.","but everything exposed by the light becomes visible,","But all things that are reproved are made manifest by the light: for whatsoever doth make manifest is light.","But everything exposed by the light becomes visible,","omnia autem, quae arguuntur, a lumine manifestantur,","אבל כל זאת יגלה כשיוכח על ידי האור כי כל הנגלה אור הוא׃"],["56","5","14","밝혀진 것은 모두 빛입니다. 그래서 이런 말씀이 있습니다. “잠자는 사람아, 깨어나라. 죽은 이들 가운데에서 일어나라. 그리스도께서 너를 비추어 주시리라.”","빛을 받아 드러나면 빛의 세계에 속하게 됩니다 \"1)잠에서 깨어나라. 죽음에서 일어나라. 그리스도께서 너에게 빛을 비추어주시리라.\"는 말씀이 이 뜻입니다.이사 26:19, 51:17, 52:1, 60:1.","그러므로 이르시기를 잠자는 자여 깨어서 죽은 자들 가운데서 일어나라 그리스도께서 너에게 비추이시리라 하셨느니라","그러므로 이르시기를 잠자는 자여 깨어서 죽은 자들 가운데서 일어나라 그리스도께서 네게 비취시리라 하셨느니라","이 때문에 하나님께서는 성경에서 이런 말씀을 하셨습니다. ㄱ) \"시온아, 어서 깨어나 힘을 내어라! 거룩한 도성 예루살렘아! 지극히 화려한 네 예복을 다시 입어라!\" (ㄱ. 사51:17,52:1)","for everything that becomes visible is light. Therefore, it says: “Awake, O sleeper, and arise from the dead, and Christ will give you light.”","Wherefore he saith, Awake thou that sleepest, and arise from the dead, and Christ shall give thee light.","for it is light that makes everything visible. This is why it is said: \"Wake up, O sleeper, rise from the dead, and Christ will shine on you.\"","omne enim, quod manifestatur, lumen est. Propter quod dicit:  “Surge, qui dormis, et exsurge a mortuis, et illuminabit te Christus “.","על כן הוא אומר עורה הישן וקומה מן המתים ויאר לך המשיח׃"],["56","5","15","그러므로 미련한 사람이 아니라 지혜로운 사람으로서 어떻게 살아가야 하는지 잘 살펴보십시오.","그러므로 여러분은 어떻게 처신해야 할지 깊이 생각해서 미련한 자처럼 살지 말고 지혜롭게 사십시오.","그런즉 너희가 어떻게 행할지를 자세히 주의하여 지혜 없는 자 같이 하지 말고 오직 지혜 있는 자 같이 하여","그런즉 너희가 어떻게 행할 것을 자세히 주의하여 지혜 없는 자 같이 말고 오직 지혜 있는 자 같이 하여","그러므로 여러분은 자신의 행실에 늘 주의를 기울여야 합니다. 지금은 악한 시대입니다. 그러니 어리석은 자가 되지 말고 현명한 자가 되십시오. 모든 기회를 충분히 살려서 선한 행동을 하십시오.","Watch carefully then how you live, not as foolish persons but as wise,","See then that ye walk circumspectly, not as fools, but as wise,","Be very careful, then, how you live--not as unwise but as wise,","Videte itaque caute quomodo ambuletis, non quasi insipientes sed ut sapientes,","ועתה ראו והזהרו להתהלך לא ככסילים כי אם כחכמים׃"],["56","5","16","시간을 잘 쓰십시오. 지금은 악한 때입니다.","이 시대는 악합니다. 그러니 여러분에게 주어진 기회를 잘 살리십시오.","세월을 아끼라 때가 악하니라","2)세월을 아끼라 3)때가 악하니라 헬, 기회를 사라헬, 그 날들이","(15절에 포함되어 있음)","making the most of the opportunity, because the days are evil.","Redeeming the time, because the days are evil.","making the most of every opportunity, because the days are evil.","redimentes tempus, quoniam dies mali sunt.","מוקירים העת כי הימים רעים המה׃"],["56","5","17","그러니 어리석은 자가 되지 말고, 주님의 뜻이 무엇인지 깨달으십시오.","여러분은 어리석은 자가 되지 말고 주님의 뜻이 무엇인지를 잘 아는 사람이 되십시오.","그러므로 어리석은 자가 되지 말고 오직 주의 뜻이 무엇인가 이해하라","그러므로 어리석은 자가 되지 말고 오직 주의 뜻이 무엇인가 이해하라","분별없이 행동하지 말고 주께서 여러분에게 원하시는 것을 실천하십시오.","Therefore, do not continue in ignorance, but try to understand what is the will of the Lord.","Wherefore be ye not unwise, but understanding what the will of the Lord is.","Therefore do not be foolish, but understand what the Lord's will is.","Propterea nolite fieri imprudentes, sed intellegite, quae sit voluntas Domini.","על כן אל תהיו חסרי דעת כי אם מבינים לדעת מה הוא רצון אדנינו׃"],["56","5","18","술에 취하지 마십시오. 거기에서 방탕이 나옵니다. 오히려 성령으로 충만해지십시오.","술 취하지 마십시오. 방탕한 생활이 거기에서 옵니다. 여러분은 성령을 가득히 받아야 합니다.","술 취하지 말라 이는 방탕한 것이니 오직 성령으로 충만함을 받으라","술 취하지 말라 이는 방탕한 것이니 오직 성령의 충만을 받으라","ㄴ) 술에 취해 살지 마십시오. 그 길에는 많은 악이 숨어 있습니다. 그보다 성령에 취하여 성령의 지배를 받으십시오. (ㄴ. 70인역 잠23:31)","And do not get drunk on wine, in which lies debauchery, but be filled with the Spirit,","And be not drunk with wine, wherein is excess; but be filled with the Spirit;","Do not get drunk on wine, which leads to debauchery. Instead, be filled with the Spirit.","Et nolite inebriari vino, in quo est luxuria, sed implemini Spiritu","ואל תשתכרו מיין המביא לידי פריצות כי אם המלאו ברוח׃"],["56","5","19","시편과 찬미가와 영가로 서로 화답하고, 마음으로 주님께 노래하며 그분을 찬양하십시오.","성시와 찬송가와 영가를 모두 같이 부르십시오. 그리고 진정한 마음으로 노래불러 주님을 찬양하십시오.","시와 찬송과 신령한 노래들로 서로 화답하며 너희의 마음으로 주께 노래하며 찬송하며","시와 찬미와 신령한 노래들로 서로 화답하며 너희의 마음으로 주께 노래하며 찬송하며","시편과 찬송가를 암송하고 거룩한 노래를 부르십시오. 마음속에서 우러난 노래를 불러 주님을 찬양하십시오.","addressing one another [in] psalms and hymns and spiritual songs, singing and playing to the Lord in your hearts,","Speaking to yourselves in psalms and hymns and spiritual songs, singing and making melody in your heart to the Lord;","Speak to one another with psalms, hymns and spiritual songs. Sing and make music in your heart to the Lord,","loquentes vobismetipsis in psalmis et hymnis et canticis spiritalibus, cantantes et psallentes in cordibus vestris Domino.","ושיחו איש לרעהו בתהלות ותשבחות ושירות רוחניות שירו וזמרו לאדני בלבבכם׃"],["56","5","20","그러면서 모든 일에 언제나 우리 주 예수 그리스도의 이름으로 하느님 아버지께 감사를 드리십시오.","또 모든 일에 언제나 우리 주 예수 그리스도의 이름으로 하느님 아버지께 감사 드리십시오.","범사에 우리 주 예수 그리스도의 이름으로 항상 아버지 하나님께 감사하며","범사에 우리 주 예수 그리스도의 이름으로 항상 아버지 하나님께 감사하며","우리 주 예수 그리스도의 이름으로 항상 아버지 하나님께 감사를 드리십시오.","giving thanks always and for everything in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ to God the Father.","Giving thanks always for all things unto God and the Father in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ;","always giving thanks to God the Father for everything, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ.","Gratias agentes semper pro omnibus in nomine Domini nostri Iesu Christi Deo et Patri,","והודו בכל עת על הכל לאלהים אבינו בשם אדנינו ישוע המשיח׃"],["56","5","21","그리스도를 경외하는 마음으로 서로 순종하십시오.","여러분은 그리스도를 공경하는 정신으로 서로 복종하십시오.","그리스도를 경외함으로 피차 복종하라","그리스도를 경외함으로 피차 복종하라","서로 순종하면서 그리스도를 높이십시오.","Be subordinate to one another out of reverence for Christ.","Submitting yourselves one to another in the fear of God.","Submit to one another out of reverence for Christ.","subiecti invicem in timore Christi.","הכנעו איש לאחיו ביראת אלהים׃"],["56","5","22","아내는 주님께 순종하듯이 남편에게 순종해야 합니다.","아내 된 사람들은 주님께 순종하듯 자기 남편에게 순종하십시오.","아내들이여 자기 남편에게 복종하기를 주께 하듯 하라","아내들이여 자기 남편에게 복종하기를 주께 하듯하라","아내된 사람은 주께 순종하듯이 남편에게 순종하십시오.","Wives should be subordinate to their husbands as to the Lord.","Wives, submit yourselves unto your own husbands, as unto the Lord.","Wives, submit to your husbands as to the Lord.","Mulieres viris suis sicut Domino,","הנשים הכנענה לבעליכן כמו לאדנינו׃"],["56","5","23","남편은 아내의 머리입니다. 이는 그리스도께서 교회의 머리이시고 그 몸의 구원자이신 것과 같습니다.","그리스도께서 당신의 몸인 교회의 구원자로서 그 교회의 머리가 되시는 것처럼 남편은 아내의 주인이 됩니다.","이는 남편이 아내의 머리 됨이 그리스도께서 교회의 머리 됨과 같음이니 그가 바로 몸의 구주시니라","이는 남편이 아내의 머리 됨이 그리스도께서 교회의 머리 됨과 같음이니 그가 친히 몸의 구주시니라","그리스도께서 그분의 몸인 교회를 책임지시듯이 남편도 자기 아내를 책임지고 있기 때문입니다. 그리스도께서는 교회를 돌보고 또 교회의 머리가 되려고 목숨까지 버리셨습니다.","For the husband is head of his wife just as Christ is head of the church, he himself the savior of the body.","For the husband is the head of the wife, even as Christ is the head of the church: and he is the saviour of the body.","For the husband is the head of the wife as Christ is the head of the church, his body, of which he is the Savior.","quoniam vir caput est mulieris, sicut et Christus caput est ecclesiae, ipse salvator corporis.","כי האיש הוא ראש האשה כאשר המשיח הוא ראש העדה והוא מושיע של הגוף׃"],["56","5","24","교회가 그리스도께 순종하듯이, 아내도 모든 일에서 남편에게 순종해야 합니다.","교회가 그리스도께 순종하는 것처럼 아내도 모든 일에 자기 남편에게 순종해야 합니다.","그러므로 교회가 그리스도에게 하듯 아내들도 범사에 자기 남편에게 복종할지니라","그러나 교회가 그리스도에게 하듯 아내들도 범사에 그 남편에게 복종할찌니라","그러므로 아내된 사람은 교회가 그리스도께 순종하듯 어떤 일에나 기쁜 마음으로 남편에게 순종해야 합니다.","As the church is subordinate to Christ, so wives should be subordinate to their husbands in everything.","Therefore as the church is subject unto Christ, so let the wives be to their own husbands in every thing.","Now as the church submits to Christ, so also wives should submit to their husbands in everything.","Sed ut ecclesia subiecta est Christo, ita et mulieres viris in omnibus.","אבל כאשר תכנע העדה למשיח ככה גם הנשים לבעליהן בכל דבר׃"],["56","5","25","남편 여러분, 그리스도께서 교회를 사랑하시고 교회를 위하여 당신 자신을 바치신 것처럼, 아내를 사랑하십시오.","남편 된 사람들은 그리스도께서 교회를 사랑하셔서 당신의 몸을 바치신 것처럼 자기 아내를 사랑하십시오.","남편들아 아내 사랑하기를 그리스도께서 교회를 사랑하시고 그 교회를 위하여 자신을 주심 같이 하라","남편들아 아내 사랑하기를 그리스도께서 교회를 사랑하시고 위하여 자신을 주심 같이 하라","또 남편된 사람은 그리스도께서 목숨을 버리면서까지 교회를 사랑하신 것처럼 자기 아내를 사랑하십시오.","Husbands, love your wives, even as Christ loved the church and handed himself over for her","Husbands, love your wives, even as Christ also loved the church, and gave himself for it;","Husbands, love your wives, just as Christ loved the church and gave himself up for her","Viri, diligite uxores, sicut et Christus dilexit ecclesiam et seipsum tradidit pro ea,","האנשים אהבו את נשיכם כאשר גם המשיח אהב את העדה ויתן את נפשו בעדה׃"],["56","5","26","그리스도께서 그렇게 하신 것은 교회를 말씀과 더불어 물로 씻어 깨끗하게 하셔서 거룩하게 하시려는 것이었습니다.","그리스도께서는 물로 씻는 예식과 말씀으로 교회를 거룩하게 하시려고 당신의 몸을 바치셨습니다.","이는 곧 물로 씻어 말씀으로 깨끗하게 하사 거룩하게 하시고","이는 곧 물로 씻어 말씀으로 깨끗하게 하사 거룩하게 하시고","그리스도께서는 침례와 하나님의 말씀으로 교회를 씻어 거룩하고 정결케 하시려고 목숨까지 버리셨습니다.","to sanctify her, cleansing her by the bath of water with the word,","That he might sanctify and cleanse it with the washing of water by the word,","to make her holy, cleansing her by the washing with water through the word,","ut illam sanctificaret mundans lavacro aquae in verbo,","למען קדשה בדברו אחרי אשר טהרה ברחיצת המים׃"],["56","5","27","그리고 교회를 티나 주름 같은 것 없이 아름다운 모습으로 당신 앞에 서게 하시며, 거룩하고 흠 없게 하시려는 것이었습니다.","그것은 교회로 하여금 티나 주름이나 그 밖의 어떤 추한 점도 없이 거룩하고 흠없는 아름다운 모습으로 당신 앞에 서게 하시려는 것입니다.","자기 앞에 영광스러운 교회로 세우사 티나 주름 잡힌 것이나 이런 것들이 없이 거룩하고 흠이 없게 하려 하심이라","자기 앞에 영광스러운 교회로 세우사 티나 주름잡힌 것이나 이런 것들이 없이 거룩하고 흠이 없게 하려 하심이니라","한 점의 티나 주름도 없고 어떠한 상처도 없는 거룩하고 흠없는 영광스러운 교회로서 맞아들이려고 그렇게 하신 것입니다.","that he might present to himself the church in splendor, without spot or wrinkle or any such thing, that she might be holy and without blemish.","That he might present it to himself a glorious church, not having spot, or wrinkle, or any such thing; but that it should be holy and without blemish.","and to present her to himself as a radiant church, without stain or wrinkle or any other blemish, but holy and blameless.","ut exhiberet ipse sibi gloriosam ecclesiam non habentem maculam aut rugam aut aliquid eiusmodi, sed ut sit sancta et immaculata.","להקימה בכבוד לו לעדה אשר אין בה כתם וקמט וכדומה כי אם למען תהיה קדושה ותמימה׃"],["56","5","28","남편도 이렇게 아내를 제 몸같이 사랑해야 합니다. 자기 아내를 사랑하는 사람은 자기 자신을 사랑하는 것입니다.","이와 같이 남편 된 사람들도 자기 아내를 제 몸같이 사랑해야 합니다. 자기 아내를 사랑하는 것은 자기 자신을 사랑하는 것이 아니겠습니까?","이와 같이 남편들도 자기 아내 사랑하기를 자기 자신과 같이 할지니 자기 아내를 사랑하는 자는 자기를 사랑하는 것이라","이와 같이 남편들도 자기 아내 사랑하기를 제몸 같이 할찌니 자기 아내를 사랑하는 자는 자기를 사랑하는 것이라","이것이야말로 남편이 아내에게 취할 태도입니다. 남편은 아내를 자기 몸의 지체처럼 사랑하십시오. 남편과 아내는 이제 한 몸이 되었기 때문에 남편이 아내를 사랑하는 것은 자기 자신을 사랑하는 것입니다.","So [also] husbands should love their wives as their own bodies. He who loves his wife loves himself.","So ought men to love their wives as their own bodies. He that loveth his wife loveth himself.","In this same way, husbands ought to love their wives as their own bodies. He who loves his wife loves himself.","Ita et viri debent diligere uxores suas ut corpora sua. Qui suam uxorem diligit, seipsum diligit;","כן האנשים חיבים לאהב את נשיהם כגופם כי האהב את אשתו אהב את עצמו׃"],["56","5","29","아무도 자기 몸을 미워하지 않습니다. 그리스도께서 교회를 위하여 하시는 것처럼 오히려 자기 몸을 가꾸고 보살핍니다.","도대체 자기 몸을 미워하는 사람은 없습니다. 오히려 자기 몸을 기르고 보살펴 줍니다. 그리스도께서도 교회를 기르시고 보살펴 주십니다.","누구든지 언제나 자기 육체를 미워하지 않고 오직 양육하여 보호하기를 그리스도께서 교회에게 함과 같이 하나니","누구든지 언제든지 제 육체를 미워하지 않고 오직 양육하여 보호하기를 그리스도께서 교회를 보양함과 같이 하나니","자기 몸을 미워하는 사람은 없습니다. 오히려 자기 몸을 더 사랑하고 돌보아줍니다. 마치 그리스도께서 자신의 몸인 교회를 돌보아 주시는 것과 같습니다. 우리는 그리스도의 몸에 딸려 있는 각 지체입니다.","For no one hates his own flesh but rather nourishes and cherishes it, even as Christ does the church,","For no man ever yet hated his own flesh; but nourisheth and cherisheth it, even as the Lord the church:","After all, no one ever hated his own body, but he feeds and cares for it, just as Christ does the church--","nemo enim umquam carnem suam odio habuit, sed nutrit et fovet eam sicut et Christus ecclesiam,","כי מעולם לא שנא איש את בשרו כי אם זן ומכלכל אתו כאשר גם האדון את עדתו׃"],["56","5","30","우리는 그분 몸의 지체입니다.","우리는 그리스도의 몸의 지체들입니다.","우리는 그 몸의 지체임이라","우리는 그 몸의 지체임이니라","(29절에 포함되어 있음)","because we are members of his body.","For we are members of his body, of his flesh, and of his bones.","for we are members of his body.","quia membra sumus corporis eius.","כי אברי גופו אנחנו משברו ומעצמיו׃"],["56","5","31","“그러므로 남자는 아버지와 어머니를 떠나 아내와 결합하여, 둘이 한 몸이 됩니다.”","성서에 \"2)그러므로 사람이 부모를 떠나 자기 아내와 결합하여 둘이 한 몸을 이룬다.\"는 말씀이 있습니다. 창세 2:24.","ㄱ)그러므로 사람이 부모를 떠나 그의 아내와 합하여 그 둘이 한 육체가 될지니","ㄱ)이러므로 사람이 부모를 떠나 그 아내와 합하여 그 둘이 한 육체가 될찌니 창 2:24","남편과 아내가 한 몸이라는 것은 성경도 증거하고 있습니다. ㄱ) \"그러므로 사람은 부모를 떠나 자기 아내와 결합하여 둘이 한 몸을 이룬다\" 라고 한 말씀이 바로 그것입니다. (ㄱ. 창2:24)","“For this reason a man shall leave [his] father and [his] mother and be joined to his wife, and the two shall become one flesh.”","For this cause shall a man leave his father and mother, and shall be joined unto his wife, and they two shall be one flesh.","\"For this reason a man will leave his father and mother and be united to his wife, and the two will become one flesh.\"","Propter hoc relinquet homo patrem et matrem et adhaerebit uxori suae, et erunt duo in carne una.","על כן יעזב איש את אביו ואת אמו ודבק באשתו והיו שניהם לבשר אחד׃"],["56","5","32","이는 큰 신비입니다. 그러나 나는 그리스도와 교회를 두고 이 말을 합니다.","참으로 심오한 진리가 담겨져 있는 말씀입니다. 나는 이 말씀이 그리스도와 교회의 관계를 말해 준다고 봅니다.","이 비밀이 크도다 나는 그리스도와 교회에 대하여 말하노라","이 비밀이 크도다 내가 그리스도와 교회에 대하여 말하노라","여기에는 깊은 뜻이 담겨 있어 쉽게 이해하기 어렵지만 우리가 그리스도의 몸에 딸려 있는 각 지체라는 것을 뜻하는 데는 좋은 예입니다.","This is a great mystery, but I speak in reference to Christ and the church.","This is a great mystery: but I speak concerning Christ and the church.","This is a profound mystery--but I am talking about Christ and the church.","Mysterium hoc magnum est; ego autem dico de Christo et ecclesia!","גדול הסוד הזה ואני מפרש אתו על המשיח ועל עדתו׃"],["56","5","33","여러분도 저마다 자기 아내를 자기 자신처럼 사랑하고, 아내도 남편을 존경해야 합니다.","그러나 이 말씀은 여러분에게도 적용되는 것으로서 남편 된 사람은 자기 아내를 자기 몸같이 사랑하고 아내 된 사람은 자기 남편을 존경해야 합니다.","그러나 너희도 각각 자기의 아내 사랑하기를 자신 같이 하고 아내도 자기 남편을 존경하라","그러나 너희도 각각 자기의 아내 사랑하기를 자기 같이 하고 아내도 그 남편을 경외하라","한 번 더 당부합니다. 남편은 아내를 자기 몸의 한 부분처럼 사랑하십시오. 그리고 아내는 남편에게 순종하고 진심으로 받들어 깊이 존경하십시오.","In any case, each one of you should love his wife as himself, and the wife should respect her husband.","Nevertheless let every one of you in particular so love his wife even as himself; and the wife see that she reverence her husband.","However, each one of you also must love his wife as he loves himself, and the wife must respect her husband.","Verumtamen et vos singuli unusquisque suam uxorem sicut seipsum diligat; uxor autem timeat virum.","ואולם גם אתם כל איש מכם יאהב את אשתו כנפשו והאשה היא תזהר ותירא את בעלה׃"],["56","6","1","자녀 여러분, 주님 안에서 부모에게 순종하십시오. 그것이 옳은 일입니다.","자녀 된 사람들은 부모에게 순종하십시오. 이것이 주님을 믿는 사람으로서 마땅히 해야 할 일입니다.","자녀들아 주 안에서 너희 부모에게 순종하라 이것이 옳으니라","자녀들아 너희 부모를 주 안에서 순종하라 이것이 옳으니라","자녀들은 부모에게 순종하십시오. 하나님께서 자녀를 감독할 권리를 부모에게 주셨으므로 자녀들은 마땅히 부모에게 순종해야 합니다.","Children, obey your parents [in the Lord], for this is right.","Children, obey your parents in the Lord: for this is right.","Children, obey your parents in the Lord, for this is right.","Filii, oboedite parentibus vestris in Domino; hoc enim est iu stum.","שמעו בנים אל הוריכם באדנינו כי ארח ישר הוא׃"],["56","6","2","“아버지와 어머니를 공경하여라.” 이는 약속이 딸린 첫 계명입니다.","\"1)네 부모를 공경하여라.\" 하신 계명은 약속이 붙어 있는 첫째 계명입니다. 신명 5:16; 출애 20:12.","ㄱ)네 아버지와 어머니를 공경하라 이것은 약속이 있는 첫 계명이니","ㄱ)네 아버지와 어머니를 공경하라 이것이 약속 있는 첫계명이니 출 20:12, 신 5:16","ㄴ) \"네 부모를 공경하라.\" 이것이 십계명 중에서 약속이 붙어 있는 첫째 계명입니다. (ㄴ. 신5:16)","“Honor your father and mother.” This is the first commandment with a promise,","Honour thy father and mother; which is the first commandment with promise;","\"Honor your father and mother\"--which is the first commandment with a promise--","Honora patrem tuum et matrem, quod est mandatum primum cum promissione,","כבד את אביך ואת אמך זאת היא המצוה הראשונה אשר לה ההבטחה׃"],["56","6","3","“네가 잘되고 땅에서 오래 살 것이다.” 하신 약속입니다.","그 약속은, 계명을 잘 지키는 사람은 2)복을 받고 땅에서 오래 살리라는 것입니다.신명 5:16; 출애 20:12.","이로써 네가 잘되고 땅에서 장수하리라","이는 네가 잘 되고 땅에서 장수하리라","그 약속이란 \"네 부모를 공경하면 너는 복을 받고 오래 살리라\"는 것입니다.","“that it may go well with you and that you may have a long life on earth.”","That it may be well with thee, and thou mayest live long on the earth.","\"that it may go well with you and that you may enjoy long life on the earth.\"","ut bene sit tibi, et sis longaevus super terram.","למען ייטב לך ולמען יאריכן ימיך על האדמה׃"],["56","6","4","그리고 아버지 여러분, 자녀들을 성나게 하지 말고 주님의 훈련과 훈계로 기르십시오.","어버이들은 자녀의 마음에 상처를 입히지 말고 주님의 정신으로 교육하고 훈계하며 잘 기르십시오.","또 아비들아 너희 자녀를 노엽게 하지 말고 오직 주의 교훈과 훈계로 양육하라","또 아비들아 너희 자녀를 노엽게 하지 말고 오직 주의 교양과 훈계로 양육하라","부모들에게도 한마디 당부하겠습니다. 자녀들을 너무 꾸짖지 마십시오. 또 잔소리를 늘어놓아 반항심을 일으키거나 분노를 품게 하지 마십시오. 그보다는 주님의 사랑이 담긴 훈계와 조언과 충고로 키우십시오.","Fathers, do not provoke your children to anger, but bring them up with the training and instruction of the Lord.","And, ye fathers, provoke not your children to wrath: but bring them up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord.","Fathers, do not exasperate your children; instead, bring them up in the training and instruction of the Lord.","Et, patres, nolite ad iracundiam provocare filios vestros, sed educate illos in disciplina et correptione Domini.","ואתם האבות אל תכעיסו את בניכם אך גדלום במוסר אדנינו ובתוכחתו׃"],["56","6","5","종 여러분, 그리스도께 순종하듯이, 두려워하고 떨면서 순수한 마음으로 현세의 주인에게 순종하십시오.","남의 종이 된 사람들은 그리스도께 복종하듯이 두렵고 떨리는 마음으로 성의를 다하여 자기 주인에게 복종하십시오.","종들아 두려워하고 떨며 성실한 마음으로 육체의 상전에게 순종하기를 그리스도께 하듯 하라","종들아 두려워하고 떨며 성실한 마음으로 육체의 상전에게 순종하기를 그리스도께 하듯하여","종들은 주인에게 복종하고 섬기는 일에 최선을 다하십시오. 그리스도를 섬기듯 자기의 주인에게 봉사하십시오.","Slaves, be obedient to your human masters with fear and trembling, in sincerity of heart, as to Christ,","Servants, be obedient to them that are your masters according to the flesh, with fear and trembling, in singleness of your heart, as unto Christ;","Slaves, obey your earthly masters with respect and fear, and with sincerity of heart, just as you would obey Christ.","Servi, oboedite dominis carnalibus cum timore et tremore, in simplicitate cordis vestri, sicut Christo;","שמעו עבדים אל אדניכם לפי הבשר ביראה ורתת ובתם לבבכם כמו למשיח׃"],["56","6","6","사람들의 비위를 맞추기 좋아하는 자들처럼 눈가림으로 하지 말고, 그리스도의 종으로서 하느님의 뜻을 진심으로 실행하십시오.","사람에게 잘 보이려고 눈가림으로만 섬기지 말고 그리스도의 종답게 진심으로 하느님의 뜻을 실천하십시오.","눈가림만 하여 사람을 기쁘게 하는 자처럼 하지 말고 그리스도의 종들처럼 마음으로 하나님의 뜻을 행하고","눈가림만 하여 사람을 기쁘게 하는 자처럼 하지 말고 그리스도의 종들처럼 1)마음으로 하나님의 뜻을 행하여 헬, 목숨","주인이 볼 때는 열심히 일하는 척하다가 뒷전에 가서는 딴 짓을 해서야 되겠습니까? 하나님께서 원하시는 것을 마음을 다해서 행하고 그리스도를 위해 일하는 것과 똑같이 언제나 기쁜 마음으로 주인을 위해 열심히 일하십시오.","not only when being watched, as currying favor, but as slaves of Christ, doing the will of God from the heart,","Not with eyeservice, as menpleasers; but as the servants of Christ, doing the will of God from the heart;","Obey them not only to win their favor when their eye is on you, but like slaves of Christ, doing the will of God from your heart.","non ad oculum servientes, quasi hominibus placentes, sed ut servi Christi facientes voluntatem Dei ex animo;","לא בעבדת מראה העין כמבקשי חן בני אדם כי אם כעבדי המשיח עשים רצון האלהים בכל נפשם׃"],["56","6","7","사람이 아니라 주님을 섬기는 것처럼 기쁘게 섬기십시오.","사람을 섬긴다고 생각하지 말고 주님을 섬기는 마음으로 기쁘게 섬기십시오.","기쁜 마음으로 섬기기를 주께 하듯 하고 사람들에게 하듯 하지 말라","단 마음으로 섬기기를 주께 하듯하고 사람들에게 하듯하지 말라","(6절에 포함되어 있음)","willingly serving the Lord and not human beings,","With good will doing service, as to the Lord, and not to men:","Serve wholeheartedly, as if you were serving the Lord, not men,","cum bona voluntate servientes, sicut Domino et non hominibus,","ועבדים בנפש חפצה את האדון ולא בני אדם׃"],["56","6","8","종이든 자유인이든 저마다 좋은 일을 하면 주님께 상을 받는다는 것을 알아 두십시오.","선한 일을 하는 사람은 그가 종이든 종이 아니든 각기 주님께로부터 그만한 상급을 받는다는 것을 알아두십시오.","이는 각 사람이 무슨 선을 행하든지 종이나 자유인이나 주께로부터 그대로 받을 줄을 앎이라","이는 각 사람이 무슨 선을 행하든지 종이나 자유하는 자나 주에게 그대로 받을 줄을 앎이니라","여러분이 종의 신분이든 자유인이든간에 선한 일을 하면 일일이 주께서 갚아 주신다는 것을 잊지 마십시오.","knowing that each will be requited from the Lord for whatever good he does, whether he is slave or free.","Knowing that whatsoever good thing any man doeth, the same shall he receive of the Lord, whether he be bond or free.","because you know that the Lord will reward everyone for whatever good he does, whether he is slave or free.","scientes quoniam unusquisque, si quid fecerit bonum, hoc percipiet a Domino, sive servus sive liber.","וידעתם כי כל דבר טוב אשר עשה האדם ישלמנו לו אדנינו אם עבד הוא או בן חורין׃"],["56","6","9","그리고 주인 여러분, 여러분도 종들을 이와 같이 대해 주십시오. 겁주는 일은 그만두십시오. 그들의 주님이시며 여러분의 주님이신 분께서 하늘에 계시고 또 그분께서는 사람을 차별하지 않으신다는 것을 알아 두십시오.","주인 된 사람들도 자기 종들에게 같은 정신으로 대해 주어야 합니다. 여러분은 종들을 협박해서는 안 됩니다. 그들에게나 여러분에게 주인이 되시는 분은 하늘에 계시며 또 그분은 모든 사람을 차별없이 대해 주신다는 것을 알아두십시오.","상전들아 너희도 그들에게 이와 같이 하고 위협을 그치라 이는 그들과 너희의 상전이 하늘에 계시고 그에게는 사람을 외모로 취하는 일이 없는 줄 너희가 앎이라","상전들아 너희도 저희에게 이와 같이 하고 공갈을 그치라 이는 저희와 너희의 상전이 하늘에 계시고 그에게는 외모로 사람을 취하는 일이 없는줄 너희가 앎이니라","주인들도 지금 내가 종들에게 권면한 것과 같은 태도를 가지십시오. 종들을 윽박지르지만 말고 정당하게 대하십시오. 여러분 자신도 그리스도의 종이라는 것을 기억하십시오. 여러분의 주님은 그들에게도 주님이 되십니다. 주께서는 사람을 차별하시지 않습니다.","Masters, act in the same way toward them, and stop bullying, knowing that both they and you have a Master in heaven and that with him there is no partiality.","And, ye masters, do the same things unto them, forbearing threatening: knowing that your Master also is in heaven; neither is there respect of persons with him.","And masters, treat your slaves in the same way. Do not threaten them, since you know that he who is both their Master and yours is in heaven, and there is no favoritism with him.","Et, domini, eadem facite illis, remittentes minas, scientes quia et illorum et vester Dominus est in caelis, et personarum acceptio non est apud eum.","ואתם האדנים ככה תעשו גם להם חדלו מגער בם וידעתם כי גם עליכם יש אדון בשמים ואין לפניו משא פנים׃"],["56","6","10","끝으로, 주님 안에서 그분의 강한 힘을 받아 굳세어지십시오.","내가 끝으로 여러분에게 권고할 말은 이것입니다. 여러분은 주님과 함께 살면서 그분에게서 강한 힘을 받아 굳세게 되십시오.","끝으로 너희가 주 안에서와 그 힘의 능력으로 강건하여지고","종말로 너희가 주 안에서와 그 힘의 능력으로 강건하여지고","끝으로 내가 여러분에게 깨우쳐 드리고 싶은 것은 여러분 속에서 역사하시는 주님의 능력으로 강한 사람이 되라는 것입니다.","Finally, draw your strength from the Lord and from his mighty power.","Finally, my brethren, be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might.","Finally, be strong in the Lord and in his mighty power.","De cetero confortamini in Domino et in potentia virtutis eius.","סוף דבר אחי חזקו באדנינו ובעז גבורתו׃"],["56","6","11","악마의 간계에 맞설 수 있도록 하느님의 무기로 완전히 무장하십시오.","속임수를 쓰는 악마에 대항할 수 있도록 하느님께서 주시는 무기로 완전무장을 하십시오.","마귀의 간계를 능히 대적하기 위하여 하나님의 전신 갑주를 입으라","마귀의 궤계를 능히 대적하기 위하여 하나님의 전신갑주를 입으라","그러니 사단의 어떤 속임수나 올무에도 대항할 수 있도록 하나님의 무기로 무장을 하십시오.","Put on the armor of God so that you may be able to stand firm against the tactics of the devil.","Put on the whole armour of God, that ye may be able to stand against the wiles of the devil.","Put on the full armor of God so that you can take your stand against the devil's schemes.","Induite armaturam Dei, ut possitis stare adversus insidias Diaboli.","לבשו כלי נשק אלהים למען תוכלו עמד נגד נכלי השטן׃"],["56","6","12","우리의 전투 상대는 인간이 아니라, 권세와 권력들과 이 어두운 세계의 지배자들과 하늘에 있는 악령들입니다.","우리가 대항하여 싸워야 할 원수들은 인간이 아니라 권세와 세력의 악신들과 암흑 세계의 지배자들과 하늘의 악령들입니다.","우리의 씨름은 혈과 육을 상대하는 것이 아니요 통치자들과 권세들과 이 어둠의 세상 주관자들과 하늘에 있는 악의 영들을 상대함이라","우리의 씨름은 혈과 육에 대한 것이 아니요 정사와 권세와 이 어두움의 세상 주관자들과 하늘에 있는 악의 영들에게 대함이라","우리가 싸워야 할 적들은 살과 피를 가진 인간이 아니라 육체가 없는 자들입니다. 다시 말해서 그들은 눈에는 보이지 않는 세상의 악한 지배자들과 강력한 존재와 이 세상을 지배하는 어둠의 왕들과 영적 세계에 있는 무수한 악령들입니다.","For our struggle is not with flesh and blood but with the principalities, with the powers, with the world rulers of this present darkness, with the evil spirits in the heavens.","For we wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against principalities, against powers, against the rulers of the darkness of this world, against spiritual wickedness in high places.","For our struggle is not against flesh and blood, but against the rulers, against the authorities, against the powers of this dark world and against the spiritual forces of evil in the heavenly realms.","Quia non est nobis colluctatio adversus sanguinem et carnem sed adversus principatus, adversus potestates, adversus mundi rectores tenebrarum harum, adversus spiritalia nequitiae in caelestibus.","כי לא עם בשר ודם מלחמתנו כי עם שרים ושליטים עם המשלים בחשכת העולם הזה עם הרוחות הרעות אשר במרומים׃"],["56","6","13","그러므로 악한 날에 그들에게 대항할 수 있도록, 그리고 모든 채비를 마치고서 그들에게 맞설 수 있도록, 하느님의 무기로 완전한 무장을 갖추십시오.","그러므로 지금 하느님의 무기로 완전무장을 하십시오. 그래야 악한 무리가 공격해 올 때에 그들을 대항하여 원수를 완전히 무찌르고 승리를 거둘 수 있을 것입니다.","그러므로 하나님의 전신 갑주를 취하라 이는 악한 날에 너희가 능히 대적하고 모든 일을 행한 후에 서기 위함이라","그러므로 하나님의 전신갑주를 취하라 이는 악한 날에 너희가 능히 대적하고 모든 일을 행한 후에 서기 위함이라","그러므로 언제 적이 공격해 오든지 맞서 싸울 수 있도록 하나님의 무기를 다 사용하십시오. 그렇게 하면 전쟁이 끝난 후에도 여러분은 굳게 서 있을 것입니다.","Therefore, put on the armor of God, that you may be able to resist on the evil day and, having done everything, to hold your ground.","Wherefore take unto you the whole armour of God, that ye may be able to withstand in the evil day, and having done all, to stand.","Therefore put on the full armor of God, so that when the day of evil comes, you may be able to stand your ground, and after you have done everything, to stand.","Propterea accipite armaturam Dei, ut possitis resistere in die malo et, omnibus perfectis, stare.","על כן אחזו בכלי נשק אלהים למען תוכלו לקום ביום הרע ולמלא צבאכם ולעמוד׃"],["56","6","14","그리하여 진리로 허리에 띠를 두르고 의로움의 갑옷을 입고 굳건히 서십시오.","그러므로 굳건히 서서 진리로 허리를 동이고 정의로 가슴에 무장을 하고","그런즉 서서 진리로 너희 허리 띠를 띠고 의의 호심경을 붙이고","그런즉 서서 2)진리로 너희 허리 띠를 띠고 의의 흉배를 붙이고 헬, 참","이제 여러분은 진리의 허리띠를 띠고 하나님이 인정하신다는 흉패를 가슴에 붙여야 합니다.","So stand fast with your loins girded in truth, clothed with righteousness as a breastplate,","Stand therefore, having your loins girt about with truth, and having on the breastplate of righteousness;","Stand firm then, with the belt of truth buckled around your waist, with the breastplate of righteousness in place,","State ergo succincti lumbos vestros in veritate et induti loricam iustitiae","עמדו נא חגורי מתנים באמת ומלבשים בשריון הצדק׃"],["56","6","15","발에는 평화의 복음을 위한 준비의 신을 신으십시오.","발에는 평화의 복음을 갖추어 신고","평안의 복음이 준비한 것으로 신을 신고","평안의 복음의 예비한 것으로 신을 신고","평화의 복음을 전하기 위해 빨리 달릴 수 있는 신을 신어야 합니다.","and your feet shod in readiness for the gospel of peace.","And your feet shod with the preparation of the gospel of peace;","and with your feet fitted with the readiness that comes from the gospel of peace.","et calceati pedes in praeparatione evangelii pacis,","ורגליכם מנעלות להיותכם מוכנים לבשורת השלום׃"],["56","6","16","무엇보다도 믿음의 방패를 잡으십시오. 여러분은 악한 자가 쏘는 불화살을 그 방패로 막아서 끌 수 있을 것입니다.","손에는 언제나 믿음의 방패를 잡고 있어야 합니다. 그 방패로 여러분은 악마가 쏘는 불화살을 막아 꺼버릴 수 있을 것입니다.","모든 것 위에 믿음의 방패를 가지고 이로써 능히 악한 자의 모든 불화살을 소멸하고","모든 것 위에 믿음의 방패를 가지고 이로써 능히 악한 자의 모든 화전을 소멸하고","어떤 싸움에서든 악한 세력이 쏘는 불화살을 막아 꺼버릴 수 있는 믿음의 방패를 들고 있어야 합니다.","In all circumstances, hold faith as a shield, to quench all [the] flaming arrows of the evil one.","Above all, taking the shield of faith, wherewith ye shall be able to quench all the fiery darts of the wicked.","In addition to all this, take up the shield of faith, with which you can extinguish all the flaming arrows of the evil one.","inomnibus sumentes scutum fidei, in quo possitis omnia tela Maligni ignea exstinguere;","ועל כל אלה תפשו את מגן האמונה אשר תוכלו לכבות בו את חצי הרשע הבערים׃"],["56","6","17","그리고 구원의 투구를 받아 쓰고 성령의 칼을 받아 쥐십시오. 성령의 칼은 하느님의 말씀입니다.","구원의 투구를 받아 쓰고 성령의 칼을 받아 쥐십시오. 성령의 칼은 하느님의 말씀입니다.","구원의 투구와 성령의 검 곧 하나님의 말씀을 가지라","구원의 투구와 성령의 검 곧 하나님의 말씀을 가지라","그리고 ㄱ) 구원의 투구를 쓰고 하나님의 말씀인 성령의 칼을 손에 쥐고 있어야 합니다. (ㄱ. 사59:17)","And take the helmet of salvation and the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God.","And take the helmet of salvation, and the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God:","Take the helmet of salvation and the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God.","et galeam salutis assumite et gladium Spiritus, quod est verbum Dei;","וקחו את כובע הישועה וחרב הרוח שהיא דבר האלהים׃"],["56","6","18","여러분은 늘 성령 안에서 온갖 기도와 간구를 올려 간청하십시오. 그렇게 할 수 있도록 인내를 다하고 모든 성도들을 위하여 간구하며 깨어 있으십시오.","여러분은 또한 언제나 기도하며 하느님의 도우심을 청하십시오. 모든 경우에 성령의 도움을 받아 기도하십시오. 늘 깨어서 꾸준히 기도하며 모든 성도들을 위하여 간구하십시오.","모든 기도와 간구를 하되 항상 성령 안에서 기도하고 이를 위하여 깨어 구하기를 항상 힘쓰며 여러 성도를 위하여 구하라","모든 기도와 간구로 하되 무시로 성령 안에서 기도하고 이를 위하여 깨어 구하기를 항상 힘쓰며 여러 성도를 위하여 구하고","여러분은 또한 항상 기도하십시오. 무슨 일에나 성령께서 원하시는 선 안에서 하나님께 간구하십시오. 여러분이 필요한 것을 계속해서 아뢰십시오. 각지에 흩어져 사는 그리스도인들을 위해 열심으로 기도하십시오.","With all prayer and supplication, pray at every opportunity in the Spirit. To that end, be watchful with all perseverance and supplication for all the holy ones","Praying always with all prayer and supplication in the Spirit, and watching thereunto with all perseverance and supplication for all saints;","And pray in the Spirit on all occasions with all kinds of prayers and requests. With this in mind, be alert and always keep on praying for all the saints.","per omnem orationem et obsecrationem orantes omni tempore in Spiritu, et in ipso vigilantes in omni instantia et obsecratione pro omnibus sanctis","והתפללו תמיד בכל עת בתפלה ותחנונים ברוח ושקדו והתאמצו על זאת להעתיר תמיד בעד כל הקדשים׃"],["56","6","19","그리고 내가 입을 열면 말씀이 주어져 복음의 신비를 담대히 알릴 수 있도록 나를 위해서도 간구해 주십시오.","나를 위해서도 기도해 주십시오. 내가 말을 할 때 마땅히 해야 할 말을 하고 복음의 심오한 진리를 전할 때에 담대하게 말할 수 있도록 하느님께 기도해 주십시오.","또 나를 위하여 구할 것은 내게 말씀을 주사 나로 입을 열어 복음의 비밀을 담대히 알리게 하옵소서 할 것이니","또 나를 위하여 구할 것은 내게 말씀을 주사 나로 입을 벌려 복음의 비밀을 담대히 알리게 하옵소서 할 것이니","내가 주님에 관한 것을 담대하게 말할 때나 주님의 구원이 이방 사람들에게도 임한다는 것을 설명할 때 하나님께서 적절한 말씀을 주시도록 나를 위해서도 기도해 주십시오.","and also for me, that speech may be given me to open my mouth, to make known with boldness the mystery of the gospel","And for me, that utterance may be given unto me, that I may open my mouth boldly, to make known the mystery of the gospel,","Pray also for me, that whenever I open my mouth, words may be given me so that I will fearlessly make known the mystery of the gospel,","et pro me, ut detur mihi sermo in aperitione oris mei cum fiducia notum facere mysterium evangelii,","וגם בעדי למען ינתן לי הדבר בפתחי פי להגיד בבטחון את סוד הבשורה אשר אנכי ציר לה במוסרות׃"],["56","6","20","이 복음을 전하는 사절인 내가 비록 사슬에 매여 있어도, 말을 해야 할 때에 이 복음에 힘입어 담대해질 수 있도록 말입니다.","나는 지금 갇혀 있기는 하지만 이 복음을 전할 사명을 띤 사람입니다. 그러니 마땅히 해야 할 말은 대담하게 말할 수 있게 되기를 빕니다.","이 일을 위하여 내가 쇠사슬에 매인 사신이 된 것은 나로 이 일에 당연히 할 말을 담대히 하게 하려 하심이라","이 일을 위하여 내가 쇠사슬에 매인 사신이 된 것은 나로 이 일에 당연히 할 말을 담대히 하게 하려 하심이니라","나는 지금 하나님의 복음을 전하다가 쇠사슬에 매여 있습니다. 그러나 이 감옥 안에서도 주님을 증거하는 말을 담대하게 할 수 있도록 기도해 주십시오.","for which I am an ambassador in chains, so that I may have the courage to speak as I must.","For which I am an ambassador in bonds: that therein I may speak boldly, as I ought to speak.","for which I am an ambassador in chains. Pray that I may declare it fearlessly, as I should.","pro quo legatione fungor in catena, ut in ipso audeam, prout oportet me, loqui.","למען אדבר בה בבטחה כאשר מטל עלי לדבר׃"],["56","6","21","내 사정이 어떠한지, 내가 무엇을 하고 있는지 여러분도 알 수 있도록, 주님 안에서 사랑하는 형제이며 충실한 일꾼인 티키코스가 모든 것을 알려 줄 것입니다.","내가 지금 처해 있는 형편과 하고 있는 일을 여러분도 알았으면 합니다. 우리 친애하는 형제 디키고가 이 모든 소식을 여러분에게 알려줄 것입니다. 그는 주님을 믿는 충실한 일꾼입니다.","나의 사정 곧 내가 무엇을 하는지 너희에게도 알리려 하노니 사랑을 받은 형제요 주 안에서 진실한 일꾼인 두기고가 모든 일을 너희에게 알리리라","나의 사정 곧 내가 무엇을 하는지 너희에게도 알게 하려 하노니 사랑을 받은 형제요 주 안에서 진실한 일군인 두기고가 모든 일을 너희에게 알게 하리라","사랑하는 형제이며 주님의 일을 충실히 돕는 두기고가 여러분에게 나의 형편을 알려줄 것입니다.","So that you also may have news of me and of what I am doing, Tychicus, my beloved brother and trustworthy minister in the Lord, will tell you everything.","But that ye also may know my affairs, and how I do, Tychicus, a beloved brother and faithful minister in the Lord, shall make known to you all things:","Tychicus, the dear brother and faithful servant in the Lord, will tell you everything, so that you also may know how I am and what I am doing.","Ut autem et vos sciatis, quae circa me sunt, quid agam, omnia nota vobis faciet Tychicus, carissimus frater et fidelis minister in Domino,","ולמען אשר תדעו גם אתם את קרתי ואת מעשי הנה את הכל יודיע אתכם טוכיקוס האח החביב והמשרת הנאמן באדנינו׃"],["56","6","22","그 때문에 내가 티키코스를 여러분에게 보냅니다. 우리의 형편을 알리고 여러분의 마음을 격려하게 하려는 것입니다.","나는 우리 사정을 알리고 또 여러분의 마음을 격려하기 위하여 이 사람을 여러분에게 보냅니다.","우리 사정을 알리고 또 너희 마음을 위로하기 위하여 내가 특별히 그를 너희에게 보내었노라","우리 사정을 알게 하고 또 너희 마음을 위로하게 하기 위하여 내가 특별히 저를 너희에게 보내었노라","내가 두기고를 여러분에게 보내는 것은 우리의 형편을 알리려는 뜻도 있지만 아울러 여러분이 그의 보고를 듣고 격려를 받게 하기 위해서입니다.","I am sending him to you for this very purpose, so that you may know about us and that he may encourage your hearts.","Whom I have sent unto you for the same purpose, that ye might know our affairs, and that he might comfort your hearts.","I am sending him to you for this very purpose, that you may know how we are, and that he may encourage you.","quem misi ad vos in hoc ipsum, ut cognoscatis, quae circa nos sunt, et consoletur corda vestra.","אשר לזאת שלחתיהו אליכם למען תדעו את קרתינו ולמען ינחם את לבבכם׃"],["56","6","23","하느님 아버지와 주 예수 그리스도에게서 평화가, 그리고 믿음과 더불어 사랑이 형제들에게 내리기를 빕니다.","하느님 아버지와 주 예수 그리스도께서 여러 교우들에게 평화를 내려주시고 믿음과 더불어 사랑을 베풀어주시기를 빕니다.","아버지 하나님과 주 예수 그리스도께로부터 평안과 믿음을 겸한 사랑이 형제들에게 있을지어다","아버지 하나님과 주 예수 그리스도에게로부터 평안과 믿음을 겸한 사랑이 형제들에게 있을찌어다","하나님 아버지와 주 예수 그리스도께서 나의 믿음의 형제들인 여러분에게 평화를 내려 주시기를 기도합니다. 그리고 믿음과 더불어 충만한 사랑도 함께 베풀어 주시기를 기도합니다.","Peace be to the brothers, and love with faith, from God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.","Peace be to the brethren, and love with faith, from God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.","Peace to the brothers, and love with faith from God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.","Pax fratribus et caritas cum fide a Deo Patre et Domino Iesu Christo.","השלום לאחים והאהבה עם האמונה מאת האלהים האב ומאת האדון ישוע המשיח׃"],["56","6","24","불멸의 생명과 더불어 은총이 우리 주 예수 그리스도를 사랑하는 모든 이와 함께하기를 빕니다.","또한 우리 주 예수 그리스도를 변함없이 사랑하는 모든 사람에게 은총이 내리기를 빕니다.","우리 주 예수 그리스도를 변함 없이 사랑하는 모든 자에게 은혜가 있을지어다","우리 주 예수 그리스도를 변함 없이 사랑하는 모든 자에게 은혜가 있을찌어다","또한 우리 주 예수 그리스도를 진심으로 사랑하는 모든 사람에게 하나님의 은총이 함께 하기를 기도합니다.","Grace be with all who love our Lord Jesus Christ in immortality.","Grace be with all them that love our Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity. Amen.","Grace to all who love our Lord Jesus Christ with an undying love.","Gratia cum omnibus, qui diligunt Dominum nostrum Iesum Christum in incorruptione.","החסד עם כל האהבים את אדנינו ישוע המשיח באהבה אשר לא תכלה אמן׃"],["57","1","1","그리스도 예수님의 종 바오로와 티모테오가 그리스도 예수님 안에서 사는 필리피의 모든 성도에게, 그리고 감독들과 봉사자들에게 인사합니다.","그리스도 예수의 종인 나 바울로와 디모테오는 그리스도 예수를 믿는 필립비의 모든 성도들과 교회 지도자들과 그 보조자들에게 이 편지를 씁니다.","그리스도 예수의 종 바울과 디모데는 그리스도 예수 안에서 빌립보에 사는 모든 성도와 또한 감독들과 집사들에게 편지하노니","그리스도 예수의 종 바울과 디모데는 그리스도 예수 안에서 빌립보에 사는 모든 성도와 또는 감독들과 집사들에게 편지하노니","그리스도 예수의 종인 나 바울은 디모데와 더불어 빌립보에 사는 신실한 믿음의 식구들에게 이 편지를 씁니다.","Paul and Timothy, slaves of Christ Jesus, to all the holy ones in Christ Jesus who are in Philippi, with the overseers and ministers:","Paul and Timotheus, the servants of Jesus Christ, to all the saints in Christ Jesus which are at Philippi, with the bishops and deacons:","Paul and Timothy, servants of Christ Jesus, To all the saints in Christ Jesus at Philippi, together with the overseers and deacons:","Paulus et Timotheus servi Christi Iesu omnibus sanctis in Christo Iesu, qui sunt Philippis, cum episcopis et diaconis:","פולוס וטימותיוס עבדי המשיח ישוע אל כל הקדשים במשיח ישוע אשר הם בפילפי עם הפקידים והשמשים׃"],["57","1","2","하느님 우리 아버지와 주 예수 그리스도에게서 은총과 평화가 여러분에게 내리기를 빕니다.","하느님 우리 아버지와 주 예수 그리스도께서 은총과 평화를 여러분에게 내려주시기를 빕니다.","하나님 우리 아버지와 주 예수 그리스도로부터 은혜와 평강이 너희에게 있을지어다","하나님 우리 아버지와 주 예수 그리스도에게로서 은혜와 평강이 너희에게 있을찌어다","하나님의 은총이 여러분과 함께 하시기를 빕니다. 그리고 우리 아버지 하나님과 주 예수 그리스도께서 여러분 한 사람 한 사람에게 넘치는 은총과 평화를 내려 주시기를 빕니다.","grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.","Grace be unto you, and peace, from God our Father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ.","Grace and peace to you from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.","gratia vobis et pax a Deo Patre nostro et Domino Iesu Christo.","חסד לכם ושלום מאת האלהים אבינו ואדנינו ישוע המשיח׃"],["57","1","3","나는 여러분을 기억할 때마다 나의 하느님께 감사를 드립니다.","나는 여러분을 생각할 때마다 나의 하느님께 감사를 드리며","내가 너희를 생각할 때마다 나의 하나님께 감사하며","내가 너희를 생각할 때마다 나의 하나님께 감사하며","여러분을 생각할 때마다 나는 하나님을 찬양하는 마음으로 가득 찹니다.","I give thanks to my God at every remembrance of you,","I thank my God upon every remembrance of you,","I thank my God every time I remember you.","Gratias ago Deo meo in omni memoria vestri,","אודה לאלהי מדי זכרי אתכם׃"],["57","1","4","그리고 기도할 때마다 늘 여러분 모두를 위하여 기쁜 마음으로 기도를 드립니다.","기도할 때마다 언제나 여러분 모두를 위해서 기쁜 마음으로 간구합니다.","간구할 때마다 너희 무리를 위하여 기쁨으로 항상 간구함은","간구할 때마다 너희 무리를 위하여 기쁨으로 항상 간구함은","그리고 기쁨에 넘쳐 여러분을 위해 기도를 올립니다.","praying always with joy in my every prayer for all of you,","Always in every prayer of mine for you all making request with joy,","In all my prayers for all of you, I always pray with joy","semper in omni oratione mea pro omnibus vobis cum gaudio deprecationem faciens","ותמיד בכל תפלותי אתחנן בשמחה בעד כלכם׃"],["57","1","5","여러분이 첫날부터 지금까지 복음을 전하는 일에 동참하고 있기 때문입니다.","여러분이 그리스도를 믿기 시작한 첫날부터 오늘에 이르기까지 그 복음을 전하는 데 협력해 온 것을 나는 하느님께 감사 드립니다.","너희가 첫날부터 이제까지 복음을 위한 일에 참여하고 있기 때문이라","첫날부터 이제까지 복음에서 너희가 교제함을 인함이라","여러분이 그리스도의 복음을 처음 듣던 그날부터 오늘까지 이 복음을 전하는 일에 온 힘을 다해 협력해 주었기 때문입니다.","because of your partnership for the gospel from the first day until now.","For your fellowship in the gospel from the first day until now;","because of your partnership in the gospel from the first day until now,","super communione vestra in evangelio a prima die usque nunc;","על התחברותכם אל הבשורה למן היום הראשון ועד הנה׃"],["57","1","6","여러분 가운데에서 좋은 일을 시작하신 분께서 그리스도 예수님의 날까지 그 일을 완성하시리라고 나는 확신합니다.","여러분들에게 훌륭한 일을 시작하신 하느님께서는 그 일을 계속하실 것이며 마침내 그리스도 예수께서 다시 오시는 날 완성하실 것입니다. 이것이 나의 신념입니다.","너희 안에서 착한 일을 시작하신 이가 그리스도 예수의 날까지 이루실 줄을 우리는 확신하노라","너희 속에 착한 일을 시작하신 이가 그리스도 예수의 날까지 이루실 줄을 우리가 확신하노라","여러분 속에서 선한 일을 시작하신 하나님께서는 계속 그 일을 은혜로이 성장시켜서 예수 그리스도께서 다시 오시는 날에 완성해 주실 것을 나는 확신하고 있습니다.","I am confident of this, that the one who began a good work in you will continue to complete it until the day of Christ Jesus.","Being confident of this very thing, that he which hath begun a good work in you will perform it until the day of Jesus Christ:","being confident of this, that he who began a good work in you will carry it on to completion until the day of Christ Jesus.","confidens hoc ipsum, quia, qui coepit in vobis opus bonum, perficiet usque in diem Christi Iesu;","ובטח אני כי המתחיל בכם המעשה הטוב גם יגמרנו עד יום ישוע המשיח׃"],["57","1","7","내가 여러분 모두를 이렇게 생각하는 것이 나로서는 당연합니다. 여러분이 내 마음속에 자리 잡고 있기 때문입니다. 내가 갇혀 있을 때나, 복음을 수호하고 확증할 때나 여러분은 모두 나와 함께 은총에 동참한 사람들입니다.","여러분은 내가 갇혀 있을 때나 복음을 수호하고 입증할 때에 나와 함께 은총을 나누어 받으며 고생을 같이 해온 사람들로서 항상 내 마음속에 자리잡고 있으니 내가 여러분을 그런 생각으로 대하는 것도 당연한 일입니다.","내가 너희 무리를 위하여 이와 같이 생각하는 것이 마땅하니 이는 너희가 내 마음에 있음이며 나의 매임과 복음을 변명함과 확정함에 너희가 다 나와 함께 은혜에 참여한 자가 됨이라","내가 너희 무리를 위하여 이와 같이 생각하는 것이 마땅하니 이는 너희가 내 마음에 있음이며 나의 매임과 복음을 변명함과 확정함에 너희가 다 나와 함께 은혜에 참예한 자가 됨이라","나의 이러한 생각은 당연한 것입니다. 여러분은 내게 특별한 사람들이기 때문입니다. 내가 감옥에 있을 때나 밖에 나와서 진리를 수호하고 그리스도를 증거하고 있을 때도 우리는 하나님의 복을 함께 나누어 왔습니다.","It is right that I should think this way about all of you, because I hold you in my heart, you who are all partners with me in grace, both in my imprisonment and in the defense and confirmation of the gospel.","Even as it is meet for me to think this of you all, because I have you in my heart; inasmuch as both in my bonds, and in the defence and confirmation of the gospel, ye all are partakers of my grace.","It is right for me to feel this way about all of you, since I have you in my heart; for whether I am in chains or defending and confirming the gospel, all of you share in God's grace with me.","sicut est mihi iustum hoc sentire pro omnibus vobis, eo quod habeam in corde vos et in vinculis meis et in defensione et confirmatione evangelii socios gratiae meae omnes vos esse.","כאשר ראוי לי לחשב ככה על כלכם בעבור שאתי אתכם בלבבי במוסרי ובהצדיקי ובחזקי את הבשורה באשר כלכם חברי בחסד׃"],["57","1","8","사실 나는 그리스도 예수님의 애정으로 여러분 모두를 몹시 그리워하고 있습니다. 하느님께서 나의 증인이십니다.","내가 그리스도 예수의 지극한 사랑으로 여러분을 그리워하고 있다는 사실은 누구보다도 하느님께서 잘 알고 계십니다.","내가 예수 그리스도의 심장으로 너희 무리를 얼마나 사모하는지 하나님이 내 증인이시니라","내가 예수 그리스도의 심장으로 너희 무리를 어떻게 사모하는지 하나님이 내 증인이시니라","내가 그리스도 예수의 극진한 사랑으로 얼마나 여러분을 사랑하고 그리워하고 있는지는 누구보다도 하나님께서 잘 알고 계십니다.","For God is my witness, how I long for all of you with the affection of Christ Jesus.","For God is my record, how greatly I long after you all in the bowels of Jesus Christ.","God can testify how I long for all of you with the affection of Christ Jesus.","Testis enim mihi Deus, quomodo cupiam omnes vos in visceribus Christi Iesu.","כי האלהים לי לעד אשר לכלכם נכספתי באהבת ישוע המשיח׃"],["57","1","9","그리고 내가 기도하는 것은, 여러분의 사랑이 지식과 온갖 이해로 더욱더 풍부해져","내가 여러분을 위해서 기원하는 것은 여러분의 사랑이 참된 지식과 분별력을 갖추어 점점 더 풍성해져서","내가 기도하노라 너희 사랑을 지식과 모든 총명으로 점점 더 풍성하게 하사","내가 기도하노라 너희 사랑을 지식과 모든 총명으로 점점 더 풍성하게 하사","나는 여러분이 더욱더 남을 사랑하고, 또 그에 못지않게 영적 지식과 통찰력도 계속 성장하기를 기도합니다.","And this is my prayer: that your love may increase ever more and more in knowledge and every kind of perception,","And this I pray, that your love may abound yet more and more in knowledge and in all judgment;","And this is my prayer: that your love may abound more and more in knowledge and depth of insight,","Et hoc oro, ut caritas vestra magis ac magis abundet in scientia et omni sensu,","ועל זאת מתפלל אנכי כי תרבה ותגדל אהבתכם בהשכל ובכל דעת׃"],["57","1","10","무엇이 옳은지 분별할 줄 알게 되는 것입니다. 그리하여 여러분이 순수하고 나무랄 데 없는 사람으로 그리스도의 날을 맞이하고,","가장 옳은 것이 무엇인지를 가릴 수 있게 되었으면 하는 것입니다. 그래서 여러분이 순결하고 나무랄 데 없는 사람으로서 그리스도의 날을 맞이하게 되고","너희로 지극히 선한 것을 분별하며 또 진실하여 허물 없이 그리스도의 날까지 이르고","너희로 1)지극히 선한 것을 분별하며 또 진실하여 허물 없이 그리스도의 날까지 이르고 혹 같지 아니한 것을","그리하여 선악을 분별하는 능력이 늘 갖추어져 있고 누구로부터도 비난받을 일이 없는 정결한 사람이 되어 그리스도의 날을 맞이하기를 바랍니다.","to discern what is of value, so that you may be pure and blameless for the day of Christ,","That ye may approve things that are excellent; that ye may be sincere and without offence till the day of Christ.","so that you may be able to discern what is best and may be pure and blameless until the day of Christ,","ut probetis potiora, ut sitis sinceri et sine offensa in diem Christi,","למען תבחנו את המבחרות והייתם זכים ובלי מכשול עד יום המשיח׃"],["57","1","11","예수 그리스도를 통하여 오는 의로움의 열매를 가득히 맺어, 하느님께 영광과 찬양을 드릴 수 있게 되기를 바랍니다.","또 예수 그리스도를 믿음으로써 올바른 일을 많이 하여 하느님께 영광과 찬양을 드릴 수 있게 되기를 바랍니다.","예수 그리스도로 말미암아 의의 열매가 가득하여 하나님의 영광과 찬송이 되기를 원하노라","예수 그리스도로 말미암아 의의 열매가 가득하여 하나님의 영광과 찬송이 되게 하시기를 구하노라","또 언제나 하나님의 자녀답게 착하고 친절하게 행동하여 주님을 높이 찬양하고 주께 영광 돌리기를 바랍니다.","filled with the fruit of righteousness that comes through Jesus Christ for the glory and praise of God.","Being filled with the fruits of righteousness, which are by Jesus Christ, unto the glory and praise of God.","filled with the fruit of righteousness that comes through Jesus Christ--to the glory and praise of God.","repleti fructu iustitiae, qui est per Iesum Christum, in gloriam et laudem Dei.","מלאים פרי הצדקה על ידי ישוע המשיח לכבוד אלהים ותהלתו׃"],["57","1","12","형제 여러분, 나에게 닥친 일이 오히려 복음 전파에 도움이 되었다는 것을 알기 바랍니다.","형제 여러분, 내가 당하고 있는 일이 복음을 전파하는 일에 오히려 도움이 되었다는 사실을 알아주시기 바랍니다.","형제들아 내가 당한 일이 도리어 복음 전파에 진전이 된 줄을 너희가 알기를 원하노라","형제들아 나의 당한 일이 도리어 복음의 진보가 된 줄을 너희가 알기를 원하노라","사랑하는 형제들이여, 내가 여기서 당하고 있는 수모가 오히려 그리스도의 복음을 전파하는 데 큰 도움이 되었다는 것을 알아주기 바랍니다.","I want you to know, brothers, that my situation has turned out rather to advance the gospel,","But I would ye should understand, brethren, that the things which happened unto me have fallen out rather unto the furtherance of the gospel;","Now I want you to know, brothers, that what has happened to me has really served to advance the gospel.","Scire autem vos volo, fratres, quia, quae circa me sunt, magis ad profectum venerunt evangelii,","והנני מודיע אתכם אחי כי אשר מצאתני היתה אך ליתרון הבשורה׃"],["57","1","13","내가 그리스도 때문에 갇혀 있다는 사실이 온 경비대와 그 밖의 모든 사람에게 알려졌습니다.","내가 그리스도를 위해서 갇혀 있다는 사실이 온 경비대와 그 밖의 모든 사람들에게 알려지게 되었습니다.","이러므로 나의 매임이 그리스도 안에서 모든 시위대 안과 그 밖의 모든 사람에게 나타났으니","이러므로 나의 매임이 그리스도 안에서 온 시위대 안과 기타 모든 사람에게 나타났으니","여기 내 주위에 있는 사람들은 물론이고 병영 안에 있는 사병들에 이르기까지도 이제는 내가 단지 그리스도인이라는 이유만으로 죄 없이 감옥에 갇혀있다는 사실을 알게 되었습니다.","so that my imprisonment has become well known in Christ throughout the whole praetorium and to all the rest,","So that my bonds in Christ are manifest in all the palace, and in all other places;","As a result, it has become clear throughout the whole palace guard and to everyone else that I am in chains for Christ.","ita ut vincula mea manifesta fierent in Christo in omni praetorio et in ceteris omnibus;","עד אשר נגלו מוסרותי במשיח בכל שער המלך ולכל הנשארים׃"],["57","1","14","그리고 대부분의 형제들이 내가 갇혀 있다는 사실로 말미암아 주님 안에서 확신을 얻고, 두려움 없이 더욱 대담하게 말씀을 전하게 되었습니다.","그래서 내가 갇힌 일 때문에 많은 교우들이 주님을 더욱 확고히 믿게 되었고 이제는 조금도 두려움 없이 용감하게 하느님의 말씀을 전하게 되었습니다.","형제 중 다수가 나의 매임으로 말미암아 주 안에서 신뢰함으로 겁 없이 하나님의 말씀을 더욱 담대히 전하게 되었느니라","2)형제 중 다수가 나의 매임을 인하여 주 안에서 신뢰하므로 겁 없이 하나님의 말씀을 더욱 담대히 말하게 되었느니라 혹 주 안의 형제들","그리고 이처럼 내가 감옥에 갇힌 채 참고 견디는 것을 본 많은 그리스도인들은 감옥에 가기를 두려워하지 않고 더욱 담대하게 그리스도를 다른 사람들에게 증거할 수 있게 되었습니다.","and so that the majority of the brothers, having taken encouragement in the Lord from my imprisonment, dare more than ever to proclaim the word fearlessly.","And many of the brethren in the Lord, waxing confident by my bonds, are much more bold to speak the word without fear.","Because of my chains, most of the brothers in the Lord have been encouraged to speak the word of God more courageously and fearlessly.","et plures e fratribus in Domino confidentes vinculis meis, abundantius audere sine timore verbum loqui.","ורב האחים באדנינו הוסיפו אמץ במוסרותי והתחזקו יותר בלבבם לדבר את הדבר בלי פחד׃"],["57","1","15","사실 어떤 이들은 시기심과 경쟁심으로 그리스도를 선포하지만, 어떤 이들은 선의로 그 일을 합니다.","어떤 사람들은 사실 시기와 경쟁심으로 그리스도를 전하지만 선의를 가지고 그리스도를 전하는 사람들도 있습니다.","어떤 이들은 투기와 분쟁으로, 어떤 이들은 착한 뜻으로 그리스도를 전파하나니","어떤이들은 투기와 분쟁으로, 어떤이들은 착한 뜻으로 그리스도를 전파하나니","물론 개중에는 하나님께서 나를 이렇게 쓰시는 데 대한 질투심으로 덩달아 복음을 전하는 사람들도 있습니다. 그들이 바라는 것은 오직 두려움 없는 전도자라는 명성을 듣는 것뿐입니다. 그러나 순수한 동기에서 전도하는 사람들도 많습니다.","Of course, some preach Christ from envy and rivalry, others from good will.","Some indeed preach Christ even of envy and strife; and some also of good will:","It is true that some preach Christ out of envy and rivalry, but others out of goodwill.","Quidam quidem et propter invidiam et contentionem, quidam autem et propter bonam voluntatem Christum praedicant;","הן יש מגידים את המשיח מקנאה וריב ויש מגידים בכונה טובה׃"],["57","1","16","선의로 하는 이들은 내가 복음을 수호하도록 정해진 사람이라는 것을 알고, 사랑으로 그 일을 합니다.","선의로 전하는 사람들은 내가 복음을 수호하는 사명을 받은 사람이라는 것을 알고 사랑하는 마음으로 전하지만","이들은 내가 복음을 변증하기 위하여 세우심을 받은 줄 알고 사랑으로 하나","이들은 내가 복음을 변명하기 위하여 세우심을 받은줄 알고 사랑으로 하나","순수한 동기를 가진 사람들은 주께서 나를 이곳으로 보내신 것이 진리를 수호하는 일에 쓰시기 위한 것이라는 사실을 알고 나를 사랑하는 마음으로 전도에 애씁니다. 그러나 그렇지 않은 사람들은 자기들이 복음을 전하는 일을 잘 해내어 감옥에 갇혀 있는 내가 속상해 하고 질투하게 만들려고 전도하는 것입니다.","The latter act out of love, aware that I am here for the defense of the gospel;","The one preach Christ of contention, not sincerely, supposing to add affliction to my bonds:","The latter do so in love, knowing that I am put here for the defense of the gospel.","hi quidem ex caritate scientes quoniam in defensionem evangelii positus sum,","אלה ממריבה מגידים את המשיח לא בלב טהור כי חשבים להוסיף צרה על מוסרי׃"],["57","1","17","그러나 다른 이들은 이기심이라는 불순한 동기로 그리스도를 선포합니다. 그들은 나의 감옥 생활에 괴로움을 더할 궁리를 하는 것입니다.","이기적인 동기에서 전하는 자들은 성실한 마음으로 하는 것이 아니라 내가 감옥에 있는 동안 나를 괴롭힐 생각으로 하는 것입니다.","그들은 나의 매임에 괴로움을 더하게 할 줄로 생각하여 순수하지 못하게 다툼으로 그리스도를 전파하느니라","저들은 나의 매임에 괴로움을 더하게 할 줄로 생각하여 순전치 못하게 다툼으로 그리스도를 전파하느니라","(16절에 포함되어 있음)","the former proclaim Christ out of selfish ambition, not from pure motives, thinking that they will cause me trouble in my imprisonment.","But the other of love, knowing that I am set for the defence of the gospel.","The former preach Christ out of selfish ambition, not sincerely, supposing that they can stir up trouble for me while I am in chains.","illi autem ex contentione Christum annuntiant, non sincere, existimantes pressuram se suscitare vinculis meis.","ואלה מאהבה באשר הם ידעים כי נתון אנכי להצדיק את הבשורה׃"],["57","1","18","아무려면 어떻습니까? 가식으로 하든 진실로 하든 그리스도를 전하는 것이니, 나는 그 일로 기뻐합니다. 사실 나는 앞으로도 기뻐할 것입니다.","그러나 그것이 무슨 상관이 있겠습니까? 가식으로 하든지 진실로 하든지 결국 그리스도가 전파되는 것이니 나에게는 기쁜 일입니다. 또 앞으로도 기뻐할 것입니다.","그러면 무엇이냐 겉치레로 하나 참으로 하나 무슨 방도로 하든지 전파되는 것은 그리스도니 이로써 나는 기뻐하고 또한 기뻐하리라","그러면 무엇이뇨 외모로 하나 참으로 하나 무슨 방도로 하든지 전파되는 것은 그리스도니 이로써 내가 기뻐하고 또한 기뻐하리라","그러나 그들의 동기야 어떻든 그리스도의 복음이 전파되는 것만은 사실이니 기뻐할 일이 아니겠습니까?","What difference does it make, as long as in every way, whether in pretense or in truth, Christ is being proclaimed? And in that I rejoice. Indeed I shall continue to rejoice,","What then? notwithstanding, every way, whether in pretence, or in truth, Christ is preached; and I therein do rejoice, yea, and will rejoice.","But what does it matter? The important thing is that in every way, whether from false motives or true, Christ is preached. And because of this I rejoice. Yes, and I will continue to rejoice,","Quid enim? Dum omni modo, sive sub obtentu sive in veritate, Christus annuntietur, et in hoc gaudeo; sed et gaudebo,","אך מה בכך הלא בכל אופן אם בעלילה או באמת יגד המשיח ואני הנני שמח בזאת וגם אשמח׃"],["57","1","19","여러분의 기도와 예수 그리스도의 영의 도움으로 이 일이 나에게는 구원으로 끝나리라는 것을 알기 때문입니다.","1)내가 지금은 갇혀 있지만 그것이 마침내는 여러분의 기도와 예수 그리스도의 성령의 도우심으로 나에게 구원을 가져오리라는 것을 알고 있기 때문입니다. 칠십인역 욥기 13:16.","이것이 너희의 간구와 예수 그리스도의 성령의 도우심으로 나를 구원에 이르게 할 줄 아는 고로","이것이 너희 간구와 예수 그리스도의 성령의 도우심으로 내 구원에 이르게 할줄 아는고로","나는 앞으로도 계속 기쁨으로 살 것입니다. ㄱ) 여러분이 나를 위해 기도해 주고 성령께서도 나를 도와주고 계시므로 내가 겪는 이 모든 일이 내게 결국 구원을 가져오리라는 것을 알기 때문입니다. (ㄱ. 70인역 욥13:16)","for I know that this will result in deliverance for me through your prayers and support from the Spirit of Jesus Christ.","For I know that this shall turn to my salvation through your prayer, and the supply of the Spirit of Jesus Christ,","for I know that through your prayers and the help given by the Spirit of Jesus Christ, what has happened to me will turn out for my deliverance.","scio enim quia hoc mihi proveniet in salutem per vestram orationem et subministrationem Spiritus Iesu Christi,","כי יודע אני שתהיה לי זאת לישועה בתפלתכם ובעזרת רוח ישוע המשיח׃"],["57","1","20","나의 간절한 기대와 희망은, 내가 어떠한 경우에도 부끄러운 일을 당하지 않고, 언제나 그러하였듯이 지금도, 살든지 죽든지 나의 이 몸으로 아주 담대히 그리스도를 찬양하는 것입니다.","나의 간절한 기대와 희망은 내가 무슨 일에나 부끄러움을 당하지 않고 늘 그러했듯이 지금도 큰 용기를 가지고 살든지 죽든지 나의 생활을 통틀어 그리스도의 영광을 드러내는 것입니다.","나의 간절한 기대와 소망을 따라 아무 일에든지 부끄러워하지 아니하고 지금도 전과 같이 온전히 담대하여 살든지 죽든지 내 몸에서 그리스도가 존귀하게 되게 하려 하나니","나의 간절한 기대와 소망을 따라 아무 일에든지 부끄럽지 아니하고 오직 전과 같이 이제도 온전히 담대하여 살든지 죽든지 내 몸에서 그리스도가 존귀히 되게 하려 하나니","나의 간절한 기대와 희망은 내가 부끄러움을 당할 일을 일체 하지 않고 오히려 시련을 당하고 있는 지금도 예전과 같이 언제나 그리스도를 위해서 담대하게 말하고, 또 살든지 죽든지 어떤 순간에도 나의 존재로 그리스도의 영광을 드러내는 일입니다.","My eager expectation and hope is that I shall not be put to shame in any way, but that with all boldness, now as always, Christ will be magnified in my body, whether by life or by death.","According to my earnest expectation and my hope, that in nothing I shall be ashamed, but that with all boldness, as always, so now also Christ shall be magnified in my body, whether it be by life, or by death.","I eagerly expect and hope that I will in no way be ashamed, but will have sufficient courage so that now as always Christ will be exalted in my body, whether by life or by death.","secundum exspectationem et spem meam quia in nullo confundar, sed in omni fiducia, sicut semper et nunc, magnificabitur Christus in corpore meo, sive per vitam sive per mortem.","ואוחיל ואקוה שלא אבוש בכל דבר כי אם בכל בטחון כאשר מאז כן גם עתה יתגדל המשיח בגופי אם בחיי אם במותי׃"],["57","1","21","사실 나에게는 삶이 곧 그리스도이며 죽는 것이 이득입니다.","나에게는 그리스도가 생의 전부입니다. 그리고 죽는 것도 나에게는 이득이 됩니다.","이는 내게 사는 것이 그리스도니 죽는 것도 유익함이라","이는 내게 사는 것이 그리스도니 죽는 것도 유익함이니라","내게 있어서 사는 것이 그리스도를 위해 일할 기회가 된다면 죽는 것은 더 나은 기회를 뜻하기 때문입니다.","For to me life is Christ, and death is gain.","For to me to live is Christ, and to die is gain.","For to me, to live is Christ and to die is gain.","Mihi enim vivere Christus est et mori lucrum.","כי המשיח הוא חיי והמות רוח לי׃"],["57","1","22","그러나 내가 육신을 입고 살아야 한다면, 나에게는 그것도 보람된 일입니다. 그래서 어느 쪽을 선택해야 할지 모르겠습니다.","그러나 내가 이 세상에 더 살아서 보람 있는 일을 할 수 있다면 과연 어느 쪽을 택해야 할지 모르겠습니다.","그러나 만일 육신으로 사는 이것이 내 일의 열매일진대 무엇을 택해야 할는지 나는 알지 못하노라","그러나 만일 육신으로 사는 이것이 내 일의 열매일찐대 무엇을 가릴는지 나는 알지 못하노라","그러나 살아서 사람들을 그리스도에게로 인도하는 풍부한 결실을 거둘 수 있다면 사는 것과 죽는 것 중에 어느 편을 택해야 할지 잘 모르겠습니다.","If I go on living in the flesh, that means fruitful labor for me. And I do not know which I shall choose.","But if I live in the flesh, this is the fruit of my labour: yet what I shall choose I wot not.","If I am to go on living in the body, this will mean fruitful labor for me. Yet what shall I choose? I do not know!","Quod si vivere in carne, hic mihi fructus operis est, et quid eligam ignoro.","אולם אם לחיות בבשר עוד יוסיף לי פרי עמלי אין לי להגיד במה אבחר׃"],["57","1","23","나는 이 둘 사이에 끼여 있습니다. 나의 바람은 이 세상을 떠나 그리스도와 함께 있는 것입니다. 그편이 훨씬 낫습니다.","나는 그 둘 사이에 끼여 있으나 마음 같아서는 이 세상을 떠나서 그리스도와 함께 살고 싶습니다. 또 그 편이 훨씬 낫겠습니다.","내가 그 둘 사이에 끼었으니 차라리 세상을 떠나서 그리스도와 함께 있는 것이 훨씬 더 좋은 일이라 그렇게 하고 싶으나","내가 그 두 사이에 끼였으니 떠나서 그리스도와 함께 있을 욕망을 가진 이것이 더욱 좋으나","어떤 때는 살고 싶다가도 어떤 때는 그렇지 않습니다. 이 세상을 떠나 그리스도 곁으로 가는 것이 내 소원이기 때문입니다. 그편이 여기 있는 것보다 얼마나 더 행복한지 모르겠습니다.","I am caught between the two. I long to depart this life and be with Christ, [for] that is far better.","For I am in a strait betwixt two, having a desire to depart, and to be with Christ; which is far better:","I am torn between the two: I desire to depart and be with Christ, which is better by far;","Coartor autem ex his duobus: desiderium habens dissolvi et cum Christo esse, multo magis melius;","כי משוך אני מן השנים נפשי אותה להפטר ולהיות עם המשיח כי זה המבחר׃"],["57","1","24","그러나 내가 이 육신 속에 머물러 있는 것이 여러분에게는 더 필요합니다.","그러나 여러분을 위해서는 내가 이 세상에 더 살아 있어야 하겠습니다.","내가 육신으로 있는 것이 너희를 위하여 더 유익하리라","그러나 내가 육신에 거하는 것이 너희를 위하여 더 유익하리라","그러나 내가 이 세상에 머물러 있는 것이 여러분에게는 훨씬 더 도움이 되는 것도 사실입니다.","Yet that I remain [in] the flesh is more necessary for your benefit.","Nevertheless to abide in the flesh is more needful for you.","but it is more necessary for you that I remain in the body.","permanere autem in carne, magis necessarium est propter vos.","אבל לעמד עוד בבשר צריך יתר בעבורכם׃"],["57","1","25","이러한 확신이 있기에, 여러분의 믿음이 깊어지고 기쁨을 누릴 수 있도록 내가 남아 여러분 모두의 곁에 머물러 있어야 한다는 것을 압니다.","이런 확신이 섰기 때문에 나는 살아 남아서 여전히 여러분과 함께 지내게 되리라고 생각합니다. 그렇게 되면 나는 여러분의 믿음을 발전시켜 주고 기쁨을 더해 줄 수 있을 것입니다.","내가 살 것과 너희 믿음의 진보와 기쁨을 위하여 너희 무리와 함께 거할 이것을 확실히 아노니","내가 3)살 것과 너희 믿음의 진보와 기쁨을 위하여 너희 무리와 함께 거할 이것을 확실히 아노니 헬, 거할 것과","그렇습니다. 나는 아직 이 세상에 더 머물러 있을 필요가 있습니다. 그래서 여러분의 믿음이 자라고 또 그 믿음 안에서 여러분이 더욱 큰 기쁨을 누리도록 도와야 합니다.","And this I know with confidence, that I shall remain and continue in the service of all of you for your progress and joy in the faith,","And having this confidence, I know that I shall abide and continue with you all for your furtherance and joy of faith;","Convinced of this, I know that I will remain, and I will continue with all of you for your progress and joy in the faith,","Et hoc confidens, scio quia manebo et permanebo omnibus vobis ad profectum vestrum et gaudium fidei,","ואני בטח וידע כי אותר ואעמד עם כלכם יחד לאמץ אתכם ולהגדיל שמחת אמונתכם׃"],["57","1","26","그리하여 내가 다시 여러분에게 가면, 여러분이 그리스도 예수님 안에서 자랑할 거리가 나 때문에 더욱 풍성해질 것입니다.","그리고 내가 여러분을 다시 찾아가게 되면 여러분은 나로 말미암아 그리스도 예수를 더욱 자랑할 수 있게 될 것입니다.","내가 다시 너희와 같이 있음으로 그리스도 예수 안에서 너희 자랑이 나로 말미암아 풍성하게 하려 함이라","내가 다시 너희와 같이 있음으로 그리스도 예수 안에서 너희 자랑이 나를 인하여 풍성하게 하려 함이라","그러면 후에 다시 내가 여러분을 방문하게 될 때 여러분은 기쁨에 넘쳐 나를 무사히 지켜 주신 그리스도 예수께 영광을 돌리게 될 것입니다.","so that your boasting in Christ Jesus may abound on account of me when I come to you again.","That your rejoicing may be more abundant in Jesus Christ for me by my coming to you again.","so that through my being with you again your joy in Christ Jesus will overflow on account of me.","ut gloriatio vestra abundet in Christo Iesu in me, per meum adventum iterum ad vos.","למען תרבה על ידי תהלתכם במשיח ישוע בשובי לבוא אליכם׃"],["57","1","27","다만, 그리스도의 복음에 합당한 생활을 하십시오. 그리하여 내가 가서 여러분을 보든지 이렇게 떨어져 있든지 간에, 여러분에 대한 좋은 소식을 들을 수 있게 하십시오. 여러분이 한뜻으로 굳건히 서서 한마음으로 복음에 대한 믿음을 위하여 함께 싸우고,","여러분은 그리스도의 복음을 받은 사람다운 생활을 하십시오. 그리고 내가 여러분을 찾아가서 만나게 되든지 이렇게 떨어져 있든지 간에 나는 여러분이 복음의 교리를 위하여 한마음 한 뜻으로 굳게 서서 분투 노력하며","오직 너희는 그리스도의 복음에 합당하게 생활하라 이는 내가 너희에게 가 보나 떠나 있으나 너희가 한마음으로 서서 한 뜻으로 복음의 신앙을 위하여 협력하는 것과","오직 너희는 그리스도 복음에 합당하게 4)생활하라 이는 내가 너희를 가보나 떠나 있으나 너희가 5)일심으로 서서 한 뜻으로 복음의 신앙을 위하여 협력하는 것과 혹 시민 노릇헬, 영 혹 정신","그러나 내 신변에 어떤 일이 일어나더라도 여러분은 언제나 그리스도인답게 살아야 한다는 것을 잊지 마십시오. 내가 여러분을 만나게 되거나 또 설령 못 만나게 되더라도 여러분은 그리스도의 복음을 전파하는 한가지 목표를 향해 굳게 연합하여 서 있으십시오. 그래서 여러분을 박해하는 자들이 어떤 짓을 하든지 겁내지 않는다는 기쁜 소식을 계속 듣게 해주십시오. 그러한 용기가 그들에게는 멸망을 알리는 징조가 되지만 여러분에게는 하나님께서 여러분과 함께 계시며 영원한 생명을 주시리라는 분명한 증거가 됩니다.","Only, conduct yourselves in a way worthy of the gospel of Christ, so that, whether I come and see you or am absent, I may hear news of you, that you are standing firm in one spirit, with one mind struggling together for the faith of the gospel,","Only let your conversation be as it becometh the gospel of Christ: that whether I come and see you, or else be absent, I may hear of your affairs, that ye stand fast in one spirit, with one mind striving together for the faith of the gospel;","Whatever happens, conduct yourselves in a manner worthy of the gospel of Christ. Then, whether I come and see you or only hear about you in my absence, I will know that you stand firm in one spirit, contending as one man for the faith of the gospel","Tantum digne evangelio Christi conversamini, ut sive cum venero et videro vos, sive absens audiam de vobis quia statis in uno Spiritu unanimes, concertantes fide evangelii;","רק חתנהגו כראוי לבשורת המשיח למען אשמע עליכם אם בבואי לראותכם אם בהיותי רחוק כי קימים אתם ברוח אחת ועזרים אתי בנפש אחת להלחם בעד אמונת הבשורה׃"],["57","1","28","어떠한 경우에도 적대자들을 겁내지 않는다는 소식 말입니다. 이것이 그들에게는 멸망의 징표이며 여러분에게는 구원의 징표로 하느님에게서 오는 것입니다.","반대자들이 무슨 짓을 하더라도 조금도 겁내지 않는다는 소식을 듣고 싶습니다. 그러한 용기가 그들에게는 멸망의 징조가 되고 여러분에게는 구원의 징조가 될 것입니다. 구원은 하느님께서 주시는 것입니다.","무슨 일에든지 대적하는 자들 때문에 두려워하지 아니하는 이 일을 듣고자 함이라 이것이 그들에게는 멸망의 증거요 너희에게는 구원의 증거니 이는 하나님께로부터 난 것이라","아무 일에든지 대적하는 자를 인하여 두려워하지 아니하는 이 일을 듣고자 함이라 이것이 저희에게는 멸망의 빙거요 너희에게는 구원의 빙거니 이는 하나님께로부터 난 것이니라","(27절에 포함되어 있음)","not intimidated in any way by your opponents. This is proof to them of destruction, but of your salvation. And this is God’s doing.","And in nothing terrified by your adversaries: which is to them an evident token of perdition, but to you of salvation, and that of God.","without being frightened in any way by those who oppose you. This is a sign to them that they will be destroyed, but that you will be saved--and that by God.","et in nullo perterriti ab adversariis, quod est illis indicium perditionis, vobis autem salutis, et hoc a Deo;","ואינכם חרדים מאומה מפני המתקוממים אשר זאת להם אות לאבדם ולכם לישועתכם ומאת האלהים היא׃"],["57","1","29","여러분은 그리스도를 위하는 특권을, 곧 그리스도를 믿을 뿐만 아니라 그분을 위하여 고난까지 겪는 특권을 받았습니다.","여러분은 그리스도를 믿을 특권뿐만 아니라 그분을 위해서 고난까지 당하는 특권, 곧 그리스도를 섬기는 특권을 받았습니다.","그리스도를 위하여 너희에게 은혜를 주신 것은 다만 그를 믿을 뿐 아니라 또한 그를 위하여 고난도 받게 하려 하심이라","그리스도를 위하여 너희에게 은혜를 주신 것은 다만 그를 믿을뿐 아니라 또한 그를 위하여 고난도 받게 하심이라","여러분은 그리스도를 믿을 특권 뿐만 아니라 그리스도를 위하여 고난을 받을 특권까지도 받았습니다.","For to you has been granted, for the sake of Christ, not only to believe in him but also to suffer for him.","For unto you it is given in the behalf of Christ, not only to believe on him, but also to suffer for his sake;","For it has been granted to you on behalf of Christ not only to believe on him, but also to suffer for him,","quia vobis hoc donatum est pro Christo, non solum ut in eum credatis, sed ut etiam pro illo patiamini","כי נתן לכם בעד המשיח לא לבד להאמין בו כי אם גם להתענות בעדו׃"],["57","1","30","전에 나에게서 보았고 지금도 나에 대하여 듣는 것과 똑같은 투쟁을 여러분도 벌이고 있는 것입니다.","여러분은 내가 전에 그리스도를 위해서 싸우는 것을 보았고 또 지금도 계속해서 싸우고 있다는 것을 듣고 있을 터이지만 지금 여러분도 같은 싸움을 하고 있습니다.","너희에게도 그와 같은 싸움이 있으니 너희가 내 안에서 본 바요 이제도 내 안에서 듣는 바니라","너희에게도 같은 싸움이 있으니 너희가 내 안에서 본 바요 이제도 내 안에서 듣는 바니라","우리는 함께 싸우고 있습니다. 여러분은 과거에 내가 그리스도로 인해 당한 고난과 지금도 치르고 있는 무서운 투쟁을 잘 알고 있습니다. 바로 그런 싸움을 여러분도 겪어야 할 것입니다.","Yours is the same struggle as you saw in me and now hear about me.","Having the same conflict which ye saw in me, and now hear to be in me.","since you are going through the same struggle you saw I had, and now hear that I still have.","idem certamen habentes, quale vidistis in me et nunc auditis in me.","כי גם לכם המלחמה אשר ראיתם בי ואשר עתה שמעים אתם עלי׃"],["57","2","1","그러므로 여러분이 그리스도 안에서 격려를 받고 사랑에 찬 위로를 받으며 성령 안에서 친교를 나누고 애정과 동정을 나눈다면,","여러분은 그리스도를 믿음으로써 힘을 얻습니까? 그리스도의 사랑에서 위안을 받습니까? 성령의 감화로 서로 사귀는 일이 있습니까? 서로 애정을 나누며 동정하고 있습니까?","그러므로 그리스도 안에 무슨 권면이나 사랑의 무슨 위로나 성령의 무슨 교제나 긍휼이나 자비가 있거든","그러므로 그리스도 안에 무슨 권면이나 사랑에 무슨 위로나 성령의 무슨 교제나 긍휼이나 자비가 있거든","여러분은 그리스도인으로서 서로 격려해 줄 마음 가짐이 되어 있습니까? 여러분은 나를 도울 마음이 우러날 만큼 나에 대한 사랑이 있습니까? 우리가 함께 성령을 받았고 주님 안에서 형제가 되어 있다는 참다운 의미를 알고 있습니까? 여러분의 마음에 애정이 있고 동정심이 있습니까?","If there is any encouragement in Christ, any solace in love, any participation in the Spirit, any compassion and mercy,","If there be therefore any consolation in Christ, if any comfort of love, if any fellowship of the Spirit, if any bowels and mercies,","If you have any encouragement from being united with Christ, if any comfort from his love, if any fellowship with the Spirit, if any tenderness and compassion,","Si qua ergo consolatio in Christo, si quod solacium cari tatis, si qua communio spiritus, si quae viscera et miserationes,","לכן אם יש תוכחה במשיח אם תנחומות האהבה אם התחברות הרוח אם רחמים וחמלה׃"],["57","2","2","뜻을 같이하고 같은 사랑을 지니고 같은 마음 같은 생각을 이루어, 나의 기쁨을 완전하게 해 주십시오.","그렇다면 같은 생각을 가지고 같은 사랑을 나누며 마음을 합쳐서 하나가 되십시오. 그렇게 해서 나의 기쁨을 완전하게 해주십시오.","마음을 같이하여 같은 사랑을 가지고 뜻을 합하며 한마음을 품어","마음을 같이 하여 같은 사랑을 가지고 뜻을 합하며 한 마음을 품어","그렇다면 서로 사랑하고 서로 마음을 열어 화합하십시오. 한마음과 한생각과 한목적을 가지고 함께 일하여 내 마음을 기쁘게 해주십시오.","complete my joy by being of the same mind, with the same love, united in heart, thinking one thing.","Fulfil ye my joy, that ye be likeminded, having the same love, being of one accord, of one mind.","then make my joy complete by being like-minded, having the same love, being one in spirit and purpose.","implete gaudium meum, ut idem sapiatis, eandem caritatem habentes, unanimes, id ipsum sapientes;","השלימו נא את שמחתי בהיות לכם לב אחד ואהבה אחת ונפש אחת ורצון אחד׃"],["57","2","3","무슨 일이든 이기심이나 허영심으로 하지 마십시오. 오히려 겸손한 마음으로 서로 남을 자기보다 낫게 여기십시오.","무슨 일에나 이기적인 야심이나 허영을 버리고 다만 겸손한 마음으로 서로 남을 자기보다 낫게 여기십시오.","아무 일에든지 다툼이나 허영으로 하지 말고 오직 겸손한 마음으로 각각 자기보다 남을 낫게 여기고","아무 일에든지 다툼이나 허영으로 하지 말고 오직 겸손한 마음으로 각각 자기보다 남을 낫게 여기고","자기 본위가 되거나 남에게 과장된 행동을 하지 말고 겸손하게 남을 존중해 주십시오.","Do nothing out of selfishness or out of vainglory; rather, humbly regard others as more important than yourselves,","Let nothing be done through strife or vainglory; but in lowliness of mind let each esteem other better than themselves.","Do nothing out of selfish ambition or vain conceit, but in humility consider others better than yourselves.","nihil per contentionem neque per inanem gloriam, sed in humilitate superiores sibi invicem arbitrantes;","ולא תעשו דבר בדרך מריבה או כבוד שוא כי אם בשפלות רוח תחשבו איש את רעהו יותר מעצמו׃"],["57","2","4","저마다 자기 것만 돌보지 말고 남의 것도 돌보아 주십시오.","저마다 제 실속만 차리지 말고 남의 이익도 돌보십시오.","각각 자기 일을 돌볼뿐더러 또한 각각 다른 사람들의 일을 돌보아 나의 기쁨을 충만하게 하라","각각 자기 일을 돌아볼 뿐더러 또한 각각 다른 사람들의 일을 돌아보아 나의 기쁨을 충만케 하라","자기 이익만을 추구하지 말고 남에게도 눈을 돌려 그들이 하는 일에 관심을 가지십시오.","each looking out not for his own interests, but [also] everyone for those of others.","Look not every man on his own things, but every man also on the things of others.","Each of you should look not only to your own interests, but also to the interests of others.","non, quae sua sunt, singuli considerantes, sed et ea, quae aliorum.","כל אחד אל ידאג לאשר לו לבדו כי אם גם לאשר לחברו׃"],["57","2","5","그리스도 예수님께서 지니셨던 바로 그 마음을 여러분 안에 간직하십시오.","여러분은 그리스도 예수께서 지니셨던 마음을 여러분의 마음으로 간직하십시오","너희 안에 이 마음을 품으라 곧 그리스도 예수의 마음이니","너희 안에 이 마음을 품으라 곧 그리스도 예수의 마음이니","그리스도 예수께서 여러분에게 보여주신 자세를 본받으십시오.","Have among yourselves the same attitude that is also yours in Christ Jesus,","Let this mind be in you, which was also in Christ Jesus:","Your attitude should be the same as that of Christ Jesus:","Hoc sentite in vobis, quod et in Christo Iesu:","כי הרוח ההיא אשר היתה במשיח תהי גם בכם׃"],["57","2","6","그분께서는 하느님의 모습을 지니셨지만 하느님과 같음을 당연한 것으로 여기지 않으시고","그리스도 예수는 하느님과 본질이 같은 분이셨지만 굳이 하느님과 동등한 존재가 되려 하지 않으시고","그는 근본 하나님의 본체시나 하나님과 동등됨을 취할 것으로 여기지 아니하시고","그는 근본 하나님의 1)본체시나 하나님과 동등됨을 2)취할 것으로 여기지 아니하시고 혹 형체 혹 보류","그리스도께서는 하나님이면서도 하나님으로서의 권리를 요구하거나 거기에 집착하지 않으셨습니다.","Who, though he was in the form of God, did not regard equality with God something to be grasped.","Who, being in the form of God, thought it not robbery to be equal with God:","Who, being in very nature God, did not consider equality with God something to be grasped,","qui cum in forma Dei esset, non rapinam arbitratus est esse se aequalem Deo,","אשר אף כי היה בדמות האלהים לא חשב לו לשלל היותו שוה לאלהים׃"],["57","2","7","오히려 당신 자신을 비우시어 종의 모습을 취하시고 사람들과 같이 되셨습니다. 이렇게 여느 사람처럼 나타나","오히려 당신의 것을 다 내어놓고 종의 신분을 취하셔서 우리와 똑같은 인간이 되셨습니다. 이렇게 인간의 모습으로 나타나","오히려 자기를 비워 종의 형체를 가지사 사람들과 같이 되셨고","오히려 자기를 비워 종의 3)형체를 가져 사람들과 같이 되었고 혹 본체","오히려 그 큰 능력과 영광을 버리고 ㄱ) 종의 형상을 취하여 우리와 똑같은 인간이 되셨습니다. (ㄱ. 글자대로는 \"인간의 형상을 입으셨습니다\")","Rather, he emptied himself, taking the form of a slave, coming in human likeness; and found human in appearance,","But made himself of no reputation, and took upon him the form of a servant, and was made in the likeness of men:","but made himself nothing, taking the very nature of a servant, being made in human likeness.","sed semetipsum exinanivit formam servi accipiens, in similitudinem hominum factus; et habitu inventus ut homo,","כי אם הפשיט את עצמו וילבש דמות עבד וידמה לבני אדם וימצא בתכונתו כבן אדם׃"],["57","2","8","당신 자신을 낮추시어 죽음에 이르기까지, 십자가 죽음에 이르기까지 순종하셨습니다.","당신 자신을 낮추셔서 죽기까지, 아니, 십자가에 달려서 죽기까지 순종하셨습니다.","사람의 모양으로 나타나사 자기를 낮추시고 죽기까지 복종하셨으니 곧 십자가에 죽으심이라","사람의 모양으로 나타나셨으매 자기를 낮추시고 죽기까지 복종하셨으니 곧 십자가에 죽으심이라","아니, 훨씬 더 자기를 낮추어 죄인처럼 십자가에서 죽으셨습니다.","he humbled himself, becoming obedient to death, even death on a cross.","And being found in fashion as a man, he humbled himself, and became obedient unto death, even the death of the cross.","And being found in appearance as a man, he humbled himself and became obedient to death--even death on a cross!","humiliavit semetipsum factus oboediens usque ad mortem, mortem autem crucis.","וישפל את נפשו ויכנע עד מות עד מיתת הצליבה׃"],["57","2","9","그러므로 하느님께서도 그분을 드높이 올리시고 모든 이름 위에 뛰어난 이름을 그분께 주셨습니다.","그러므로 하느님께서도 그분을 높이 올리시고 모든 이름 위에 뛰어난 이름을 주셨습니다.","이러므로 하나님이 그를 지극히 높여 모든 이름 위에 뛰어난 이름을 주사","이러므로 하나님이 그를 지극히 높여 모든 이름 위에 뛰어난 이름을 주사","이 때문에 하나님께서는 그리스도를 하늘 높이 올리시고 모든 이름 위에 뛰어난 이름을 주셨습니다.","Because of this, God greatly exalted him and bestowed on him the name that is above every name,","Wherefore God also hath highly exalted him, and given him a name which is above every name:","Therefore God exalted him to the highest place and gave him the name that is above every name,","Propter quod et Deus illum exaltavit et donavit illi nomen, quod est super omne nomen,","על כן גם האלהים הגביהו מאד ויתן לו שם נעלה על כל שם׃"],["57","2","10","그리하여 예수님의 이름 앞에 하늘과 땅 위와 땅 아래에 있는 자들이 다 무릎을 꿇고","1)그래서 하늘과 땅 위와 땅 아래에 있는 모든 것이 예수의 이름을 받들어 무릎을 꿇고칠십인역 이사 29:13(45:23 참조).","하늘에 있는 자들과 땅에 있는 자들과 땅 아래에 있는 자들로 모든 무릎을 예수의 이름에 꿇게 하시고","하늘에 있는 자들과 땅에 있는 자들과 땅 아래 있는 자들로 모든 무릎을 예수의 이름에 꿇게 하시고","그리하여 ㄴ) 하늘과 땅 위와 땅 아래 있는 모든 것이 예수의 이름 앞에 무릎을 꿇고 (ㄴ. 70인역 사45:23)","that at the name of Jesus every knee should bend, of those in heaven and on earth and under the earth,","That at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, of things in heaven, and things in earth, and things under the earth;","that at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, in heaven and on earth and under the earth,","ut in nomine Iesu omne genu flectatur caelestium et terrestrium et infernorum,","למען אשר בשם ישוע תכרע כל ברך אשר בשמים ובארץ ומתחת לארץ׃"],["57","2","11","예수 그리스도는 주님이시라고 모두 고백하며 하느님 아버지께 영광을 드리게 하셨습니다.","모두가 입을 모아 예수 그리스도가 주님이시라 찬미하며 하느님 아버지를 찬양하게 되었습니다.","모든 입으로 예수 그리스도를 주라 시인하여 하나님 아버지께 영광을 돌리게 하셨느니라","모든 입으로 예수 그리스도를 주라 시인하여 하나님 아버지께 영광을 돌리게 하셨느니라","입을 모아 \"예수 그리스도는 주님이십니다.\" 하고 고백하여 아버지 하나님께 영광을 돌리게 된 것입니다.","and every tongue confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the Father.","And that every tongue should confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the Father.","and every tongue confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the Father.","et omnis lingua confiteatur  “Dominus Iesus Christus! “, in gloriam Dei Patris.","וכל לשון תודה כי אדון הוא ישוע המשיח לכבוד אלהים האב׃"],["57","2","12","사랑하는 여러분, 여러분은 늘 순종하였습니다. 내가 함께 있을 때만이 아니라 지금처럼 떨어져 있을 때에는 더욱더 그러하였습니다. 그러므로 두렵고 떨리는 마음으로 여러분 자신의 구원을 위하여 힘쓰십시오.","그러므로 내 사랑하는 교우 여러분, 여러분은 내가 함께 있을 때에도 언제나 순종하였거니와 그 때뿐만 아니라 떨어져 있는 지금에 와서는 더욱 순종하여 두렵고 떨리는 마음으로 여러분 자신의 구원을 위해서 힘쓰십시오.","그러므로 나의 사랑하는 자들아 너희가 나 있을 때뿐 아니라 더욱 지금 나 없을 때에도 항상 복종하여 두렵고 떨림으로 너희 구원을 이루라","그러므로 나의 사랑하는 자들아 너희가 나 있을 때 뿐아니라 더욱 지금 나 없을 때에도 항상 복종하여 두렵고 떨림으로 너희 구원을 이루라","사랑하는 형제들이여, 내가 그곳에서 여러분과 함께 있을 때, 여러분은 늘 내가 가르치는 것에 세심한 주의를 기울여 따라 주었습니다. 그러니 비록 내가 떠나 있더라도 구원받은 자로서 마땅히 해야 할 옳은 일에 더욱더 힘써 주기 바랍니다. 지극한 경외심을 가지고 하나님께 순종하고 하나님께서 기뻐하지 않는 일에는 손을 대지 마십시오.","So then, my beloved, obedient as you have always been, not only when I am present but all the more now when I am absent, work out your salvation with fear and trembling.","Wherefore, my beloved, as ye have always obeyed, not as in my presence only, but now much more in my absence, work out your own salvation with fear and trembling.","Therefore, my dear friends, as you have always obeyed--not only in my presence, but now much more in my absence--continue to work out your salvation with fear and trembling,","Itaque, carissimi mei, sicut semper oboedistis, non ut in praesentia mei tantum sed multo magis nunc in absentia mea, cum metu et tremore vestram salutem operamini;","לכן חביבי כאשר שמעתם לי בכל עת כן לא לבד בהיותי עמכם כי עוד יתר עתה אשר אני רחוק מכם תיגעו בתשועת נפשתיכם ביראה וברעדה׃"],["57","2","13","하느님은 당신 호의에 따라 여러분 안에서 활동하시어, 의지를 일으키시고 그것을 실천하게도 하시는 분이십니다.","여러분 안에 계셔서 여러분에게 당신의 뜻에 맞는 일을 하고자 하는 마음을 일으켜주시고 그 일을 할 힘을 주시는 분은 하느님이십니다.","너희 안에서 행하시는 이는 하나님이시니 자기의 기쁘신 뜻을 위하여 너희에게 소원을 두고 행하게 하시나니","너희 안에서 행하시는 이는 하나님이시니 자기의 기쁘신 뜻을 위하여 너희로 소원을 두고 행하게 하시나니","하나님께서는 여러분 안에 계시면서 순종하는 마음을 일으켜 주고 하나님께서 원하는 일을 할 수 있도록 여러분을 도와주십니다.","For God is the one who, for his good purpose, works in you both to desire and to work.","For it is God which worketh in you both to will and to do of his good pleasure.","for it is God who works in you to will and to act according to his good purpose.","Deus est enim, qui operatur in vobis et velle et perficere pro suo beneplacito.","כי האלהים הוא הפעל בכם גם לחפץ גם לפעל כפי רצונו׃"],["57","2","14","무슨 일이든 투덜거리거나 따지지 말고 하십시오.","무슨 일을 하든지 불평을 하거나 다투지 마십시오.","모든 일을 원망과 시비가 없이 하라","모든 일을 원망과 시비가 없이 하라","무슨 일을 하든지 불평을 하거나 다투지 마십시오.","Do everything without grumbling or questioning,","Do all things without murmurings and disputings:","Do everything without complaining or arguing,","Omnia facite sine murmurationibus et haesitationibus,","עשו כל דבר בלא תלנות ובלא מזמות׃"],["57","2","15","그리하여 비뚤어지고 뒤틀린 이 세대에서 허물없는 사람, 순결한 사람, 하느님의 흠 없는 자녀가 되어, 이 세상에서 별처럼 빛날 수 있도록 하십시오.","그리하여 여러분은 나무랄 데 없는 순결한 사람이 되어 이 악하고 비뚤어진 세상에서 하느님의 흠없는 자녀가 되어 하늘을 비추는 별들처럼 빛을 내십시오.","이는 너희가 흠이 없고 순전하여 어그러지고 거스르는 세대 가운데서 하나님의 흠 없는 자녀로 세상에서 그들 가운데 빛들로 나타내며","이는 너희가 흠이 없고 순전하여 어그러지고 거스리는 세대 가운데서 하나님의 흠 없는 자녀로 세상에서 그들 가운데 빛들로 나타내며","그래서 어느 누구도 여러분을 비난하지 못하게 하십시오. 마음이 비뚤어지고 완고한 사람들이 가득하여 어두운 세상에서 여러분은 흠 없고 순결한 하나님의 자녀가 되어 그들 사이에 생명의 말씀을 높이 들고 등불처럼 빛을 발하십시오. 그렇게 하면 그리스도께서 다시 오시는 날 나는 여러분을 위해 일한 내 수고가 헛되지 않았음을 알고 자랑스러워할 것입니다.","that you may be blameless and innocent, children of God without blemish in the midst of a crooked and perverse generation, among whom you shine like lights in the world,","That ye may be blameless and harmless, the sons of God, without rebuke, in the midst of a crooked and perverse nation, among whom ye shine as lights in the world;","so that you may become blameless and pure, children of God without fault in a crooked and depraved generation, in which you shine like stars in the universe","ut efficiamini sine querela et simplices, filii Dei sine reprehensione in medio generationis pravae et perversae, inter quos lucetis sicut luminaria in mundo,","למען תהיו נקיים וטהורים בני אלהים לא מום בם בתוך דור עקש ופתלתל אשר תאירו ביניהם כמאורת בעולם׃"],["57","2","16","생명의 말씀을 굳게 지니십시오. 그러면 내가 헛되이 달음질하거나 헛되이 애쓴 것이 되지 않아, 그리스도의 날에 자랑할 수 있게 될 것입니다.","생명의 말씀을 굳게 지키십시오. 그래야 내가 달음질치며 수고한 것이 헛되지 않아 그리스도의 날에 자랑할 수 있을 것입니다.","생명의 말씀을 밝혀 나의 달음질이 헛되지 아니하고 수고도 헛되지 아니함으로 그리스도의 날에 내가 자랑할 것이 있게 하려 함이라","4)생명의 5)말씀을 밝혀 나의 달음질도 헛되지 아니하고 수고도 헛되지 아니함으로 그리스도의 날에 나로 자랑할 것이 있게 하려 함이라 헬, 생혹 붙들어","(15절에 포함되어 있음)","as you hold on to the word of life, so that my boast for the day of Christ may be that I did not run in vain or labor in vain.","Holding forth the word of life; that I may rejoice in the day of Christ, that I have not run in vain, neither laboured in vain.","as you hold out the word of life--in order that I may boast on the day of Christ that I did not run or labor for nothing.","verbum vitae firmiter tenentes ad gloriam meam in die Christi, quia non in vacuum cucurri neque in vacuum laboravi.","מחזיקים בדבר החיים לתהלה לי ביום המשיח אשר לא לחנם רצתי ולא לריק יגעתי׃"],["57","2","17","내가 설령 하느님께 올리는 포도주가 되어 여러분이 봉헌하는 믿음의 제물 위에 부어진다 하여도, 나는 기뻐할 것입니다. 여러분 모두와 함께 기뻐할 것입니다.","여러분이 바치는 믿음의 제사와 제물을 위해서라면 나는 그 위에 내 피라도 쏟아 부을 것이며 그것을 나는 기뻐할 것입니다. 아니 여러분과 함께 기뻐할 것입니다.","만일 너희 믿음의 제물과 섬김 위에 내가 나를 전제로 드릴지라도 나는 기뻐하고 너희 무리와 함께 기뻐하리니","만일 너희 믿음의 제물과 봉사 위에 내가 나를 관제로 드릴찌라도 나는 기뻐하고 너희 무리와 함께 기뻐하리니","여러분의 믿음을 제물로 하나님께 바칠 때 내 피를 그 위에 쏟아부으라 할지라도 나는 기꺼이 그렇게 할 것입니다. 여러분을 위해서 내가 죽지 않으면 안된다고 할지라도 나는 기뻐할 것입니다. 여러분에게 골고루 이 기쁨을 나누어 주고 싶습니다.","But, even if I am poured out as a libation upon the sacrificial service of your faith, I rejoice and share my joy with all of you.","Yea, and if I be offered upon the sacrifice and service of your faith, I joy, and rejoice with you all.","But even if I am being poured out like a drink offering on the sacrifice and service coming from your faith, I am glad and rejoice with all of you.","Sed et si delibor supra sacrificium et obsequium fidei vestrae, gaudeo et congaudeo omnibus vobis;","אבל אם גם אסך על זבח אמונתכם ועבודתה הנני שמח וגם שש עם כלכם׃"],["57","2","18","여러분도 마찬가지로 기뻐하십시오. 나와 함께 기뻐하십시오.","그러니 여러분도 기뻐하십시오. 나와 함께 기뻐하십시오.","이와 같이 너희도 기뻐하고 나와 함께 기뻐하라","이와 같이 너희도 기뻐하고 나와 함께 기뻐6)하라혹 하느니라","그러니 여러분도 기뻐하십시오. 내가 여러분을 위해서 죽을 권리를 가지고 있다는 것을 함께 기뻐해 주십시오.","In the same way you also should rejoice and share your joy with me.","For the same cause also do ye joy, and rejoice with me.","So you too should be glad and rejoice with me.","idipsum autem et vos gaudete et congaudete mihi.","וככה שמחו אף אתם ושישו עמדי׃"],["57","2","19","주 예수님 안에서 나는 티모테오를 여러분에게 곧 보낼 수 있게 되기를 바랍니다. 나도 여러분의 소식을 알고 기운을 얻으려는 것입니다.","주 예수께서 허락하신다면 나는 디모테오를 여러분에게 어서 보내고 싶습니다. 그래서 그 편에 여러분의 소식을 들으면 내 마음도 기쁘겠습니다.","내가 디모데를 속히 너희에게 보내기를 주 안에서 바람은 너희의 사정을 앎으로 안위를 받으려 함이니","내가 디모데를 속히 너희에게 보내기를 주 안에서 바람은 너희 사정을 앎으로 안위를 받으려 함이니","만일 주께서 허락하신다면 디모데를 가까운 시일 안에 여러분에게로 보내려 합니다. 그가 다녀오면 여러분의 소식과 지내는 형편을 듣게 되어 내가 한결 기운이 솟을 것입니다.","I hope, in the Lord Jesus, to send Timothy to you soon, so that I too may be heartened by hearing news of you.","But I trust in the Lord Jesus to send Timotheus shortly unto you, that I also may be of good comfort, when I know your state.","I hope in the Lord Jesus to send Timothy to you soon, that I also may be cheered when I receive news about you.","Spero autem in Domino Iesu Timotheum cito me mittere ad vos, ut et ego bono animo sim, cognitis, quae circa vos sunt.","וקויתי בישוע אדנינו לשלח במהרה אליכם את טימותיוס למען תנוח דעתי בהודע לי דבר מעמדכם׃"],["57","2","20","나와 같은 마음으로 여러분의 일을 성심껏 돌보아 줄 사람이 나에게는 티모테오밖에 없습니다.","나와 같은 마음으로 여러분의 일을 진심으로 걱정해 주는 사람은 그 사람밖에 없습니다.","이는 뜻을 같이하여 너희 사정을 진실히 생각할 자가 이밖에 내게 없음이라","이는 뜻을 같이 하여 너희 사정을 진실히 생각할 자가 이 밖에 내게 없음이라","디모데만큼 여러분의 일에 마음을 쓰는 사람도 없습니다.","For I have no one comparable to him for genuine interest in whatever concerns you.","For I have no man likeminded, who will naturally care for your state.","I have no one else like him, who takes a genuine interest in your welfare.","Neminem enim habeo tam unanimem, qui sincere pro vobis sollicitus sit;","כי זולתו אין אתי איש כלבבי אשר בלב שלם ידאג לכם׃"],["57","2","21","모두 자기의 것만 추구할 뿐 예수 그리스도의 것은 추구하지 않습니다.","모두들 자기 일만 돌보고 예수 그리스도의 일은 아랑곳하지 않습니다.","그들이 다 자기 일을 구하고 그리스도 예수의 일을 구하지 아니하되","저희가 다 자기 일을 구하고 그리스도 예수의 일을 구하지 아니하되","다른 사람들은 모두 자기 일에만 정신이 팔려 예수 그리스도의 일에는 관심이 없지만","For they all seek their own interests, not those of Jesus Christ.","For all seek their own, not the things which are Jesus Christ's.","For everyone looks out for his own interests, not those of Jesus Christ.","omnes enim sua quaerunt, non quae sunt Iesu Christi.","כי כלם את אשר להם ידרשו ולא את אשר לישוע המשיח׃"],["57","2","22","여러분은 그가 믿을 수 있는 사람이라는 것을, 그가 나와 함께 마치 자식과 아버지처럼 복음을 위하여 일하였다는 것을 알고 있습니다.","그러나 디모테오는 여러분도 잘 알다시피 흠잡을 데 없는 사람으로 자식이 아버지를 섬기듯 나를 섬기면서 복음을 위하여 함께 일해 왔습니다.","디모데의 연단을 너희가 아나니 자식이 아버지에게 함같이 나와 함께 복음을 위하여 수고하였느니라","디모데의 연단을 너희가 아나니 자식이 아비에게 함같이 나와 함께 복음을 위하여 수고하였느니라","디모데는 그렇지 않습니다. 여러분도 잘 알다시피 그는 내가 복음을 전하는 일에 마치 나의 친자식처럼 나를 도와주었습니다.","But you know his worth, how as a child with a father he served along with me in the cause of the gospel.","But ye know the proof of him, that, as a son with the father, he hath served with me in the gospel.","But you know that Timothy has proved himself, because as a son with his father he has served with me in the work of the gospel.","Probationem autem eius cognoscitis, quoniam sicut patri filius mecum servivit in evangelium.","ואותו ידעתם כי בחון הוא אשר כבן העבד את אביו כן היה אתי בעבודת הבשורה׃"],["57","2","23","그래서 내 형편이 어찌될지 아는 대로, 그를 보낼 수 있게 되기를 바랍니다.","그러니 내가 디모테오를 보낼 수 있는 형편이 되면 곧 그를 보낼 생각입니다.","그러므로 내가 내 일이 어떻게 될지를 보아서 곧 이 사람을 보내기를 바라고","그러므로 내가 내 일이 어떻게 될 것을 보아서 곧 이 사람을 보내기를 바라고","그러므로 감옥에서 내게 어떤 결정이 내려지는 대로 디모데를 그리로 보낼 생각입니다.","He it is, then, whom I hope to send as soon as I see how things go with me,","Him therefore I hope to send presently, so soon as I shall see how it will go with me.","I hope, therefore, to send him as soon as I see how things go with me.","Hunc igitur spero me mittere, mox ut videro, quae circa me sunt;","ואתו אקוה לשלח אליכם מהר כאשר אראה מה יהיה לי׃"],["57","2","24","나 자신도 곧 가게 되리라고 주님 안에서 확신합니다.","그리고 주님께서 허락하신다면 나도 곧 가게 되리라고 믿습니다.","나도 속히 가게 될 것을 주 안에서 확신하노라","나도 속히 가기를 주 안에서 확신하노라","그리고 내게도 가까운 시일 안에 여러분을 찾아가 만나도록 주께서 주선해 주실 것을 확신하고 있습니다.","but I am confident in the Lord that I myself will also come soon.","But I trust in the Lord that I also myself shall come shortly.","And I am confident in the Lord that I myself will come soon.","confido autem in Domino, quoniam et ipse cito veniam.","ובטחתי באדנינו אשר גם אנכי אבוא אליכם במהרה׃"],["57","2","25","나는 에파프로디토스도 여러분에게 보내야 한다고 생각합니다. 그는 나의 형제이고 협력자이며 전우이고 여러분의 대표이며, 내가 곤궁할 때에 나를 도와준 봉사자입니다.","그러나 나는 내 형제 에바프로디도를 먼저 여러분에게 돌려보내야 한다고 생각했습니다. 그는 여러분이 보낸 사절로서 내가 손이 모자랄 때 나를 돕고 섬긴 동료요 전우입니다.","그러나 에바브로디도를 너희에게 보내는 것이 필요한 줄로 생각하노니 그는 나의 형제요 함께 수고하고 함께 군사 된 자요 너희 사자로 내가 쓸 것을 돕는 자라","그러나 에바브로디도를 너희에게 보내는 것이 필요한 줄로 생각하노니 그는 나의 형제요 함께 수고하고 함께 군사된 자요 너희 사자로 나의 쓸 것을 돕는 자라","나는 에바브로디도도 여러분에게 돌려보내려고 생각합니다. 내가 어려운 처지에 있을 때 나를 도우라고 여러분이 보내 주었던 그와 나는 친형제처럼 같이 일하고 싸워왔습니다.","With regard to Epaphroditus, my brother and co-worker and fellow soldier, your messenger and minister in my need, I consider it necessary to send him to you.","Yet I supposed it necessary to send to you Epaphroditus, my brother, and companion in labour, and fellowsoldier, but your messenger, and he that ministered to my wants.","But I think it is necessary to send back to you Epaphroditus, my brother, fellow worker and fellow soldier, who is also your messenger, whom you sent to take care of my needs.","Necessarium autem existimavi Epaphroditum fratrem et cooperatorem et commilitonem meum, vestrum autem apostolum et ministrum necessitatis meae, mittere ad vos,","ואחשב מן הצרך לשלח אליכם את אפפרודיטוס אחי ועזרי וחברי בצבא והוא שליחכם ומשרתי בצרכי׃"],["57","2","26","그가 여러분 모두를 그리워할 뿐만 아니라, 자기가 병이 났다는 소식을 여러분이 듣게 되어 불안해하고 있기 때문입니다.","그는 여러분 모두를 몹시 보고 싶어할 뿐만 아니라 자기가 병으로 고생했다는 소식이 여러분에게 전해진 것을 알고 매우 안타까워하고 있습니다.","그가 너희 무리를 간절히 사모하고 자기가 병든 것을 너희가 들은 줄을 알고 심히 근심한지라","그가 너희 무리를 간절히 사모하고 자기 병든 것을 너희가 들은 줄을 알고 심히 근심한지라","이제 나는 그를 집으로 돌려보냅니다. 그는 여러분을 몹시 그리워하고 있습니다. 게다가 자기가 병으로 고생했다는 소식이 여러분에게 전해진 것을 알고 걱정에 싸여 지냅니다.","For he has been longing for all of you and was distressed because you heard that he was ill.","For he longed after you all, and was full of heaviness, because that ye had heard that he had been sick.","For he longs for all of you and is distressed because you heard he was ill.","quoniam omnes vos desiderabat et maestus erat, propterea quod audieratis illum infirmatum.","יען היותו נכסף לכלכם ונעצב מאד על אשר שמעתם כי חלה׃"],["57","2","27","사실 그는 병이 나서 죽을 뻔하였습니다. 그러나 하느님께서는 그에게 자비를 베푸셨습니다. 그에게만이 아니라 나에게도 자비를 베푸시어, 내가 이중으로 슬픔을 겪지 않게 해 주셨습니다.","사실 그는 병이 나서 죽을 뻔했으나 지금은 하느님의 자비로 다 나았습니다. 하느님께서는 그에게뿐만 아니라 나에게도 자비를 베푸셔서 나에게 겹치는 슬픔을 면하게 해주셨습니다.","그가 병들어 죽게 되었으나 하나님이 그를 긍휼히 여기셨고 그뿐 아니라 또 나를 긍휼히 여기사 내 근심 위에 근심을 면하게 하셨느니라","저가 병들어 죽게 되었으나 하나님이 저를 긍휼히 여기셨고 저뿐 아니라 또 나를 긍휼히 여기사 내 근심 위에 근심을 면하게 하셨느니라","사실 그는 병치레를 하느라 거의 죽을 뻔했습니다. 그러나 하나님께서 돌보아주셔서 이제는 다 나았습니다. 슬픔 위에 또 슬픔이 겹치지 않도록 그에게뿐 아니라 내게도 자비를 베풀어 주신 것입니다.","He was indeed ill, close to death; but God had mercy on him, not just on him but also on me, so that I might not have sorrow upon sorrow.","For indeed he was sick nigh unto death: but God had mercy on him; and not on him only, but on me also, lest I should have sorrow upon sorrow.","Indeed he was ill, and almost died. But God had mercy on him, and not on him only but also on me, to spare me sorrow upon sorrow.","Nam et infirmatus est usque ad mortem, sed Deus misertus est eius; non solum autem eius, verum et mei, ne tristitiam super tristitiam haberem.","אמנם חלה חלה וגם נטה למות אבל האלהים רחם עליו ולא עליו בלבד כי גם עלי רחם שלא יבוא עלי יגון על יגון׃"],["57","2","28","그래서 나는 더욱 서둘러 그를 보냅니다. 여러분이 그를 다시 보고 기뻐하게 하려는 것이며 나도 근심을 덜려는 것입니다.","그래서 나는 더욱 서둘러서 그를 보냅니다. 여러분은 그를 다시 만나 기뻐하게 될 것이며 나도 걱정을 덜게 될 것입니다.","그러므로 내가 더욱 급히 그를 보낸 것은 너희로 그를 다시 보고 기뻐하게 하며 내 근심도 덜려 함이니라","그러므로 내가 더욱 급히 저를 보낸 것은 너희로 저를 다시 보고 기뻐하게 하며 내 근심도 덜려 함이니","그래서 나는 더욱 그를 서둘러 여러분에게 보내려는 겁니다. 여러분이 그를 만나 감사에 넘쳐하는 모습이 눈에 보이는 듯합니다. 나는 걱정을 한시름 덜게 될 것입니다.","I send him therefore with the greater eagerness, so that, on seeing him, you may rejoice again, and I may have less anxiety.","I sent him therefore the more carefully, that, when ye see him again, ye may rejoice, and that I may be the less sorrowful.","Therefore I am all the more eager to send him, so that when you see him again you may be glad and I may have less anxiety.","Festinantius ergo misi illum, ut, viso eo, iterum gaudeatis, et ego sine tristitia sim.","לכן מהרתי לשלחו אליכם למען תראהו ותשובו לשמוח וגם ימעט יגוני׃"],["57","2","29","그러니 주님 안에서 그를 아주 기쁘게 맞아들이십시오. 그리고 이러한 이들을 존경하십시오.","그러므로 여러분은 주님을 믿는 같은 형제로서 그를 기쁘게 맞이하고 또 그러한 사람들을 존경하십시오.","이러므로 너희가 주 안에서 모든 기쁨으로 그를 영접하고 또 이와 같은 자들을 존귀히 여기라","이러므로 너희가 주 안에서 모든 기쁨으로 저를 영접하고 또 이와 같은 자들을 존귀히 여기라","주님 안에서 그를 기쁨으로 영접해 주십시오. 그리고 그에게 감사를 표해 주십시오.","Welcome him then in the Lord with all joy and hold such people in esteem,","Receive him therefore in the Lord with all gladness; and hold such in reputation:","Welcome him in the Lord with great joy, and honor men like him,","Excipite itaque illum in Domino cum omni gaudio et eiusmodi cum honore habetote,","על כן קבלהו באדנינו בכל שמחה והוקירוט אנשים כמהו׃"],["57","2","30","그는 여러분이 나를 위하여 못 다한 봉사를 마저 채우려고, 목숨을 걸고 그리스도를 위하여 일하다가 죽음에까지 가까이 갔던 사람이기 때문입니다.","그는 여러분이 나에게 미처 해주지 못한 것을 해주려고 목숨을 걸고 그리스도를 위하여 일하다가 죽을 고비를 겪은 사람입니다.","그가 그리스도의 일을 위하여 죽기에 이르러도 자기 목숨을 돌보지 아니한 것은 나를 섬기는 너희의 일에 부족함을 채우려 함이니라","저가 그리스도의 일을 위하여 죽기에 이르러도 자기 목숨을 돌아보지 아니한 것은 나를 섬기는 너희의 일에 부족함을 채우려 함이니라","그는 그리스도를 위해 생명을 내걸고 일하다가 하마터면 죽을 뻔하기도 하였습니다. 그는 멀리 떨어져 있는 여러분을 대신해서 정성을 다해 내 일을 돌봐준 사람입니다.","because for the sake of the work of Christ he came close to death, risking his life to make up for those services to me that you could not perform.","Because for the work of Christ he was nigh unto death, not regarding his life, to supply your lack of service toward me.","because he almost died for the work of Christ, risking his life to make up for the help you could not give me.","quoniam propter opus Christi usque ad mortem accessit in interitum tradens animam suam, ut suppleret id, quod vobis deerat ministerii erga me.","כי בעבור מעשה המשיח הגיע עד מות ותקל נפשו בעיניו למען ימלא את אשר חסרתם בשרתכם אותי׃"],["57","3","1","끝으로 나의 형제 여러분, 주님 안에서 기뻐하십시오. 같은 내용을 적어 보낸다 해서 나에게는 성가실 것이 없습니다. 그것이 오히려 여러분에게는 안전한 것이 됩니다.","내 형제 여러분, 주님께서 여러분에게 많은 기쁨을 주시기를 빕니다. 나는 여러분의 안전을 위하여 성가시게 생각하지 않고 같은 이야기를 되풀이하여 써 보냅니다.","끝으로 나의 형제들아 주 안에서 기뻐하라 너희에게 같은 말을 쓰는 것이 내게는 수고로움이 없고 너희에게는 안전하니라","종말로 나의 형제들아 주 안에서 기뻐하라 너희에게 같은 말을 쓰는 것이 내게는 수고로움이 없고 너희에게는 안전하니라","사랑하는 형제들이여, 어떤 일이 일어나든지 주님 안에서 기뻐하십시오. 이미 여러 차례 한 말입니다만 여러분을 위해 또다시 당부하는 것이니 내 말을 단단히 들어 두십시오.","Finally, my brothers, rejoice in the Lord. Writing the same things to you is no burden for me but is a safeguard for you.","Finally, my brethren, rejoice in the Lord. To write the same things to you, to me indeed is not grievous, but for you it is safe.","Finally, my brothers, rejoice in the Lord! It is no trouble for me to write the same things to you again, and it is a safeguard for you.","De cetero, fratres mei, gaudete in Domino. Eadem vobis scribe re mihi quidem non pigrum, vobis autem securum.","ובכן אחי שמחו באדנינו הן לכתב ולשנות כזאת אליכם עלי איננו לטרח ולכם הוא לחזוק׃"],["57","3","2","개들을 조심하십시오. 나쁜 일꾼들을 조심하십시오. 거짓된 할례를 주장하는 자들을 조심하십시오.","개들을 조심하십시오. 악한들을 조심하십시오. 형식적인 할례를 주장하는 자들을 조심하십시오.","개들을 삼가고 행악하는 자들을 삼가고 몸을 상해하는 일을 삼가라","개들을 삼가고 행악하는 자들을 삼가고 손할례당을 삼가라","할례를 받아야 구원을 얻는다고 말하는 위험한 개들을 조심하십시오. 그 악한 자들을 경계하십시오.","Beware of the dogs! Beware of the evil workers! Beware of the mutilation!","Beware of dogs, beware of evil workers, beware of the concision.","Watch out for those dogs, those men who do evil, those mutilators of the flesh.","Videte canes, videte malos operarios, videte concisionem!","הזהרו מן הכלבים הזהרו מן הפעלים הרעים הזהרו מן החתוך׃"],["57","3","3","하느님의 영으로 예배하고 그리스도 예수님 안에서 자랑하며 육적인 것을 신뢰하지 않는 우리야말로 참된 할례를 받은 사람입니다.","영적으로 하느님께 예배 드리고 그리스도 예수를 자랑하며 세속적인 것에 의지하지 않는 우리야말로 진정한 할례를 받은 사람들입니다.","하나님의 성령으로 봉사하며 그리스도 예수로 자랑하고 육체를 신뢰하지 아니하는 우리가 곧 할례파라","하나님의 성령으로 봉사하며 그리스도 1)예수로 자랑하고 육체를 신뢰하지 아니하는 우리가 곧 할례당이라 혹 안에서","몸의 한 부분을 잘라 낸다고 해서 하나님의 자녀가 되는 게 아닙니다. 우리의 영으로 하나님께 예배를 드려야 하나님의 자녀가 됩니다. 그 예배만이 참할례입니다. 우리 그리스도인이 자랑할 일은 오직 그리스도 예수께서 우리를 위해서 하신 일뿐입니다. 우리가 스스로를 구원할 수 없다는 것은 너무도 잘 알고 있지 않습니까?","For we are the circumcision, we who worship through the Spirit of God, who boast in Christ Jesus and do not put our confidence in flesh,","For we are the circumcision, which worship God in the spirit, and rejoice in Christ Jesus, and have no confidence in the flesh.","For it is we who are the circumcision, we who worship by the Spirit of God, who glory in Christ Jesus, and who put no confidence in the flesh--","Nos enim sumus circumcisio, qui Spiritu Dei servimus et gloriamur in Christo Iesu et non in carne fiduciam habentes,","כי אנחנו בני המילה העבדים את האלהים ברוח ומתפארים במשיח ישוע ואיננו בטחים בבשר׃"],["57","3","4","하기야 나에게도 육적인 것을 신뢰할 수 있는 근거가 있기는 합니다. 다른 어떤 사람이 육적인 것을 신뢰할 수 있다고 생각한다면, 나는 더욱 그렇습니다.","하기야 세속적인 면에서도 나는 내세울 만한 것이 있습니다. 만일 어떤 사람이 세속적인 것을 가지고 자랑하려 든다면 나에게는 자랑할 만한 것이 더 많습니다.","그러나 나도 육체를 신뢰할 만하며 만일 누구든지 다른 이가 육체를 신뢰할 것이 있는 줄로 생각하면 나는 더욱 그러하리니","그러나 나도 육체를 신뢰할만하니 만일 누구든지 다른이가 육체를 신뢰할 것이 있는 줄로 생각하면 나는 더욱 그러하리니","그러나 만일 스스로 구원할 수 있다는 희망을 가지기에 충분한 사람이 있다고 하면 그것은 바로 나라고 할 수 있을 것입니다. 인간적인 면만을 본다면 확실히 나도 구원받을 가능성이 있습니다.","although I myself have grounds for confidence even in the flesh. If anyone else thinks he can be confident in flesh, all the more can I.","Though I might also have confidence in the flesh. If any other man thinketh that he hath whereof he might trust in the flesh, I more:","though I myself have reasons for such confidence. If anyone else thinks he has reasons to put confidence in the flesh, I have more:","quamquam ego habeam confidentiam et in carne. Si quis alius videtur confidere in carne, ego magis:","אף כי גם לי יש לבטח בבשר ואם יחשב איש שיוכל לבטח בבשר הנה אני יותר ממנו׃"],["57","3","5","여드레 만에 할례를 받은 나는 이스라엘 민족으로 벤야민 지파 출신이고, 히브리 사람에게서 태어난 히브리 사람이며, 율법으로 말하면 바리사이입니다.","나는 이스라엘 백성 가운데서도 베냐민 지파에서 태어났으며 난 지 여드레 만에 할례를 받았고 히브리 사람 중의 히브리 사람입니다. 나는 율법으로 말하면 바리사이파 사람이며","나는 팔일 만에 할례를 받고 이스라엘 족속이요 베냐민 지파요 히브리인 중의 히브리인이요 율법으로는 바리새인이요","내가 팔일만에 할례를 받고 이스라엘의 족속이요 베냐민의 지파요 히브리인 중의 히브리인이요 율법으로는 바리새인이요","나는 순수한 유대인 혈통을 이어받아 오랜 전통의 베냐민 가문에 태어났으며, 난 지 여드레 만에 유대인의 표지를 받기 위해 할례의식을 치렀습니다. 그러므로 나는 어디 한군데 흠잡을 데 없는 진짜 유대인입니다. 게다가 유대교의 모든 율법과 관습을 지키기를 가장 엄격하게 요구하는 바리새파 회원이었습니다.","Circumcised on the eighth day, of the race of Israel, of the tribe of Benjamin, a Hebrew of Hebrew parentage, in observance of the law a Pharisee,","Circumcised the eighth day, of the stock of Israel, of the tribe of Benjamin, an Hebrew of the Hebrews; as touching the law, a Pharisee;","circumcised on the eighth day, of the people of Israel, of the tribe of Benjamin, a Hebrew of Hebrews; in regard to the law, a Pharisee;","circumcisus octava die, ex genere Israel, de tribu Beniamin, Hebraeus ex Hebraeis, secundum legem pharisaeus,","אשר אני נמול בן שמונת ימים מבני ישראל משבט בנימין עברי מן העברים׃"],["57","3","6","열성으로 말하면 교회를 박해하던 사람이었고, 율법에 따른 의로움으로 말하면 흠잡을 데 없는 사람이었습니다.","열성으로 말하면 교회를 박해하던 사람입니다. 율법을 지킴으로써 올바른 사람으로 인정을 받는다면 나는 조금도 흠이 없는 사람입니다.","열심으로는 교회를 박해하고 율법의 의로는 흠이 없는 자라","열심으로는 교회를 핍박하고 율법의 의로는 흠이 없는 자로라","얼마나 그악스러웠던지 교회를 모조리 핍박했고 유대교의 모든 규칙과 규정을 빠짐없이 지키려 온 힘을 쏟았습니다.","in zeal I persecuted the church, in righteousness based on the law I was blameless.","Concerning zeal, persecuting the church; touching the righteousness which is in the law, blameless.","as for zeal, persecuting the church; as for legalistic righteousness, faultless.","secundum aemulationem persequens ecclesiam, secundum iustitiam, quae in lege est, conversatus sine querela.","לפי התורה פרוש בקנאתי רדף את העדה ולפי צדקת התורה בלי שמץ׃"],["57","3","7","그러나 나에게 이롭던 것들을, 나는 그리스도 때문에 모두 해로운 것으로 여기게 되었습니다.","그러나 나에게 유익했던 이런 것들을 나는 그리스도를 위해서 장해물로 여겼습니다.","그러나 무엇이든지 내게 유익하던 것을 내가 그리스도를 위하여 다 해로 여길뿐더러","그러나 무엇이든지 내게 유익하던 것을 내가 그리스도를 위하여 다 해로 여길뿐더러","그러나 한때 대단한 가치가 있다고 생각했던 이런 것들을 지금에 와서는 모조리 내던졌습니다. 그리스도만을 의지하고 그분에게만 소망을 두기 위해서입니다.","[But] whatever gains I had, these I have come to consider a loss because of Christ.","But what things were gain to me, those I counted loss for Christ.","But whatever was to my profit I now consider loss for the sake of Christ.","Sed, quae mihi erant lucra, haec arbitratus sum propter Christum detrimentum.","אך היתרנות האלה כלן חשבתי לי לחסרנות למען המשיח׃"],["57","3","8","그뿐만 아니라, 나의 주 그리스도 예수님을 아는 지식의 지고한 가치 때문에, 다른 모든 것을 해로운 것으로 여깁니다. 나는 그리스도 때문에 모든 것을 잃었지만 그것들을 쓰레기로 여깁니다. 내가 그리스도를 얻고","그뿐만 아니라 나에게는 모든 것이 다 장해물로 생각됩니다. 나에게는 내 주 그리스도 예수를 아는 지식이 무엇보다도 존귀합니다. 나는 그리스도를 위해서 모든 것을 잃었고 그것들을 모두 쓰레기로 여기고 있습니다. 그것은 내가 그리스도를 얻고","또한 모든 것을 해로 여김은 내 주 그리스도 예수를 아는 지식이 가장 고상하기 때문이라 내가 그를 위하여 모든 것을 잃어버리고 배설물로 여김은 그리스도를 얻고","또한 모든 것을 해로 여김은 내 주 그리스도 예수를 아는 지식이 가장 고상함을 인함이라 내가 그를 위하여 모든 것을 잃어버리고 배설물로 여김은 그리스도를 얻고","그렇습니다. 나의 주님 그리스도 예수를 알게 된 것이 너무도 존귀해서 이것과 비교하면 다른 것은 다 무가치하게 여겨질 뿐입니다. 나는 그리스도 외에는 다 쓰레기처럼 여기고 모두 내버렸습니다. 그리스도를 얻기 위해 그렇게 한 것입니다.","More than that, I even consider everything as a loss because of the supreme good of knowing Christ Jesus my Lord. For his sake I have accepted the loss of all things and I consider them so much rubbish, that I may gain Christ","Yea doubtless, and I count all things but loss for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord: for whom I have suffered the loss of all things, and do count them but dung, that I may win Christ,","What is more, I consider everything a loss compared to the surpassing greatness of knowing Christ Jesus my Lord, for whose sake I have lost all things. I consider them rubbish, that I may gain Christ","Verumtamen existimo omnia detrimentum esse propter eminentiam scientiae Christi Iesu Domini mei, propter quem omnia detrimentum feci et arbitror ut stercora, ut Christum lucrifaciam","וגם עודני חשב את כלן לחסרון לעמת מעלת ידיעת ישוע המשיח אדני אשר בעבורו חסרתי את נפשי מכל אלה ואחשבם לסחי להרויח את המשיח ולהמצא בו׃"],["57","3","9","그분 안에 있으려는 것입니다. 율법에서 오는 나의 의로움이 아니라, 그리스도에 대한 믿음으로 말미암은 의로움, 곧 믿음을 바탕으로 하느님에게서 오는 의로움을 지니고 있으려는 것입니다.","그리스도와 하나가 되려는 것입니다. 내가 율법을 지킴으로써 하느님과의 올바른 관계를 얻는 것이 아니라 내가 그리스도를 믿을 때 내 믿음을 보시고 하느님께서 나를 당신과의 올바른 관계에 놓아주시는 것입니다.","그 안에서 발견되려 함이니 내가 가진 의는 율법에서 난 것이 아니요 오직 그리스도를 믿음으로 말미암은 것이니 곧 믿음으로 하나님께로부터 난 의라","그 안에서 발견되려 함이니 내가 가진 의는 율법에서 난 것이 아니요 오직 그리스도를 믿음으로 말미암은 것이니 곧 믿음으로 하나님께로서 난 의라","보다 더 의로운 사람이 되려고 하거나 율법을 지켜서 구원을 얻으려는 생각을 집어치우고 오직 믿음으로 구원을 얻고 그리스도와 하나가 되기 위해서 그렇게 한 것입니다. 하나님께서 우리를 하나님과 올바른 관계에 놓아 주시는 것은 그리스도만을 의지하는 믿음을 가지고 있느냐 없느냐에 달려 있기 때문입니다.","and be found in him, not having any righteousness of my own based on the law but that which comes through faith in Christ, the righteousness from God, depending on faith","And be found in him, not having mine own righteousness, which is of the law, but that which is through the faith of Christ, the righteousness which is of God by faith:","and be found in him, not having a righteousness of my own that comes from the law, but that which is through faith in Christ--the righteousness that comes from God and is by faith.","et inveniar in illo non habens meam iustitiam, quae ex lege est, sed illam, quae per fidem est Christi, quae ex Deo est iustitia in fide;","ולא תהיה לי צדקתי מתוך התורה כי אם באמונת המשיח הצדקה הבאה מאת האלהים באמונה׃"],["57","3","10","나는 죽음을 겪으시는 그분을 닮아, 그분과 그분 부활의 힘을 알고 그분 고난에 동참하는 법을 알고 싶습니다.","내가 바라는 것은 그리스도를 알고 그리스도의 부활의 능력을 깨닫고 그리스도와 고난을 같이 나누고 그리스도와 같이 죽는 것입니다.","내가 그리스도와 그 부활의 권능과 그 고난에 참여함을 알고자 하여 그의 죽으심을 본받아","내가 그리스도와 그 부활의 권능과 그 고난에 2)참예함을 알려하여 그의 죽으심을 본받아 혹 교제","나는 지금 모든 것을 다 내던졌습니다. 내가 바라는 것은 다만 참으로 그리스도를 알고 그리스도를 다시 살리신 전능한 능력을 체험하고 그리스도와 함께 고난을 당하고 그리스도와 함께 죽는다는 것이 무엇을 의미하는가를 아는 일입니다.","to know him and the power of his resurrection and [the] sharing of his sufferings by being conformed to his death,","That I may know him, and the power of his resurrection, and the fellowship of his sufferings, being made conformable unto his death;","I want to know Christ and the power of his resurrection and the fellowship of sharing in his sufferings, becoming like him in his death,","ad cognoscendum illum et virtutem resurrectionis eius et communionem passionum illius, conformans me morti eius,","לדעת אתו ואת גבורת תחיתו והתחברות ענוייו ולהדמות למותו׃"],["57","3","11","그리하여 어떻게든 죽은 이들 가운데에서 살아나는 부활에 이를 수 있기를 바랍니다.","그러다가 마침내 죽은 자들 가운데서 다시 살아나기를 바랍니다.","어떻게 해서든지 죽은 자 가운데서 부활에 이르려 하노니","어찌하든지 죽은 자 가운데서 부활에 이르려 하노니","죽은 자 가운데서 다시 살아난 분이 가지는 신선하고 새로운 생명 가운데서 사는 자가 되기 위해서라면 어떤 일이라도 감수할 것입니다.","if somehow I may attain the resurrection from the dead.","If by any means I might attain unto the resurrection of the dead.","and so, somehow, to attain to the resurrection from the dead.","si quo modo occurram ad resurrectionem, quae est ex mortuis.","להגיע אם אוכל אל תחית המתים׃"],["57","3","12","나는 이미 그것을 얻은 것도 아니고 목적지에 다다른 것도 아닙니다. 그것을 차지하려고 달려갈 따름입니다. 그리스도 예수님께서 이미 나를 당신 것으로 차지하셨기 때문입니다.","나는 이 희망을 이미 이루었다는 것도 아니고 또 이미 완전한 사람이 되었다는 것도 아닙니다. 다만 나는 그것을 붙들려고 달음질칠 뿐입니다. 그리스도 예수께서 나를 붙드신 목적이 바로 이것입니다.","내가 이미 얻었다 함도 아니요 온전히 이루었다 함도 아니라 오직 내가 그리스도 예수께 잡힌 바 된 그것을 잡으려고 달려가노라","내가 이미 얻었다 함도 아니요 온전히 이루었다 함도 아니라 오직 내가 그리스도 예수께 잡힌바 된 그것을 잡으려고 좇아가노라","내가 완전한 인간이 되었다고 말하려는 게 아닙니다. 나는 아직도 배워야 할 것이 많습니다. 다만 나는 그리스도께서 왜 나를 구원해 주셨는가를 깨달아 그리스도께서 내게 바라는 사람이 될 그날을 향해서 계속 노력할 뿐입니다.","It is not that I have already taken hold of it or have already attained perfect maturity, but I continue my pursuit in hope that I may possess it, since I have indeed been taken possession of by Christ [Jesus].","Not as though I had already attained, either were already perfect: but I follow after, if that I may apprehend that for which also I am apprehended of Christ Jesus.","Not that I have already obtained all this, or have already been made perfect, but I press on to take hold of that for which Christ Jesus took hold of me.","Non quod iam acceperim aut iam perfectus sim; persequor autem si umquam comprehendam, sicut et comprehensus sum a Christo Iesu.","לא כאלו השגתי כבר או כאלו השלמתי אבל ארדף אולי אשיג כאשר גם השיגני המשיח ישוע׃"],["57","3","13","형제 여러분, 나는 이미 그것을 차지하였다고 여기지 않습니다. 그러나 이 한 가지는 분명합니다. 나는 내 뒤에 있는 것을 잊어버리고 앞에 있는 것을 향하여 내달리고 있습니다.","형제 여러분, 나는 그것을 이미 붙들었다고 생각하지 않습니다. 다만 나는 내 뒤에 있는 것을 잊고 앞에 있는 것만 바라보면서","형제들아 나는 아직 내가 잡은 줄로 여기지 아니하고 오직 한 일 즉 뒤에 있는 것은 잊어버리고 앞에 있는 것을 잡으려고","형제들아 나는 아직 내가 잡은 줄로 여기지 아니하고 오직 한 일 즉 뒤에 있는 것은 잊어버리고 앞에 있는 것을 잡으려고","사랑하는 형제들이여, 아직 나는 그 목표에 이르지 못하였습니다. 그래서 그 일을 이루는 데 내 모든 힘을 기울이고 있습니다. 과거의 것에 집착하지 않고 앞에 있는 것을 바라보며","Brothers, I for my part do not consider myself to have taken possession. Just one thing: forgetting what lies behind but straining forward to what lies ahead,","Brethren, I count not myself to have apprehended: but this one thing I do, forgetting those things which are behind, and reaching forth unto those things which are before,","Brothers, I do not consider myself yet to have taken hold of it. But one thing I do: Forgetting what is behind and straining toward what is ahead,","Fratres, ego me non arbitror comprehendisse; unum autem: quae quidem retro sunt, obliviscens, ad ea vero, quae ante sunt, extendens me","אחי אינני חשב כי כבר השגתי אך אחת דברתי כי שכח אני את אשר מאחרי ואשתטח אל אשר לפני׃"],["57","3","14","하느님께서 그리스도 예수님 안에서 우리를 하늘로 부르시어 주시는 상을 얻으려고, 그 목표를 향하여 달려가고 있는 것입니다.","목표를 향하여 달려갈 뿐입니다. 하느님께서는 그리스도 예수를 통하여 나를 부르셔서 높은 곳에 살게 하십니다. 그것이 나의 목표이며 내가 바라는 상입니다.","푯대를 향하여 그리스도 예수 안에서 하나님이 위에서 부르신 부름의 상을 위하여 달려가노라","푯대를 향하여 그리스도 예수 안에서 하나님이 3)위에서 부르신 부름의 상을 위하여 좇아가노라 혹 위로","목적지까지 달려서 상을 타려고 열심히 노력하고 있습니다. 이 상은 그리스도 예수께서 우리를 위해 이루신 그 일을 바탕으로 하여 내리는 것입니다. 지금 하나님께서는 이 상을 주시려고 나를 하늘로 부르고 계십니다.","I continue my pursuit toward the goal, the prize of God’s upward calling, in Christ Jesus.","I press toward the mark for the prize of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus.","I press on toward the goal to win the prize for which God has called me heavenward in Christ Jesus.","ad destinatum persequor, ad bravium supernae vocationis Dei in Christo Iesu.","וארדף את מטרת שכר הנצחון אשר הוא בקריאה של מעלה מאת האלהים במשיח ישוע׃"],["57","3","15","성숙한 사람인 우리는 모두 이러한 생각을 지닙시다. 혹시 여러분이 무엇인가 달리 생각한다면, 그것도 하느님께서 여러분에게 계시해 주실 것입니다.","그러므로 믿음이 성숙한 사람은 모두 이와 같은 마음가짐으로 살아가야 합니다. 만일 여러분이 어떤 문제에 관해서 다른 생각을 품었더라도 하느님께서는 그것까지도 분명히 가르쳐주실 것입니다.","그러므로 누구든지 우리 온전히 이룬 자들은 이렇게 생각할지니 만일 어떤 일에 너희가 달리 생각하면 하나님이 이것도 너희에게 나타내시리라","그러므로 누구든지 우리 온전히 이룬 자들은 이렇게 생각할찌니 만일 무슨 일에 너희가 달리 생각하면 하나님이 이것도 너희에게 나타내시리라","나는 여러분이 모두 성숙한 그리스도인으로서 이 점에 대해 나와 같은 생각을 가지기를 바랍니다. 혹시 여러분이 생각을 달리하는 점이 있더라도 하나님께서는 그 점을 분명히 지적해 가르쳐 주실 것입니다.","Let us, then, who are “perfectly mature” adopt this attitude. And if you have a different attitude, this too God will reveal to you.","Let us therefore, as many as be perfect, be thus minded: and if in any thing ye be otherwise minded, God shall reveal even this unto you.","All of us who are mature should take such a view of things. And if on some point you think differently, that too God will make clear to you.","Quicumque ergo perfecti, hoc sentiamus; et si quid aliter sapitis, et hoc vobis Deus revelabit;","לכן מי שהוא שלם בנו כן יחשב ואם תחשבו מחשבה אחרת גם זאת יגלה לכם האלהים׃"],["57","3","16","아무튼 우리가 어디에 이르렀든 같은 길로 나아갑시다.","어쨌든 우리가 이미 이룬 것을 바탕으로 해서 다 같이 앞으로 나아갑시다.","오직 우리가 어디까지 이르렀든지 그대로 행할 것이라","오직 우리가 어디까지 이르렀든지 그대로 행할 것이라","지금까지 우리가 어떻게 됐든지간에 이제는 같은 원칙을 가지고 앞으로 나아갑시다.","Only, with regard to what we have attained, continue on the same course.","Nevertheless, whereto we have already attained, let us walk by the same rule, let us mind the same thing.","Only let us live up to what we have already attained.","verumtamen, ad quod pervenimus, in eodem ambulemus.","רק נתהלכה באשר הגענו עדיה במעגל אחד יבלב אחד׃"],["57","3","17","형제 여러분, 다 함께 나를 본받는 사람이 되십시오. 여러분이 우리를 본보기로 삼는 것처럼 그렇게 살아가는 다른 이들도 눈여겨보십시오.","형제 여러분, 나를 본받으십시오. 그리고 여러분과 같이 우리를 모범으로 삼고 따르는 사람들을 눈여겨보십시오.","형제들아 너희는 함께 나를 본받으라 그리고 너희가 우리를 본받은 것처럼 그와 같이 행하는 자들을 눈여겨 보라","형제들아 너희는 함께 나를 본받으라 또 우리로 본을 삼은 것 같이 그대로 행하는 자들을 보이라","사랑하는 형제들이여, 내 생활을 본받으십시오. 그리고 나를 본받아 사는 사람들을 눈여겨 보십시오.","Join with others in being imitators of me, brothers, and observe those who thus conduct themselves according to the model you have in us.","Brethren, be followers together of me, and mark them which walk so as ye have us for an ensample.","Join with others in following my example, brothers, and take note of those who live according to the pattern we gave you.","Coimitatores mei estote, fratres, et observate eos, qui ita ambulant, sicut habetis formam nos.","אחי היו חברים להלכים אחרי והביטו אל המתהלכים כן כאשר אנחנו מופת לכם׃"],["57","3","18","내가 이미 여러분에게 자주 말하였고 지금도 눈물을 흘리며 말하는데, 많은 사람이 그리스도의 십자가의 원수로 살아가고 있습니다.","내가 벌써 여러 번 여러분에게 일러준 것을 지금 또 눈물을 흘리며 말하는 바이지만 많은 사람들이 그리스도의 십자가의 원수가 되어 살고 있습니다.","내가 여러 번 너희에게 말하였거니와 이제도 눈물을 흘리며 말하노니 여러 사람들이 그리스도의 십자가의 원수로 행하느니라","내가 여러 번 너희에게 말하였거니와 이제도 눈물을 흘리며 말하노니 여러 사람들이 그리스도 십자가의 원수로 행하느니라","내가 이처럼 전에도 여러 번 당부한 일을 지금 다시 눈물로 호소하는 것은 그리스도인이라 내세우면서도 실제로는 그리스도의 십자가를 대적하는 자들이 많기 때문입니다.","For many, as I have often told you and now tell you even in tears, conduct themselves as enemies of the cross of Christ.","(For many walk, of whom I have told you often, and now tell you even weeping, that they are the enemies of the cross of Christ:","For, as I have often told you before and now say again even with tears, many live as enemies of the cross of Christ.","Multi enim ambulant, quos saepe dicebam vobis, nunc autem et flens dico, inimicos crucis Christi,","כי רבים המתהלכים כן כאשר אנחנו מופת לכם׃"],["57","3","19","그들의 끝은 멸망입니다. 그들은 자기네 배를 하느님으로, 자기네 수치를 영광으로 삼으며 이 세상 것만 생각합니다.","그들의 최후는 멸망뿐입니다. 그들은 자기네 뱃속을 하느님으로 삼고 자기네 수치를 오히려 자랑으로 생각하며 세상 일에만 마음을 쓰는 자들입니다.","그들의 마침은 멸망이요 그들의 신은 배요 그 영광은 그들의 부끄러움에 있고 땅의 일을 생각하는 자라","저희의 마침은 멸망이요 저희의 신은 배요 그 영광은 저희의 부끄러움에 있고 땅의 일을 생각하는 자라","그들에게는 영원한 멸망이 기다릴 뿐입니다. 그들은 욕망을 하나님처럼 섬기고 수치스러운 것을 대단한 것인 양 자랑하는 자들입니다. 그들은 오직 이 세상 일에만 마음을 씁니다.","Their end is destruction. Their God is their stomach; their glory is in their “shame.” Their minds are occupied with earthly things.","Whose end is destruction, whose God is their belly, and whose glory is in their shame, who mind earthly things.)","Their destiny is destruction, their god is their stomach, and their glory is in their shame. Their mind is on earthly things.","quorum finis interitus, quorum deus venter et gloria in confusione ipsorum, qui terrena sapiunt.","כי רבים המתהלכים אשר עליהם אמרתי לכם פעמים הרבה ועתה גם בבכי אני אמר כי הם איבי צלב המשיח׃"],["57","3","20","그러나 우리는 하늘의 시민입니다. 그리고 그곳에서 구세주로 오실 주 예수 그리스도를 고대합니다.","그러나 우리는 하늘의 시민입니다. 우리는 거기에서 오실 구세주 되시는 주 예수 그리스도를 고대하고 있습니다.","그러나 우리의 시민권은 하늘에 있는지라 거기로부터 구원하는 자 곧 주 예수 그리스도를 기다리노니","오직 우리의 시민권은 하늘에 있는지라 거기로서 구원하는 자 곧 주 예수 그리스도를 기다리노니","그러나 우리의 고향은 하늘에 있습니다. 우리는 하늘에 계신 구세주 주 예수 그리스도께서 다시 오실 것을 대망하고 있습니다.","But our citizenship is in heaven, and from it we also await a savior, the Lord Jesus Christ.","For our conversation is in heaven; from whence also we look for the Saviour, the Lord Jesus Christ:","But our citizenship is in heaven. And we eagerly await a Savior from there, the Lord Jesus Christ,","Noster enim municipatus in caelis est, unde etiam salvatorem exspectamus Dominum Iesum Christum,","אשר אחריתם האבדון אשר כרסם אלהיהם וכבודם בבשתם וקרבם הבלי חלד׃"],["57","3","21","그리스도께서는 만물을 당신께 복종시키실 수도 있는 그 권능으로, 우리의 비천한 몸을 당신의 영광스러운 몸과 같은 모습으로 변화시켜 주실 것입니다.","그리스도께서는 만물을 당신께 복종시킬 수 있는 능력을 가지고 오셔서 우리의 비천한 몸을 당신의 영광스러운 몸과 같은 형상으로 변화시켜 주실 것입니다.","그는 만물을 자기에게 복종하게 하실 수 있는 자의 역사로 우리의 낮은 몸을 자기 영광의 몸의 형체와 같이 변하게 하시리라","그가 만물을 자기에게 복종케 하실 수 있는 자의 역사로 우리의 낮은 몸을 자기 영광의 몸의 형체와 같이 변케 하시리라","그때에 그리스도께서는 온 세상 만물을 이기시는 놀라운 힘으로 우리의 죽을 몸을 당신의 영광스러운 몸과 같이 변화시켜 주실 것입니다.","He will change our lowly body to conform with his glorified body by the power that enables him also to bring all things into subjection to himself.","Who shall change our vile body, that it may be fashioned like unto his glorious body, according to the working whereby he is able even to subdue all things unto himself.","who, by the power that enables him to bring everything under his control, will transform our lowly bodies so that they will be like his glorious body.","qui transfigurabit corpus humilitatis nostrae, ut illud conforme faciat corpori gloriae suae secundum operationem, qua possit etiam subicere sibi omnia.","כי אזרחותנו בשמים היא ומשם מחכים אנחנו למושיענו אדנינו ישוע המשיח׃ [ (Philippians 3:22) אשר יחליף את גוף שפלותנו להיותו דומה לגוף כבודו כפי כח יכלתו לכבש הכל תחתיו׃ ]"],["57","4","1","그러므로 내가 사랑하고 그리워하는 형제 여러분, 나의 기쁨이며 화관인 여러분, 이렇게 주님 안에 굳건히 서 있으십시오, 사랑하는 여러분!","그러므로 내가 사랑하고 그리워하는 형제 여러분, 나의 기쁨이요 면류관인 사랑하는 교우 여러분, 주님을 믿으며 굳세게 살아가십시오.","그러므로 나의 사랑하고 사모하는 형제들, 나의 기쁨이요 면류관인 사랑하는 자들아 이와 같이 주 안에 서라","그러므로 나의 사랑하고 사모하는 형제들, 나의 기쁨이요 면류관인 사랑하는 자들아 이와 같이 주 안에 서라","사랑하는 믿음의 형제들이여, 내 마음은 여러분을 향한 그리움으로 가득 차 있습니다. 여러분은 나의 기쁨이며 내가 일해서 얻은 열매입니다. 나의 사랑하는 친구들이여, 주님 안에서 진실한 믿음을 굳게 지키십시오.","Therefore, my brothers, whom I love and long for, my joy and crown, in this way stand firm in the Lord, beloved.","Therefore, my brethren dearly beloved and longed for, my joy and crown, so stand fast in the Lord, my dearly beloved.","Therefore, my brothers, you whom I love and long for, my joy and crown, that is how you should stand firm in the Lord, dear friends!","Itaque, fratres mei carissimi et desideratissimi, gaudium et co rona mea, sic state in Domino, carissimi!","ועתה אחי החביבים והחמודים שמחתי ועטרת ראשי עמדו נא כן באדנינו חביבי׃"],["57","4","2","나는 에우오디아에게 권고하고 신티케에게 권고합니다. 주님 안에서 뜻을 같이하십시오.","유오디아와 신디케 두 분에게 나는 간청합니다. 주님을 믿는 사람으로서 한마음이 되십시오.","내가 유오디아를 권하고 순두게를 권하노니 주 안에서 같은 마음을 품으라","내가 유오디아를 권하고 순두게를 권하노니 주 안에서 같은 마음을 품으라","이제 나는 주님 안에서 사랑하는 두 여인 유오디아와 순두게에게 간청합니다. 모쪼록 주님 안에서 한마음이 되어 더 이상 싸우지 말고 다시 친구가 되십시오.","I urge Euodia and I urge Syntyche to come to a mutual understanding in the Lord.","I beseech Euodias, and beseech Syntyche, that they be of the same mind in the Lord.","I plead with Euodia and I plead with Syntyche to agree with each other in the Lord.","Evodiam rogo et Syntychen deprecor idipsum sapere in Domino.","את אבהודיה אני מזהיר ואת סונטיכי אני מזהיר להיות לב אחד באדנינו׃"],["57","4","3","그렇습니다. 나의 진실한 동지여, 이 여자들을 도와주도록 그대에게도 당부합니다. 이들은 클레멘스를 비롯하여 나의 다른 협력자들과 더불어 복음을 전하려고 나와 함께 싸운 사람들입니다. 이 모든 이들의 이름이 생명의 책에 적혀 있습니다.","나와 한 멍에를 멘 내 진실한 협력자에게 부탁합니다. 이 여자들을 도와주십시오. 이 여자들은 클레멘스를 비롯하여 다른 협력자들과 더불어 복음을 전하느라고 나와 함께 애쓴 사람들입니다. 그들의 이름은 생명의 책에 올라 있습니다.","또 참으로 나와 멍에를 같이한 네게 구하노니 복음에 나와 함께 힘쓰던 저 여인들을 돕고 또한 글레멘드와 그 외에 나의 동역자들을 도우라 그 이름들이 생명책에 있느니라","또 참으로 나와 멍에를 같이 한 자 네게 구하노니 복음에 나와 함께 힘쓰던 저 부녀들을 돕고 또한 글레멘드와 그 외에 나의 동역자들을 도우라 그 이름들이 생명책에 있느니라","나의 진실한 협력자인 여러분에게도 부탁합니다. 이 여인들을 도와주십시오. 이 여인들은 글레멘드를 비롯한 여러 동역자들과 더불어 복음을 전하는 일에 적극 나를 도와준 사람들입니다. 그들 이름은 생명책에 기록되어 있습니다.","Yes, and I ask you also, my true yokemate, to help them, for they have struggled at my side in promoting the gospel, along with Clement and my other co-workers, whose names are in the book of life.","And I intreat thee also, true yokefellow, help those women which laboured with me in the gospel, with Clement also, and with other my fellowlabourers, whose names are in the book of life.","Yes, and I ask you, loyal yokefellow, help these women who have contended at my side in the cause of the gospel, along with Clement and the rest of my fellow workers, whose names are in the book of life.","Etiam rogo et te, germane compar, adiuva illas, quae mecum concertaverunt in evangelio cum Clemente et ceteris adiutoribus meis, quorum nomina sunt in libro vitae.","ואתה חברי הנצמד לי באמת אף ממך אני מבקש להיות להן לעזר אשר יגעו עמדי על הבשורה עם קלימיס ועם שאר תמכי אשר שמותם יחד בספר החיים׃"],["57","4","4","주님 안에서 늘 기뻐하십시오. 거듭 말합니다. 기뻐하십시오.","주님과 함께 항상 기뻐하십시오. 거듭 말합니다. 기뻐하십시오.","주 안에서 항상 기뻐하라 내가 다시 말하노니 기뻐하라","주 안에서 항상 기뻐하라 내가 다시 말하노니 기뻐하라","항상 주님 안에서 기뻐하십시오. 다시 한 번 말합니다. 기뻐하십시오.","Rejoice in the Lord always. I shall say it again: rejoice!","Rejoice in the Lord alway: and again I say, Rejoice.","Rejoice in the Lord always. I will say it again: Rejoice!","Gaudete in Domino semper. Iterum dico: Gaudete!","שמחו באדנינו בכל עת ועוד הפעם אמר אני שמחו׃"],["57","4","5","여러분의 너그러운 마음을 모든 사람이 알 수 있게 하십시오. 주님께서 가까이 오셨습니다.","여러분의 너그러운 마음을 모든 사람에게 보이십시오. 주님께서 오실 날이 얼마 남지 않았습니다.","너희 관용을 모든 사람에게 알게 하라 주께서 가까우시니라","너희 관용을 모든 사람에게 알게 하라 주께서 가까우시니라","자기보다 먼저 남을 생각하는 너그러움을 모든 사람에게 보이십시오. 주께서 곧 오신다는 것을 항상 기억하십시오.","Your kindness should be known to all. The Lord is near.","Let your moderation be known unto all men. The Lord is at hand.","Let your gentleness be evident to all. The Lord is near.","Modestia vestra nota sit omnibus hominibus. Dominus prope.","ענות רוחכם תודע לכל איש קרב הוא האדון׃"],["57","4","6","아무것도 걱정하지 마십시오. 어떠한 경우에든 감사하는 마음으로 기도하고 간구하며 여러분의 소원을 하느님께 아뢰십시오.","아무 걱정도 하지 마십시오. 언제나 감사하는 마음으로 기도하고 간구하며 여러분의 소원을 하느님께 아뢰십시오.","아무 것도 염려하지 말고 다만 모든 일에 기도와 간구로, 너희 구할 것을 감사함으로 하나님께 아뢰라","아무 것도 염려하지 말고 오직 모든 일에 기도와 간구로, 너희 구할 것을 감사함으로 하나님께 아뢰라","걱정에 싸여 지내지 말고 무슨 일에 있어서든지 기도하십시오. 필요할 것을 하나님께 아뢰고, 여러분의 기도에 응답해 주시는 하나남께 감사드리는 일을 잊지 마십시오.","Have no anxiety at all, but in everything, by prayer and petition, with thanksgiving, make your requests known to God.","Be careful for nothing; but in every thing by prayer and supplication with thanksgiving let your requests be made known unto God.","Do not be anxious about anything, but in everything, by prayer and petition, with thanksgiving, present your requests to God.","Nihil solliciti sitis, sed in omnibus oratione et obsecratione cum gratiarum actione petitiones vestrae innotescant apud Deum.","אל תדאגו כי אם בתפלה ובתחנונים עם תודה תודיעו בכל דבר את משאלותיכם לאלהינו׃"],["57","4","7","그러면 사람의 모든 이해를 뛰어넘는 하느님의 평화가 여러분의 마음과 생각을 그리스도 예수님 안에서 지켜 줄 것입니다.","그러면 사람으로서는 감히 생각할 수도 없는 하느님의 평화가 그리스도 예수를 믿는 여러분의 마음과 생각을 지켜주실 것입니다.","그리하면 모든 지각에 뛰어난 하나님의 평강이 그리스도 예수 안에서 너희 마음과 생각을 지키시리라","그리하면 모든 지각에 뛰어난 하나님의 평강이 그리스도 예수 안에서 너희 마음과 생각을 지키시리라","그러면 여러분은 인간의 이해를 훨씬 더 초월한 하나님의 평화를 경험하게 될 것입니다. 여러분이 그리스도 예수를 의지할 때 하나님의 평화가 여러분의 생각과 마음을 안정시키며 안식을 줄 것입니다.","Then the peace of God that surpasses all understanding will guard your hearts and minds in Christ Jesus.","And the peace of God, which passeth all understanding, shall keep your hearts and minds through Christ Jesus.","And the peace of God, which transcends all understanding, will guard your hearts and your minds in Christ Jesus.","Et pax Dei, quae exsuperat omnem sensum, custodiet corda vestra et intellegentias vestras in Christo Iesu.","ושלום אלהים הנשגב מכל שכל ינצר את לבבכם ואת מחשבותיכם במשיח ישוע׃"],["57","4","8","끝으로, 형제 여러분, 참된 것과 고귀한 것과 의로운 것과 정결한 것과 사랑스러운 것과 영예로운 것은 무엇이든지, 또 덕이 되는 것과 칭송받는 것은 무엇이든지 다 마음에 간직하십시오.","형제 여러분, 끝으로 여러분에게 당부합니다. 여러분은 무엇이든지 참된 것과 고상한 것과 옳은 것과 순결한 것과 사랑스러운 것과 영예로운 것과 덕스럽고 칭찬할 만한 것들을 마음속에 품으십시오.","끝으로 형제들아 무엇에든지 참되며 무엇에든지 경건하며 무엇에든지 옳으며 무엇에든지 정결하며 무엇에든지 사랑 받을 만하며 무엇에든지 칭찬 받을 만하며 무슨 덕이 있든지 무슨 기림이 있든지 이것들을 생각하라","종말로 형제들아 무엇에든지 참되며 무엇에든지 경건하며 무엇에든지 옳으며 무엇에든지 정결하며 무엇에든지 사랑할만하며 무엇에든지 칭찬할만하며 무슨 덕이 있든지 무슨 기림이 있든지 이것들을 생각하라","형제들이여, 이제 이 편지를 끝맺기 전에 한 가지 더 일러둘 말이 있습니다. 여러분의 생각을 참된 것과 선한 것과 옳은 일에 단단히 매어 두십시오. 순수하고 사랑스러운 것을 생각하고 남의 아름답고 좋은 점을 보도록 하십시오. 하나님께 찬양과 기쁨을 드리는 일만을 생각하십시오.","Finally, brothers, whatever is true, whatever is honorable, whatever is just, whatever is pure, whatever is lovely, whatever is gracious, if there is any excellence and if there is anything worthy of praise, think about these things.","Finally, brethren, whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good report; if there be any virtue, and if there be any praise, think on these things.","Finally, brothers, whatever is true, whatever is noble, whatever is right, whatever is pure, whatever is lovely, whatever is admirable--if anything is excellent or praiseworthy--think about such things.","De cetero, fratres, quaecumque sunt vera, quaecumque pudica, quaecumque iusta, quaecumque casta, quaecumque amabilia, quaecumque bonae famae, si qua virtus et si qua laus, haec cogitate;","ובכן אחי כל אשר הוא אמת ונכבד וישר וטהור ונעים ואשר שמעו טוב כל מעשה צדק כל מעשה שבח על אלה תשימו לבבכם׃"],["57","4","9","그리고 나에게서 배우고 받고 듣고 본 것을 그대로 실천하십시오. 그러면 평화의 하느님께서 여러분과 함께 계실 것입니다.","그리고 나에게서 배운 것과 받은 것과 들은 것과 본 것을 실행하십시오. 그러면 평화의 하느님께서 여러분과 함께 계실 것입니다.","너희는 내게 배우고 받고 듣고 본 바를 행하라 그리하면 평강의 하나님이 너희와 함께 계시리라","1)너희는 내게 배우고 받고 듣고 본 바를 행하라 그리하면 평강의 하나님이 너희와 함께 계시리라혹 너희는 배우고……내 안에서 본 바를","내게서 배운 것과 내가 행하는 것을 본받아 실천에 옮기십시오. 그렇게 하면 평화의 하나님께서 여러분과 함께 하실 것입니다.","Keep on doing what you have learned and received and heard and seen in me. Then the God of peace will be with you.","Those things, which ye have both learned, and received, and heard, and seen in me, do: and the God of peace shall be with you.","Whatever you have learned or received or heard from me, or seen in me--put it into practice. And the God of peace will be with you.","quae et didicistis et accepistis et audistis et vidistis in me, haec agite; et Deus pacis erit vobiscum.","אשר למדתם וקבלתם ושמעתם וראיתם בי את אלה תעשו ואלהי השלום יהיה עמכם׃"],["57","4","10","여러분이 나를 생각해 주는 마음을 마침내 다시 한 번 보여 주었기에, 나는 주님 안에서 크게 기뻐합니다. 사실 여러분은 줄곧 나를 생각해 주었지만 그것을 보여 줄 기회가 없었던 것입니다.","나에 대하여 여러분의 관심을 표시할 기회가 오래간만에 다시 여러분에게 생긴 것을 보고 나는 주님을 믿는 사람으로서 매우 기뻐합니다. 사실 여러분은 언제나 나를 생각하고 있었지만 그것을 표시할 기회가 없었던 것입니다.","내가 주 안에서 크게 기뻐함은 너희가 나를 생각하던 것이 이제 다시 싹이 남이니 너희가 또한 이를 위하여 생각은 하였으나 기회가 없었느니라","내가 주 안에서 크게 기뻐함은 너희가 나를 생각하던 것이 이제 다시 싹이 남이니 너희가 또한 이를 위하여 생각은 하였으나 기회가 없었느니라","여러분이 나를 다시 도와주게 되어 내가 얼마나 고마워하고 또 주님을 찬양하고 있는지 여러분은 모를 것입니다. 사실 여러분은 언제나 나를 도우려 애써 왔으면서도 한동안 그렇게 할 기회를 얻지 못하였습니다.","I rejoice greatly in the Lord that now at last you revived your concern for me. You were, of course, concerned about me but lacked an opportunity.","But I rejoiced in the Lord greatly, that now at the last your care of me hath flourished again; wherein ye were also careful, but ye lacked opportunity.","I rejoice greatly in the Lord that at last you have renewed your concern for me. Indeed, you have been concerned, but you had no opportunity to show it.","Gavisus sum autem in Domino vehementer, quoniam tandem aliquando refloruistis pro me sentire, sicut et sentiebatis, opportunitate autem carebatis.","ואני שמחתי מאד באדנינו כי עתה הפעם החלפתם כח להשגיח עלי וגם משגיחים הייתם עד כה אך לא עלתה בידכם׃"],["57","4","11","내가 궁핍해서 이런 말을 하는 것은 아닙니다. 나는 어떠한 처지에서도 만족하는 법을 배웠습니다.","내 처지가 어려워서 이런 말을 하는 것은 아닙니다. 나는 어떤 처지에서도 자족하는 법을 배웠습니다.","내가 궁핍하므로 말하는 것이 아니니라 어떠한 형편에든지 나는 자족하기를 배웠노니","내가 궁핍하므로 말하는 것이 아니라 어떠한 형편에든지 내가 자족하기를 배웠노니","내 처지가 어렵기 때문에 이런 말을 하는 게 아닙니다. 나는 가진 것이 많든 적든 즐겁게 살아가는 법을 배웠습니다.","Not that I say this because of need, for I have learned, in whatever situation I find myself, to be self-sufficient.","Not that I speak in respect of want: for I have learned, in whatsoever state I am, therewith to be content.","I am not saying this because I am in need, for I have learned to be content whatever the circumstances.","Non quasi propter penuriam dico, ego enim didici, in quibus sum, sufficiens esse.","ולא ממחסור אדבר כן כי למדתי להסתפק במה שיש לי׃"],["57","4","12","나는 비천하게 살 줄도 알고 풍족하게 살 줄도 압니다. 배부르거나 배고프거나 넉넉하거나 모자라거나 그 어떠한 경우에도 잘 지내는 비결을 알고 있습니다.","비천하게 살 줄도 알며 풍족하게 살 줄도 압니다. 배부르거나 배고프거나 넉넉하거나 궁핍하거나 그 어떤 경우에도 적응할 수 있는 비결을 알고 있습니다.","나는 비천에 처할 줄도 알고 풍부에 처할 줄도 알아 모든 일 곧 배부름과 배고픔과 풍부와 궁핍에도 처할 줄 아는 일체의 비결을 배웠노라","내가 비천에 처할 줄도 알고 풍부에 처할 줄도 알아 모든 일에 배부르며 배고픔과 풍부와 궁핍에도 일체의 비결을 배웠노라","가난을 이겨낼 줄도 알고 부유를 누릴 줄도 압니다. 배가 부르거나 배고프거나, 넉넉하거나 궁핍하거나 어떤 경우에도 만족하는 법을 몸에 익혔습니다.","I know indeed how to live in humble circumstances; I know also how to live with abundance. In every circumstance and in all things I have learned the secret of being well fed and of going hungry, of living in abundance and of being in need.","I know both how to be abased, and I know how to abound: every where and in all things I am instructed both to be full and to be hungry, both to abound and to suffer need.","I know what it is to be in need, and I know what it is to have plenty. I have learned the secret of being content in any and every situation, whether well fed or hungry, whether living in plenty or in want.","Scio et humiliari, scio et abundare; ubique et in omnibus institutus sum et satiari et esurire et abundare et penuriam pati.","ידעתי לענות אף ידעתי להותיר מחנך אני בכל ענין ואופן הן לשבע הן לרעב הן להותיר הן לחסר׃"],["57","4","13","나에게 힘을 주시는 분 안에서 나는 모든 것을 할 수 있습니다.","나에게 능력을 주시는 분에게 힘입어 나는 무슨 일이든지 할 수 있습니다.","내게 능력 주시는 자 안에서 내가 모든 것을 할 수 있느니라","내게 능력 주시는 자 안에서 내가 모든 것을 할 수 있느니라","내게 힘을 주고 강하게 하시는 그리스도의 도움으로 나는 하나님께서 원하는 것을 다할 수 있습니다.","I have the strength for everything through him who empowers me.","I can do all things through Christ which strengtheneth me.","I can do everything through him who gives me strength.","Omnia possum in eo, qui me confortat.","כל זאת אוכל בעזרת המשיח הנותן כח בקרבי׃"],["57","4","14","그러나 내가 겪는 환난에 여러분이 동참한 것은 잘한 일입니다.","그러나 고맙게도 여러분은 나와 고생을 같이 해주었습니다.","그러나 너희가 내 괴로움에 함께 참여하였으니 잘하였도다","그러나 너희가 내 괴로움에 함께 2)참예하였으니 잘하였도다 혹 교제","그러나 여러분이 이처럼 지금 내가 당하고 있는 어려움을 도와주려 하니 얼마나 고마운지 모릅니다.","Still, it was kind of you to share in my distress.","Notwithstanding ye have well done, that ye did communicate with my affliction.","Yet it was good of you to share in my troubles.","Verumtamen bene fecistis communicantes tribulationi meae.","אבל היטבתם לעשות בהתחברכם אלי בצרתי׃"],["57","4","15","필리피 신자 여러분, 복음 선포를 시작할 무렵 내가 마케도니아를 떠날 때, 여러분 외에는 나와 주고받는 관계에 있는 교회가 하나도 없었음을 여러분도 알고 있습니다.","필립비의 교우 여러분, 아시다시피 내가 복음을 전하기 시작하던 무렵 내가 마케도니아 지방을 떠날 때에 나와 주고받는 관계를 맺은 교회는 여러분밖에 없었습니다.","빌립보 사람들아 너희도 알거니와 복음의 시초에 내가 마게도냐를 떠날 때에 주고 받는 내 일에 참여한 교회가 너희 외에 아무도 없었느니라","빌립보 사람들아 너희도 알거니와 복음의 시초에 내가 마게도냐를 떠날 때에 주고 받는 내 일에 2)참예한 교회가 너희 외에 아무도 없었느니라 혹 교제","여러분이 잘 아는 대로 내가 복음을 들고 여러분을 처음으로 방문했다가 마게도냐를 떠나서 다른 지방으로 갈 때 재정적 도움을 준 이들은 여러분 빌립보 교회뿐이었습니다. 다른 교회는 그렇게 해주지 않았습니다.","You Philippians indeed know that at the beginning of the gospel, when I left Macedonia, not a single church shared with me in an account of giving and receiving, except you alone.","Now ye Philippians know also, that in the beginning of the gospel, when I departed from Macedonia, no church communicated with me as concerning giving and receiving, but ye only.","Moreover, as you Philippians know, in the early days of your acquaintance with the gospel, when I set out from Macedonia, not one church shared with me in the matter of giving and receiving, except you only;","Scitis autem et vos, Philippenses, quod in principio evangelii, quando profectus sum a Macedonia, nulla mihi ecclesia communicavit in ratione dati et accepti, nisi vos soli;","וידעתם גם אתם פילפיים כי בראשית הבשורה כצאתי ממקדוניא לא התחברה לי אחת מן הקהלות בעשק משא ומתן כי אם אתם בלבד׃"],["57","4","16","내가 테살로니카에 있을 때에도 여러분은 두어 번 필요한 것을 보내 주었습니다.","내가 데살로니카에 있을 때에도 나에게 필요한 것을 한두 번 보내주었습니다.","데살로니가에 있을 때에도 너희가 한 번뿐 아니라 두 번이나 나의 쓸 것을 보내었도다","데살로니가에 있을 때에도 너희가 한번 두번 나의 쓸 것을 보내었도다","내가 데살로니가에 머물러 있는 동안에도 두 번이나 여러분은 물자를 보내 도와주었습니다.","For even when I was at Thessalonica you sent me something for my needs, not only once but more than once.","For even in Thessalonica ye sent once and again unto my necessity.","for even when I was in Thessalonica, you sent me aid again and again when I was in need.","quia et Thessalonicam et semel et bis in usum mihi misistis.","כי גם בתסלוניקי שלחתם לי את צרכי פעם ושתים׃"],["57","4","17","물론 내가 선물을 바라는 것은 아닙니다. 여러분에게 많은 이익이 돌아가기를 바랄 뿐입니다.","내가 선물을 받고 싶어서 그러는 것은 아닙니다. 내가 바라는 것은 여러분에게 더 많은 이익이 돌아가게 하는 일뿐입니다.","내가 선물을 구함이 아니요 오직 너희에게 유익하도록 풍성한 열매를 구함이라","내가 선물을 구함이 아니요 오직 너희에게 유익하도록 과실이 번성하기를 구함이라","그러니 어찌 내가 여러분의 선물에 감사하지 않을 수 있겠습니까? 그러나 무엇보다도 기쁜 것은 여러분의 친절한 행동으로 오히려 여러분에게 풍성한 보상이 돌아가게 되었다는 사실입니다.","It is not that I am eager for the gift; rather, I am eager for the profit that accrues to your account.","Not because I desire a gift: but I desire fruit that may abound to your account.","Not that I am looking for a gift, but I am looking for what may be credited to your account.","Non quia quaero datum, sed requiro fructum, qui abundet in rationem vestram.","לא שאבקש את המתן אך אבקש הפרי אשר ירבה בחשבנכם׃"],["57","4","18","나는 모든 것을 다 받아 넉넉하게 되었습니다. 여러분이 에파프로디토스 편에 보낸 것을 받아 풍족합니다. 그것은 향기로운 예물이며 하느님 마음에 드는 훌륭한 제물입니다.","나는 여러분에게서 받을 것을 다 받았고 또 넘치도록 받았습니다. 나는 여러분이 에바프로디도를 시켜 보낸 것을 받아서 넉넉하게 살고 있습니다. 여러분이 보낸 선물은 좋은 냄새를 풍기는 향기이며 하느님께서 기꺼이 받아주실 제물입니다.","내게는 모든 것이 있고 또 풍부한지라 에바브로디도 편에 너희가 준 것을 받으므로 내가 풍족하니 이는 받으실 만한 향기로운 제물이요 하나님을 기쁘시게 한 것이라","내게는 모든 것이 있고 또 풍부한지라 에바브로디도 편에 너희의 준 것을 받으므로 내가 풍족하니 이는 받으실만한 향기로운 제물이요 하나님을 기쁘시게 한 것이라","이제 필요한 것은 다 갖추고 있습니다. 아니, 필요한 이상으로 넉넉합니다. 에바브로디도 편에 여러분이 보내 준 선물로 충분히 마련했기 때문입니다. 그 선물은 하나님께서 기뻐 받으실 향기로운 제물입니다.","I have received full payment and I abound. I am very well supplied because of what I received from you through Epaphroditus, “a fragrant aroma,” an acceptable sacrifice, pleasing to God.","But I have all, and abound: I am full, having received of Epaphroditus the things which were sent from you, an odour of a sweet smell, a sacrifice acceptable, wellpleasing to God.","I have received full payment and even more; I am amply supplied, now that I have received from Epaphroditus the gifts you sent. They are a fragrant offering, an acceptable sacrifice, pleasing to God.","Accepi autem omnia et abundo; repletus sum acceptis ab Epaphrodito, quae misistis odorem suavitatis, hostiam acceptam, placentem Deo.","ואני קבלתי את הכל ויש לי די והותר ואני נמלאתי ריח ניחח בקבלי מידי אפפרודיטוס את כל אשר שלחתם זבח ערב ורצוי לאלהים׃"],["57","4","19","나의 하느님께서는 그리스도 예수님 안에서 영광스럽게 베푸시는 당신의 그 풍요로움으로, 여러분에게 필요한 모든 것을 채워 주실 것입니다.","한량없이 풍요하신 나의 하느님께서는 그리스도 예수를 믿는 여러분에게 필요한 모든 것을 풍성하게 채워주실 것입니다.","나의 하나님이 그리스도 예수 안에서 영광 가운데 그 풍성한 대로 너희 모든 쓸 것을 채우시리라","나의 하나님이 그리스도 예수 안에서 영광 가운데 그 풍성한대로 너희 모든 쓸 것을 채우시리라","하나님께서는 그리스도 예수 안에서 여러분이 필요한 모든 것을 풍족하게 채워주실 것입니다.","My God will fully supply whatever you need, in accord with his glorious riches in Christ Jesus.","But my God shall supply all your need according to his riches in glory by Christ Jesus.","And my God will meet all your needs according to his glorious riches in Christ Jesus.","Deus autem meus implebit omne desiderium vestrum secundum divitias suas in gloria in Christo Iesu.","ואלהי הוא ימלא את כל צרככם כעשר כבודו במשיח ישוע׃"],["57","4","20","우리의 하느님 아버지께 영원무궁토록 영광이 있기를 빕니다. 아멘.","하느님 우리 아버지께서 영원무궁토록 영광을 받으시기를 빕니다. 아멘.","하나님 곧 우리 아버지께 세세 무궁하도록 영광을 돌릴지어다 아멘","하나님 곧 우리 아버지께 세세 무궁토록 영광을 돌릴찌어다 아멘","우리 아버지 하나님께 영원한 영광이 있기를 빕니다. 아멘.","To our God and Father, glory forever and ever. Amen.","Now unto God and our Father be glory for ever and ever. Amen.","To our God and Father be glory for ever and ever. Amen.","Deo autem et Patri nostro gloria in saecula saeculorum. Amen.","ולאלהים אבינו הכבוד לעולמי עולמים אמן׃"],["57","4","21","그리스도 예수님 안에서 사는 모든 성도에게 안부를 전해 주십시오. 나와 함께 있는 형제들이 여러분에게 인사합니다.","그리스도 예수를 믿는 모든 성도들에게 문안해 주십시오. 나와 함께 있는 형제들이 여러분에게 문안합니다.","그리스도 예수 안에 있는 성도에게 각각 문안하라 나와 함께 있는 형제들이 너희에게 문안하고","그리스도 예수 안에 있는 성도에게 각각 문안하라 나와 함께 있는 형제들이 너희에게 문안하고","그곳에 있는 모든 그리스도인에게 문안해 주십시오. 여기 나와 같이 있는 형제들도 문안합니다.","Give my greetings to every holy one in Christ Jesus. The brothers who are with me send you their greetings;","Salute every saint in Christ Jesus. The brethren which are with me greet you.","Greet all the saints in Christ Jesus. The brothers who are with me send greetings.","Salutate omnem sanctum in Christo Iesu. Salutant vos, qui mecum sunt, fratres.","שאלו לשלום כל קדוש במשיח ישוע האחים אשר עמדי שאלים לשלומכם׃"],["57","4","22","모든 성도가, 특히 황제 집안 사람들이 여러분에게 인사합니다.","모든 성도들이 여러분에게 문안합니다. 특히 카이사르의 집안 사람들이 문안합니다.","모든 성도들이 너희에게 문안하되 특히 가이사의 집 사람들 중 몇이니라","모든 성도들이 너희에게 문안하되 특별히 가이사집 사람 중 몇이니라","특히 가이사의 궁정에서 일하는 사람들이 문안합니다.","all the holy ones send you their greetings, especially those of Caesar’s household.","All the saints salute you, chiefly they that are of Caesar's household.","All the saints send you greetings, especially those who belong to Caesar's household.","Salutant vos omnes sancti, maxime autem, qui de Caesaris domo sunt.","כל הקדשים שאלים לשלומכם וביותר אלה אשר מבית הקיסר׃"],["57","4","23","주 예수 그리스도의 은총이 여러분의 영과 함께하기를 빕니다.","주 예수 그리스도의 은총이 여러분의 마음에 내리시기를 빕니다.","주 예수 그리스도의 은혜가 너희 심령에 있을지어다","주 예수 그리스도의 은혜가 너희 심령에 있을찌어다","우리 주 예수 그리스도의 은총이 여러분과 함께 하기를 빕니다.","The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ be with your spirit.","The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all. Amen.","The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ be with your spirit. Amen.","Gratia Domini Iesu Christi cum spiritu vestro. Amen.","חסד ישוע המשיח אדנינו עם כלכם אמן׃"],["58","1","1","하느님의 뜻에 따라 그리스도 예수님의 사도가 된 바오로와 티모테오 형제가","하느님의 뜻을 따라 그리스도 예수의 사도가 된 나 바울로와 우리 형제 디모테오가","하나님의 뜻으로 말미암아 그리스도 예수의 사도 된 바울과 형제 디모데는","하나님의 뜻으로 말미암아 그리스도 예수의 사도 된 바울과 형제 디모데는","하나님의 뜻에 따라 그리스도 예수의 사도가 된 바울과 믿음의 형제 디모데가","Paul, an apostle of Christ Jesus by the will of God, and Timothy our brother,","Paul, an apostle of Jesus Christ by the will of God, and Timotheus our brother,","Paul, an apostle of Christ Jesus by the will of God, and Timothy our brother,","Paulus, apostolus Christi Iesu per voluntatem Dei, et Timotheus frater","פולוס שליח ישוע המשיח ברצון אלהים וטימותיוס אחינו׃"],["58","1","2","콜로새에 있는 성도들 곧 그리스도 안에서 사는 형제 신자들에게 인사합니다. 하느님 우리 아버지에게서 은총과 평화가 여러분에게 내리기를 빕니다.","골로사이에 있는 성도들, 곧 성실하게 그리스도를 믿는 교우들에게 이 편지를 씁니다. 우리 아버지 하느님께서 여러분에게 은총과 평화를 내려주시기를 빕니다.","골로새에 있는 성도들 곧 그리스도 안에서 신실한 형제들에게 편지하노니 우리 아버지 하나님으로부터 은혜와 평강이 너희에게 있을지어다","골로새에 있는 1)성도들 곧 그리스도 안에서 신실한 형제들에게 편지하노니 우리 아버지 하나님으로부터 은혜와 평강이 너희에게 있을찌어다혹 성도들과","골로새에 사는 하나님의 백성인 신실한 믿음의 형제들에게 이 편지를 씁니다. 우리 아버지 하나님께서 여러분에게 복을 넘치게 쏟아부어 주시고 큰 평안으로 채워 주시기를 빕니다.","to the holy ones and faithful brothers in Christ in Colossae: grace to you and peace from God our Father.","To the saints and faithful brethren in Christ which are at Colosse: Grace be unto you, and peace, from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.","To the holy and faithful brothers in Christ at Colosse: Grace and peace to you from God our Father.","his, qui sunt Colossis, sanctis et fidelibus fratribus in Christo: gratia vobis et pax a Deo Patre nostro.","אל הקדשים והאחים הנאמנים במשיח אשר הם בקולשא חסד לכם ושלום מאת האלהים אבינו ואדנינו ישוע המשיח׃"],["58","1","3","우리는 여러분을 위하여 기도할 때면 늘 우리 주 예수 그리스도의 아버지 하느님께 감사를 드립니다.","우리는 여러분을 위해서 언제나 기도하고 그 때마다 우리 주 예수 그리스도의 아버지 하느님께 감사를 드립니다.","우리가 너희를 위하여 기도할 때마다 하나님 곧 우리 주 예수 그리스도의 아버지께 감사하노라","우리가 너희를 위하여 기도할 때마다 하나님 곧 우리 주 예수 그리스도의 아버지께 감사하노라","우리는 여러분을 위해 기도할 때 언제나 우리 주 예수 그리스도의 아버지 하나님께 대한 감사로 시작합니다.","We always give thanks to God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, when we pray for you,","We give thanks to God and the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, praying always for you,","We always thank God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, when we pray for you,","Gratias agimus Deo Patri Domini nostri Iesu Christi semper pro vobis orantes,","נודה לאלהים אבי אדנינו ישוע המשיח בכל עת אשר אנחנו מתפללים בעדכם׃"],["58","1","4","그리스도 예수님에 대한 여러분의 믿음과 모든 성도를 향한 여러분의 사랑을 우리가 전해 들었기 때문입니다.","그것은 여러분이 그리스도 예수를 믿고 모든 성도에게 사랑을 보여주고 있다는 말을 전해 들었기 때문입니다.","이는 그리스도 예수 안에 너희의 믿음과 모든 성도에 대한 사랑을 들었음이요","이는 그리스도 예수 안에 너희의 믿음과 모든 성도에 대한 사랑을 들음이요","그것은 여러분이 주님을 믿는 데 그치지 않고 함께 하나님의 백성이 된 사람들을 사랑하고 있다는 소식을 들었기 때문입니다.","for we have heard of your faith in Christ Jesus and the love that you have for all the holy ones","Since we heard of your faith in Christ Jesus, and of the love which ye have to all the saints,","because we have heard of your faith in Christ Jesus and of the love you have for all the saints--","audientes fidem vestram in Christo Iesu et dilectionem, quam habetis in sanctos omnes,","אחרי אשר שמענו אמונתכם במשיח ישוע ואהבתכם אל כל הקדשים׃"],["58","1","5","그 믿음과 사랑은 여러분을 위하여 하늘에 마련되어 있는 것에 대한 희망에 근거합니다. 이 희망은 여러분이 진리의 말씀 곧 복음을 통하여 이미 들은 것입니다.","그 믿음과 사랑은 여러분을 위해서 하늘에 마련해 두신 축복에 대한 희망에서 나온 것입니다. 그 희망에 대해서는 여러분이 진리의 말씀 곧 복음을 받아들였을 때에 이미 들은 바 있습니다.","너희를 위하여 하늘에 쌓아 둔 소망으로 말미암음이니 곧 너희가 전에 복음 진리의 말씀을 들은 것이라","너희를 위하여 하늘에 쌓아둔 소망을 인함이니 곧 너희가 전에 복음 2)진리의 말씀을 들은 것이라 헬, 참","여러분의 이러한 믿음과 따뜻한 그 사랑은 하나님께서 여러분을 위해서 하늘에 마련해 두신 희망에서 나오는 것이 아니겠습니까? 이 희망은 여러분이 복음을 처음 전해 들었을 때 이미 들었습니다.","because of the hope reserved for you in heaven. Of this you have already heard through the word of truth, the gospel,","For the hope which is laid up for you in heaven, whereof ye heard before in the word of the truth of the gospel;","the faith and love that spring from the hope that is stored up for you in heaven and that you have already heard about in the word of truth, the gospel","propter spem, quae reposita est vobis in caelis, quam ante audistis in verbo veritatis evangelii,","בעבור התקוה הצפונה לכם בשמים ונודעתם לכם מקדם בדבר אמת הבשורה׃"],["58","1","6","이 복음은 여러분에게 다다라 여러분이 그 진리 안에서 하느님의 은총을 듣고 깨달은 날부터, 온 세상에서 그러하듯이 여러분에게서도 열매를 맺으며 자라고 있습니다.","그 복음은 여러분에게 전해져서 여러분이 하느님의 은총의 말씀을 듣고 그 참뜻을 깨닫게 되면서부터 열매를 맺으며 퍼져 나갔습니다. 사실 복음은 온 세계에서 열매를 맺으며 널리 퍼져 나가고 있습니다.","이 복음이 이미 너희에게 이르매 너희가 듣고 참으로 하나님의 은혜를 깨달은 날부터 너희 중에서와 같이 또한 온 천하에서도 열매를 맺어 자라는도다","이 복음이 이미 너희에게 이르매 너희가 듣고 참으로 하나님의 은혜를 깨달은 날부터 너희 중에서와 같이 또한 온 천하에서도 열매를 맺어 자라는도다","여러분에게 전해진 이 복음은 이제 온 세계에 퍼져 나가서 어디서나 사람들의 삶을 변화시키고 있습니다. 마치 여러분이 복음을 처음으로 듣던 바로 그날에 죄인들을 향한 하나님의 크나큰 은혜를 깨닫고 여러분의 삶이 변화된 것처럼 말입니다.","that has come to you. Just as in the whole world it is bearing fruit and growing, so also among you, from the day you heard it and came to know the grace of God in truth,","Which is come unto you, as it is in all the world; and bringeth forth fruit, as it doth also in you, since the day ye heard of it, and knew the grace of God in truth:","that has come to you. All over the world this gospel is bearing fruit and growing, just as it has been doing among you since the day you heard it and understood God's grace in all its truth.","quod pervenit ad vos, sicut et in universo mundo est fructificans et crescens, sicut et in vobis, ex ea die, qua audistis et cognovistis gratiam Dei in veritate;","אשר באה אליכם וגם לכל העולם ותפרה ותרבה כמו גם בתוככם למן היום אשר שמעתם והכרתם באמת את חסד אלהים׃"],["58","1","7","여러분은 하느님의 그 은총을 우리가 사랑하는 동료 종 에파프라스에게 배웠습니다. 그는 여러분을 위하여 일하는 그리스도의 충실한 일꾼이며,","그 복음을 여러분에게 가르쳐준 사람은 우리의 사랑하는 동료 에바프라였습니다. 그는 우리를 대신해서 그리스도를 위하여 충실히 일한 일꾼이며,","이와 같이 우리와 함께 종 된 사랑하는 에바브라에게 너희가 배웠나니 그는 너희를 위한 그리스도의 신실한 일꾼이요","이와 같이 우리와 함께 종된 사랑하는 에바브라에게 너희가 배웠나니 그는 너희를 위하여 그리스도의 신실한 일군이요","이 복음을 여러분에게 전한 사람은 우리가 극진히 사랑하는 동역자 에바브라였습니다. 그는 지금도 그리스도의 신실한 일꾼으로서 여러분을 위해 열심히 애쓰고 있습니다.","as you learned it from Epaphras our beloved fellow slave, who is a trustworthy minister of Christ on your behalf","As ye also learned of Epaphras our dear fellowservant, who is for you a faithful minister of Christ;","You learned it from Epaphras, our dear fellow servant, who is a faithful minister of Christ on our behalf,","sicut didicistis ab Epaphra carissimo conservo nostro, qui est fidelis pro nobis minister Christi,","כאשר למדתם מן אפפרס חברנו החביב אשר הוא משרת נאמן בעדכם למשיח׃"],["58","1","8","성령 안에서 이루어지는 여러분의 사랑을 우리에게 알려 준 사람입니다.","여러분이 성령을 통해서 사랑의 생활을 하고 있다는 소식을 우리에게 전해 준 사람입니다.","성령 안에서 너희 사랑을 우리에게 알린 자니라","성령 안에서 너희 사랑을 우리에게 고한 자니라","여러분이 성령께 받은 사랑을 다른 이들에게 베풀면서 살고 있다는 소식도 우리는 그를 통해 들었습니다.","and who also told us of your love in the Spirit.","Who also declared unto us your love in the Spirit.","and who also told us of your love in the Spirit.","qui etiam manifestavit nobis dilectionem vestram in Spiritu.","והוא גם הודיע אתנו את האבתכם ברוח׃"],["58","1","9","그래서 우리도 그 소식을 들은 날부터 여러분을 위하여 끊임없이 기도하며 간청하고 있습니다. 곧 여러분이 모든 영적 지혜와 깨달음 덕분에 하느님의 뜻을 아는 지식으로 충만해져,","우리는 그 소식을 들은 날부터 여러분을 위하여 끊임없이 하느님께 기도해 왔습니다. 우리는 여러분이 성령께서 주시는 모든 지혜와 판단력으로 하느님의 뜻을 충분히 깨닫게 되기를 빌어왔습니다.","이로써 우리도 듣던 날부터 너희를 위하여 기도하기를 그치지 아니하고 구하노니 너희로 하여금 모든 신령한 지혜와 총명에 하나님의 뜻을 아는 것으로 채우게 하시고","이로써 우리도 듣던 날부터 너희를 위하여 기도하기를 그치지 아니하고 구하노니 너희로 하여금 모든 신령한 지혜와 총명에 하나님의 뜻을 아는 것으로 채우게 하시고","우리는 그 소식을 들은 날부터 여러분을 위해 다음과 같이 끊임없이 기도해 오고 있습니다. 우리는 여러분이 하나님의 뜻을 아는 총명과 지혜를 성령을 통해 얻게 되기를 기도합니다.","Therefore, from the day we heard this, we do not cease praying for you and asking that you may be filled with the knowledge of his will through all spiritual wisdom and understanding","For this cause we also, since the day we heard it, do not cease to pray for you, and to desire that ye might be filled with the knowledge of his will in all wisdom and spiritual understanding;","For this reason, since the day we heard about you, we have not stopped praying for you and asking God to fill you with the knowledge of his will through all spiritual wisdom and understanding.","Ideo et nos, ex qua die audivimus, non cessamus pro vobis orantes et postulantes, ut impleamini agnitione voluntatis eius in omni sapientia et intellectu spiritali,","בעבור זאת גם אנחנו למן היום אשר שמענוה לא חדלנו להתפלל בעדכם ולבקש שתמלאו דעת רצון האלהים בכל חכמה ותבונה רוחנית׃"],["58","1","10","주님께 합당하게 살아감으로써 모든 면에서 그분 마음에 들고 온갖 선행으로 열매를 맺으며 하느님을 아는 지식으로 자라기를 빕니다.","또 우리는 여러분이 주님께서 원하시는 생활을 함으로써 언제나 주님을 기쁘게 해드리고 온갖 좋은 일을 행하여 열매를 맺으며 하느님을 더욱 잘 알게 되기를 바랍니다.","주께 합당하게 행하여 범사에 기쁘시게 하고 모든 선한 일에 열매를 맺게 하시며 하나님을 아는 것에 자라게 하시고","주께 합당히 행하여 범사에 기쁘시게 하고 모든 선한 일에 열매를 맺게 하시며 하나님을 아는 것에 자라게 하시고","여러분이 주께서 원하는 생활을 하여 언제나 주님을 기쁘게 하고 주께 영광이 돌아가게 해주기를 기도합니다. 여러분이 항상 다른 사람들에게 착한 일과 친절을 베푸는 동안에 하나님을 더욱더 깊이 알게 되기를 기도합니다.","to live in a manner worthy of the Lord, so as to be fully pleasing, in every good work bearing fruit and growing in the knowledge of God,","That ye might walk worthy of the Lord unto all pleasing, being fruitful in every good work, and increasing in the knowledge of God;","And we pray this in order that you may live a life worthy of the Lord and may please him in every way: bearing fruit in every good work, growing in the knowledge of God,","ut ambuletis digne Domino per omnia placentes, in omni opere bono fructificantes et crescentes in scientia Dei,","להתהלך כטוב בעיני האדון וככל רצונו ולעשות פרי בכל מעשה טוב ולרבות בדעת אלהים׃"],["58","1","11","또 하느님의 영광스러운 능력에서 오는 모든 힘을 받아 강해져서, 모든 것을 참고 견디어 내기를 빕니다. 기쁜 마음으로,","또 우리는 여러분이 하느님의 영광스러운 권능으로부터 오는 온갖 힘을 받아 강하여져서 모든 일을 참고 견딜 수 있게 되기를 바랍니다. 그리고 기쁜 마음으로","그의 영광의 힘을 따라 모든 능력으로 능하게 하시며 기쁨으로 모든 견딤과 오래 참음에 이르게 하시고","그 영광의 힘을 좇아 모든 능력으로 능하게 하시며 기쁨으로 모든 견딤과 오래 참음에 이르게 하시고","우리는 또 이렇게 기도합니다. 하나님의 위대하고 영광스러운 힘이 여러분에게 채워져서 어떤 일이 닥치더라도 계속 전진해 나가고 언제나 주께서 주시는 기쁨이 충만하기를 기도합니다.","strengthened with every power, in accord with his glorious might, for all endurance and patience, with joy","Strengthened with all might, according to his glorious power, unto all patience and longsuffering with joyfulness;","being strengthened with all power according to his glorious might so that you may have great endurance and patience, and joyfully","in omni virtute confortati secundum potentiam claritatis eius in omnem patientiam et longanimitatem, cum gaudio","להתחזק בכל כח כגבורת כבודו לכל סבלנות וארך רוח עם שמחה׃"],["58","1","12","성도들이 빛의 나라에서 받는 상속의 몫을 차지할 자격을 여러분에게 주신 아버지께 감사하는 것입니다.","아버지께 감사를 드릴 수 있게 되기를 바랍니다. 아버지께서는 성도들이 광명의 나라에서 받을 상속에 참여할 자격을 우리에게 주셨습니다.","우리로 하여금 빛 가운데서 성도의 기업의 부분을 얻기에 합당하게 하신 아버지께 감사하게 하시기를 원하노라","우리로 하여금 빛 가운데서 성도의 기업의 부분을 얻기에 합당하게 하신 아버지께 감사하게 하시기를 원하노라","우리에게 빛의 나라에 속한 자로서 모든 훌륭한 것을 받을 수 있는 자격을 갖게 하신 아버지 하나님께 여러분이 항상 감사드릴 수 있게 되기를 기도합니다.","giving thanks to the Father, who has made you fit to share in the inheritance of the holy ones in light.","Giving thanks unto the Father, which hath made us meet to be partakers of the inheritance of the saints in light:","giving thanks to the Father, who has qualified you to share in the inheritance of the saints in the kingdom of light.","gratias agentes Patri, qui idoneos vos fecit in partem sortis sanctorum in lumine;","ולתת תודה לאבינו העשה אתנו ראוים לחלק נחלת הקדשים באור׃"],["58","1","13","아버지께서는 우리를 어둠의 권세에서 구해 내시어 당신께서 사랑하시는 아드님의 나라로 옮겨 주셨습니다.","아버지께서는 우리를 흑암의 권세에서 건져내시어 당신의 사랑하시는 아들의 나라로 옮겨주셨습니다.","그가 우리를 흑암의 권세에서 건져내사 그의 사랑의 아들의 나라로 옮기셨으니","그가 우리를 흑암의 권세에서 건져내사 그의 사랑의 아들의 나라로 옮기셨으니","아버지 하나님께서는 암울한 어둠의 세력에서 우리를 구원해 내셔서 그분의 사랑하는 아들의 나라로 데려다 주셨습니다.","He delivered us from the power of darkness and transferred us to the kingdom of his beloved Son,","Who hath delivered us from the power of darkness, and hath translated us into the kingdom of his dear Son:","For he has rescued us from the dominion of darkness and brought us into the kingdom of the Son he loves,","qui eripuit nos de potestate tenebrarum et transtulit in regnum Filii dilectionis suae,","אשר הוא חלצנו מממשלת החשך והעבירנו למלכות בן אהבתו׃"],["58","1","14","이 아드님 안에서 우리는 속량을, 곧 죄의 용서를 받습니다.","우리는 그 아들로 말미암아 죄를 용서받고 속박에서 풀려났습니다.","그 아들 안에서 우리가 속량 곧 죄 사함을 얻었도다","그 아들 안에서 우리가 구속 곧 죄 사함을 얻었도다","그리고 그 아들은 다시 자신의 피로 값을 치르고 우리를 사서 자유인이 되게 하심으로써 우리의 모든 죄를 용서해 주셨습니다.","in whom we have redemption, the forgiveness of sins.","In whom we have redemption through his blood, even the forgiveness of sins:","in whom we have redemption, the forgiveness of sins.","in quo habemus redemptionem, remissionem peccatorum;","אשר יש לנו בו הפדיון בדמו סליחת החטאים׃"],["58","1","15","그분은 보이지 않는 하느님의 모상이시며 모든 피조물의 맏이이십니다.","그리스도께서는 보이지 않는 하느님의 형상이시며 만물에 앞서 태어나신 분이십니다.","그는 보이지 아니하는 하나님의 형상이시요 모든 피조물보다 먼저 나신 이시니","그는 보이지 아니하시는 하나님의 형상이요 모든 창조물보다 먼저 나신 자니","그리스도는 눈에 보이지 않는 하나님이 우리 눈에 보이게 나타나신 바로 그분입니다. 그분은 하나님께서 아직 아무 것도 창조하기 전부터 계셨습니다.","He is the image of the invisible God, the firstborn of all creation.","Who is the image of the invisible God, the firstborn of every creature:","He is the image of the invisible God, the firstborn over all creation.","qui est imago Dei invisibilis, primogenitus omnis creaturae,","והוא צלם האלהים הנעלם ובכור כל נברא׃"],["58","1","16","만물이 그분 안에서 창조되었기 때문입니다. 하늘에 있는 것이든 땅에 있는 것이든 보이는 것이든 보이지 않는 것이든 왕권이든 주권이든 권세든 권력이든 만물이 그분을 통하여 또 그분을 향하여 창조되었습니다.","그것은 하늘과 땅에 있는 만물, 곧 보이는 것은 물론이고 왕권과 주권과 권세와 세력의 여러 천신들과 같은 보이지 않는 것까지도 모두 그분을 통해서 창조되었기 때문입니다. 만물은 그분을 통해서 그리고 그분을 위해서 창조되었습니다.","만물이 그에게서 창조되되 하늘과 땅에서 보이는 것들과 보이지 않는 것들과 혹은 왕권들이나 주권들이나 통치자들이나 권세들이나 만물이 다 그로 말미암고 그를 위하여 창조되었고","만물이 그에게 창조되되 하늘과 땅에서 보이는 것들과 보이지 않는 것들과 혹은 보좌들이나 주관들이나 정사들이나 권세들이나 만물이 다 그로 말미암고 그를 위하여 창조되었고","그리스도께서는 만물의 창조자이십니다. 하늘에 있는 것이나 땅에 있는 것이나, 눈에 보이는 것이나 보이지 않는 것이나, 세계의 왕좌나 주권이나 지배나 권위를 모두 그분이 자신의 목적과 영광을 이루려고 만드셨습니다.","For in him were created all things in heaven and on earth, the visible and the invisible, whether thrones or dominions or principalities or powers; all things were created through him and for him.","For by him were all things created, that are in heaven, and that are in earth, visible and invisible, whether they be thrones, or dominions, or principalities, or powers: all things were created by him, and for him:","For by him all things were created: things in heaven and on earth, visible and invisible, whether thrones or powers or rulers or authorities; all things were created by him and for him.","quia in ipso condita sunt universa in caelis et in terra, visibilia et invisibilia, sive throni sive dominationes sive principatus sive potestates. Omnia per ipsum et in ipsum creata sunt,","כי בו נברא כל אשר בשמים ואשר בארץ כל הנראה וכל אשר איננו נראה הן כסאות וממשלות הן שררות ורשיות הכל נברא על ידי ולמענהו׃"],["58","1","17","그분께서는 만물에 앞서 계시고 만물은 그분 안에서 존속합니다.","그분은 만물보다 앞서 계시고 만물은 그분으로 말미암아 존속합니다.","또한 그가 만물보다 먼저 계시고 만물이 그 안에 함께 섰느니라","또한 그가 만물보다 먼저 계시고 만물이 그 안에 함께 섰느니라","그리스도께서는 만물이 시작되기 전에 이미 계셨고 만물은 그분의 능력으로 보존되고 있습니다.","He is before all things, and in him all things hold together.","And he is before all things, and by him all things consist.","He is before all things, and in him all things hold together.","et ipse est ante omnia, et omnia in ipso constant.","והוא לפני הכל והכל קים בו׃"],["58","1","18","그분은 또한 당신 몸인 교회의 머리이십니다. 그분은 시작이시며 죽은 이들 가운데에서 맏이이십니다. 그리하여 만물 가운데에서 으뜸이 되십니다.","그리스도는 또한 당신의 몸인 교회의 머리이십니다. 그분은 모든 것의 시작이시고 죽은 자들 가운데서 살아나신 최초의 분이시며 만물의 으뜸이 되셨습니다.","그는 몸인 교회의 머리시라 그가 근본이시요 죽은 자들 가운데서 먼저 나신 이시니 이는 친히 만물의 으뜸이 되려 하심이요","그는 몸인 교회의 머리라 그가 근본이요 죽은 자들 가운데서 먼저 나신 자니 이는 친히 만물의 으뜸이 되려 하심이요","그리스도께서는 자신의 백성으로 이루어진 몸인 교회의 머리이십니다. 교회는 그분에게서 시작되었습니다. 그분은 죽은 자들 가운데서 살아나신 최초의 분입니다. 그래서 그분은 만물의 으뜸이 되셨습니다.","He is the head of the body, the church. He is the beginning, the firstborn from the dead, that in all things he himself might be preeminent.","And he is the head of the body, the church: who is the beginning, the firstborn from the dead; that in all things he might have the preeminence.","And he is the head of the body, the church; he is the beginning and the firstborn from among the dead, so that in everything he might have the supremacy.","Et ipse est caput corporis ecclesiae; qui est principium, primogenitus ex mortuis, ut sit in omnibus ipse primatum tenens,","והוא ראש גוף העדה אשר הוא ראשית ובכור מעם המתים למען יהיה הראשון בכל׃"],["58","1","19","과연 하느님께서는 기꺼이 그분 안에 온갖 충만함이 머무르게 하셨습니다.","하느님께서는 당신의 완전한 본질을 그리스도에게 기꺼이 주시고","아버지께서는 모든 충만으로 예수 안에 거하게 하시고","아버지께서는 모든 충만으로 예수 안에 거하게 하시고","하나님께서 자신의 모든 것이 온전히 그 아들 주 예수 그리스도 안에 머물러 있기를 원하셨기 때문입니다.","For in him all the fullness was pleased to dwell,","For it pleased the Father that in him should all fulness dwell;","For God was pleased to have all his fullness dwell in him,","quia in ipso complacuit omnem plenitudinem habitare","כי כן היה הרצון לשכן בו את כל המלוא׃"],["58","1","20","그분 십자가의 피를 통하여 평화를 이룩하시어 땅에 있는 것이든 하늘에 있는 것이든 그분을 통하여 그분을 향하여 만물을 기꺼이 화해시키셨습니다.","그리스도를 내세워 하늘과 땅의 만물을 당신과 화해시켜 주셨습니다. 곧 십자가에서 흘리신 예수의 피로써 평화를 이룩하셨습니다.","그의 십자가의 피로 화평을 이루사 만물 곧 땅에 있는 것들이나 하늘에 있는 것들이 그로 말미암아 자기와 화목하게 되기를 기뻐하심이라","그의 십자가의 피로 화평을 이루사 만물 곧 땅에 있는 것들이나 하늘에 있는 것들을 그로 말미암아 자기와 화목케 되기를 기뻐하심이라","하나님께서는 아들이 이루신 일을 통해서 하늘과 땅에 있는 모든 피조물이 하나님께 나아갈 수 있는 길을 열어 놓으셨습니다. 십자가 위에서 죽으신 그리스도의 피로 인해 만물이 하나님과 화해하게 된 것입니다.","and through him to reconcile all things for him, making peace by the blood of his cross [through him], whether those on earth or those in heaven.","And, having made peace through the blood of his cross, by him to reconcile all things unto himself; by him, I say, whether they be things in earth, or things in heaven.","and through him to reconcile to himself all things, whether things on earth or things in heaven, by making peace through his blood, shed on the cross.","et per eum reconciliare omnia in ipsum, pacificans per sanguinem crucis eius, sive quae in terris sive quae in caelis sunt.","ולרצות אל עצמו את הכל על ידו בעשותו שלום בדם צלבו על ידו הן אשר בארץ הן אשר בשמים׃"],["58","1","21","여러분은 한때 악행에 마음이 사로잡혀 하느님에게서 멀어지고 그분과 원수로 지냈습니다.","여러분도 전에는 하느님으로부터 떨어져서 하느님께 적의를 품고 사악한 행동을 일삼고 있었습니다.","전에 악한 행실로 멀리 떠나 마음으로 원수가 되었던 너희를","전에 악한 행실로 멀리 떠나 마음으로 원수가 되었던 너희를","여러분은 전에 하나님과 멀리 떨어져 하나님께 적의를 품고 악한 생각과 행동을 일삼았습니다. 그러나 지금은 그리스도께서 여러분을 되돌려 세워서 하나님과 가까운 사이가 되게 하셨습니다.","And you who once were alienated and hostile in mind because of evil deeds","And you, that were sometime alienated and enemies in your mind by wicked works, yet now hath he reconciled","Once you were alienated from God and were enemies in your minds because of your evil behavior.","Et vos, cum essetis aliquando alienati et inimici sensu in operibus malis,","וגם אתם אשר הייתם מלפנים מוזרים ואיבים בנטות לבבכם אחרי המעשים הרעים׃"],["58","1","22","그러나 이제 하느님께서는 당신 아드님의 죽음을 통하여 그분의 육체로 여러분과 화해하시어, 여러분이 거룩하고 흠 없고 나무랄 데 없는 사람으로 당신 앞에 설 수 있게 해 주셨습니다.","그러나 이제는 하느님께서 당신의 아들의 몸을 희생시키시어 여러분과 화해하시고 여러분을 거룩하고 흠없고 탓할 데 없는 사람으로서 당신 앞에 서게 하여주셨습니다.","이제는 그의 육체의 죽음으로 말미암아 화목하게 하사 너희를 거룩하고 흠 없고 책망할 것이 없는 자로 그 앞에 세우고자 하셨으니","이제는 그의 육체의 죽음으로 말미암아 화목케 하사 너희를 거룩하고 흠 없고 책망할 것이 없는 자로 그 앞에 세우고자 하셨으니","그리스도께서는 이 일을 이루려고 사람의 몸으로 오셨고 십자가 위에서 죽으심으로써 하나님과 우리가 화해하도록 하셨습니다. 결국 그리스도께서 여러분을 하나님 앞으로 인도해 주신 것입니다. 여러분이 조금도 비난이나 책망을 받을 일이 없는 사람으로 하나님 앞에 설 수 있게 하려고 그렇게 하신 것입니다.","he has now reconciled in his fleshly body through his death, to present you holy, without blemish, and irreproachable before him,","In the body of his flesh through death, to present you holy and unblameable and unreproveable in his sight:","But now he has reconciled you by Christ's physical body through death to present you holy in his sight, without blemish and free from accusation--","nunc autem reconciliavit in corpore carnis eius per mortem exhibere vos sanctos et immaculatos et irreprehensibiles coram ipso;","עתה רצה אתכם בגוף בשרו על ידי מותו להעמידכם לפניו קדשים ובלי מום ודפי׃"],["58","1","23","다만 여러분은 믿음에 기초를 두고 꿋꿋하게 견디어 내며 여러분이 들은 복음의 희망을 저버리지 말아야 합니다. 그 복음은 하늘 아래 모든 피조물에게 선포되었고, 나 바오로는 그 복음의 일꾼이 되었습니다.","물론 여러분은 튼튼한 믿음의 기초 위에 굳건히 서서 여러분이 이미 받아들인 복음의 희망을 저버리지 말고 신앙 생활을 계속해야 합니다. 그 복음은 하늘 아래 모든 사람에게 전파되었고 나 바울로는 그 소식을 전하는 일꾼입니다.","만일 너희가 믿음에 거하고 터 위에 굳게 서서 너희 들은 바 복음의 소망에서 흔들리지 아니하면 그리하리라 이 복음은 천하 만민에게 전파된 바요 나 바울은 이 복음의 일꾼이 되었노라","만일 너희가 믿음에 거하고 터 위에 굳게 서서 너희 들은바 복음의 소망에서 흔들리지 아니하면 그리하리라 이 복음은 천하 3)만민에게 전파된 바요 나 바울은 이 복음의 일군이 되었노라헬, 모든 창조물에게","여러분은 오직 진리를 굳게 믿고 그 진리 안에 서서 흔들리지 마십시오. 주님 안에서 강하게 되십시오. 예수께서 여러분을 위해 죽으셨다는 복음을 굳게 믿고 그리스도를 의지하는 믿음을 저버리지 마십시오. 여러분에게 전해진 이 놀라운 소식은 이제 온 세계로 퍼져 나갔습니다. 나 바울은 바로 이 소식을 다른 사람에게 전하는 일꾼입니다.","provided that you persevere in the faith, firmly grounded, stable, and not shifting from the hope of the gospel that you heard, which has been preached to every creature under heaven, of which I, Paul, am a minister.","If ye continue in the faith grounded and settled, and be not moved away from the hope of the gospel, which ye have heard, and which was preached to every creature which is under heaven; whereof I Paul am made a minister;","if you continue in your faith, established and firm, not moved from the hope held out in the gospel. This is the gospel that you heard and that has been proclaimed to every creature under heaven, and of which I, Paul, have become a servant.","si tamen permanetis in fide fundati et stabiles et immobiles a spe evangelii, quod audistis, quod praedicatum est in universa creatura, quae sub caelo est, cuius factus sum ego Paulus minister.","אם תעמדו מיסדים ונכונים באמונה ולא תזועו מתוחלת הבשורה אשר שמעתם ואשר נשמעה לכל הנברא תחת השמים ואני פולוס הייתי לה למשרת׃"],["58","1","24","이제 나는 여러분을 위하여 고난을 겪으며 기뻐합니다. 그리스도의 환난에서 모자란 부분을 내가 이렇게 그분의 몸인 교회를 위하여 내 육신으로 채우고 있습니다.","그래서 나는 여러분을 위하여 기꺼이 고통을 겪고 있습니다. 그리고 나는 그리스도의 몸인 교회를 위하여 그리스도의 남은 고난을 내 몸으로 채우고 있습니다.","나는 이제 너희를 위하여 받는 괴로움을 기뻐하고 그리스도의 남은 고난을 그의 몸된 교회를 위하여 내 육체에 채우노라","내가 이제 너희를 위하여 받는 괴로움을 기뻐하고 그리스도의 남은 고난을 그의 몸된 교회를 위하여 내 육체에 채우노라","여러분을 위해서 당하는 고난도 내가 맡은 한몫입니다. 그러므로 나는 고난을 기꺼이 겪고 있습니다. 그리스도의 몸인 교회를 위해 겪어야 할 그리스도의 남은 고난을 내 몸으로 채워 가고 있는 것입니다.","Now I rejoice in my sufferings for your sake, and in my flesh I am filling up what is lacking in the afflictions of Christ on behalf of his body, which is the church,","Who now rejoice in my sufferings for you, and fill up that which is behind of the afflictions of Christ in my flesh for his body's sake, which is the church:","Now I rejoice in what was suffered for you, and I fill up in my flesh what is still lacking in regard to Christ's afflictions, for the sake of his body, which is the church.","Nunc gaudeo in passionibus pro vobis et adimpleo, ea quae desunt passionum Christi in carne mea pro corpore eius, quod est ecclesia,","עתה הנני שמח בענויי אשר אני סבל למענכם ואמלא את החסר ביסורי המשיח בבשרי בעד גופו היא העדה׃"],["58","1","25","하느님께서 여러분을 위하여 당신 말씀을 선포하는 일을 완수하라고 나에게 주신 직무에 따라, 나는 교회의 일꾼이 되었습니다.","나는 하느님께서 맡기신 사명을 따라 여러분에게 하느님의 말씀을 남김없이 전하기 위해서 교회의 일꾼이 되었습니다.","내가 교회의 일꾼 된 것은 하나님이 너희를 위하여 내게 주신 직분을 따라 하나님의 말씀을 이루려 함이니라","내가 교회 일군 된 것은 하나님이 너희를 위하여 내게 주신 경륜을 따라 하나님의 말씀을 이루려 함이니라","하나님께서는 교회를 돕고 여러분에게 그분의 숨은 계획을 알리려고 나를 보내셨습니다.","of which I am a minister in accordance with God’s stewardship given to me to bring to completion for you the word of God,","Whereof I am made a minister, according to the dispensation of God which is given to me for you, to fulfil the word of God;","I have become its servant by the commission God gave me to present to you the word of God in its fullness--","cuius factus sum ego minister secundum dispensationem Dei, quae data est mihi in vos, ut impleam verbum Dei;","אשר הייתי לה למשרת כפי פקדת אלהים אשר נתנה לי עליכם למלאת את דבר האלהים׃"],["58","1","26","그 말씀은 과거의 모든 시대와 세대에 감추어져 있던 신비입니다. 그런데 그 신비가 이제는 하느님의 성도들에게 명백히 드러났습니다.","이 심오한 진리는 과거의 모든 세대, 모든 사람에게 감추어져 있던 것인데 이제는 하느님의 성도들에게 분명히 드러났습니다.","이 비밀은 만세와 만대로부터 감추어졌던 것인데 이제는 그의 성도들에게 나타났고","이 비밀은 만세와 만대로부터 옴으로 감취었던 것인데 이제는 그의 성도들에게 나타났고","하나님께서는 지금까지 여러 세대에 걸쳐 구원의 계획을 비밀로 해오셨습니다. 그러나 이제는 드디어 하나님을 사랑하고 하나님을 위해서 사는 사람들에게 기꺼이 이 계획을 알리셨습니다. 이 영광으로 가득 찬 계획에는 여러분 이방인들까지도 포함되어 있습니다. 이 계획의 깊은 뜻은 \"너희 마음속에 계시는 그리스도가 곧 영광을 얻을 유일한 희망이시라\"는 것입니다.","the mystery hidden from ages and from generations past. But now it has been manifested to his holy ones,","Even the mystery which hath been hid from ages and from generations, but now is made manifest to his saints:","the mystery that has been kept hidden for ages and generations, but is now disclosed to the saints.","mysterium, quod absconditum fuit a saeculis et generationibus, nunc autem manifestatum est sanctis eius,","את הסוד אשר היה נסתר מעולמים ומדור ודור ועתה נגלה לקדושיו׃"],["58","1","27","하느님께서는 다른 민족들 가운데에 나타난 이 신비가 얼마나 풍성하고 영광스러운지 성도들에게 알려 주기를 원하셨던 것입니다. 그 신비는 여러분 가운데에 계신 그리스도이시고, 그리스도는 영광의 희망이십니다.","하느님께서는 이방인들에게 드러내신 이 심오한 진리가 얼마나 풍성하고 영광스러운 것인가를 성도들에게 알리려 하신 것입니다. 이 심오한 진리는 곧 이방인 여러분이 그리스도를 믿게 되었다는 사실과 또 영광을 차지하게 되리라는 희망입니다.","하나님이 그들로 하여금 이 비밀의 영광이 이방인 가운데 얼마나 풍성한지를 알게 하려 하심이라 이 비밀은 너희 안에 계신 그리스도시니 곧 영광의 소망이니라","하나님이 그들로 하여금 이 비밀의 영광이 이방인 가운데 어떻게 풍성한 것을 알게 하려하심이라 이 비밀은 너희 안에 계신 그리스도시니 곧 영광의 소망이니라","(26절에 포함되어 있음)","to whom God chose to make known the riches of the glory of this mystery among the Gentiles; it is Christ in you, the hope for glory.","To whom God would make known what is the riches of the glory of this mystery among the Gentiles; which is Christ in you, the hope of glory:","To them God has chosen to make known among the Gentiles the glorious riches of this mystery, which is Christ in you, the hope of glory.","quibus voluit Deus notas facere divitias gloriae mysterii huius in gentibus, quod est Christus in vobis, spes gloriae;","אשר רצה האלהים להודיעם אי זה הוא עשר כבוד הסוד ההוא בגוים והוא המשיח אשר בכם אשר הוא תקות הכבוד׃"],["58","1","28","우리는 이 그리스도를 선포합니다. 그리고 모든 사람을 그리스도 안에서 완전한 사람으로 굳건히 서 있게 하려고, 우리는 지혜를 다하여 모든 사람을 타이르고 모든 사람을 가르칩니다.","우리는 바로 이 그리스도를 선포하고 있습니다. 그리고 모든 사람이 그리스도를 믿고 성숙한 인간으로 하느님 앞에 서도록 하려고, 우리는 지혜를 다하여 모든 사람을 경고하며 가르칩니다.","우리가 그를 전파하여 각 사람을 권하고 모든 지혜로 각 사람을 가르침은 각 사람을 그리스도 안에서 완전한 자로 세우려 함이니","우리가 그를 전파하여 4)각 사람을 권하고 모든 지혜로 각 사람을 가르침은 각 사람을 그리스도 안에서 완전한 자로 세우려 함이니 혹 모든 지혜로 각 사람을 권하고","그러므로 우리는 어디를 가든지 귀를 기울이는 모든 사람에게 그리스도를 선포하고 우리가 알고 있는 방법을 다해서 경고하고 가르치고 있는 것입니다. 그리스도께서 그들 모두를 위해 베푸신 일을 생각하면서 그들 한 사람 한 사람이 완전한 사람으로서 하나님 앞에 설 수 있게 되기를 빌고 있습니다.","It is he whom we proclaim, admonishing everyone and teaching everyone with all wisdom, that we may present everyone perfect in Christ.","Whom we preach, warning every man, and teaching every man in all wisdom; that we may present every man perfect in Christ Jesus:","We proclaim him, admonishing and teaching everyone with all wisdom, so that we may present everyone perfect in Christ.","quem nos annuntiamus, commonentes omnem hominem et docentes omnem hominem in omni sapientia, ut exhibeamus omnem hominem perfectum in Christo;","ואותו משמיעים אנחנו בהוכיחנו כל איש ובלמדנו כל איש בכל חכמה למען העמיד כל איש שלם במשיח ישוע׃"],["58","1","29","이를 위하여 나는 내 안에서 힘차게 작용하는 그리스도의 기운을 받아 열심히 노력하고 있습니다.","나는 이를 위해서 내 안에서 강하게 활동하시는 그리스도께 힘입어 애써 노력하고 있습니다.","이를 위하여 나도 내 속에서 능력으로 역사하시는 이의 역사를 따라 힘을 다하여 수고하노라","이를 위하여 나도 내 속에서 능력으로 역사하시는 이의 역사를 따라 힘을 다하여 수고하노라","이것이 나의 임무입니다. 나는 내 속에서 강한 힘으로 일하시는 그리스도를 의지하여 이 일에 온 힘을 쏟고 있습니다.","For this I labor and struggle, in accord with the exercise of his power working within me.","Whereunto I also labour, striving according to his working, which worketh in me mightily.","To this end I labor, struggling with all his energy, which so powerfully works in me.","ad quod et laboro certando secundum operationem eius, quae operatur in me in virtute.","ובזאת אף אני עמל ונלחם כפי פעלת כחו הפעל בי בגבורה׃"]]