[["47","26","43","그리고 다시 와 보시니 그들은 여전히 눈이 무겁게 감겨 자고 있었다.","그리고 제자들에게 돌아오시니 그들은 여전히 자고 있었다. 그들은 너무나 지쳐서 눈을 뜨고 있을 수가 없었던 것이다.","다시 오사 보신즉 그들이 자니 이는 그들의 눈이 피곤함일러라","다시 오사 보신즉 저희가 자니 이는 저희 눈이 피곤함일러라","예수께서 다시 제자들에게 돌아오셨을 때에도 그들은 여전히 자고 있었다. 그들은 눈이 피곤하여 잠을 떨쳐 버릴 수 없었던 것이다.","Then he returned once more and found them asleep, for they could not keep their eyes open.","And he came and found them asleep again: for their eyes were heavy.","When he came back, he again found them sleeping, because their eyes were heavy.","Et venit iterum et invenit eos dormientes: erant enim oculi eorum gravati.","ויבא וימצאם גם בפעם הזאת ישנים כי עיניהם היו כבדות׃"],["47","26","44","예수님께서는 그들을 그대로 두시고 다시 가시어 세 번째 같은 말씀으로 기도하셨다.","하는 수 없이 제자들을 그대로 두시고 세 번째 가셔서 같은 말씀으로 기도하셨다.","또 그들을 두시고 나아가 세 번째 같은 말씀으로 기도하신 후","또 저희를 두시고 나아가 세번째 동일한 말씀으로 기도하신 후","예수께서는 그들을 두고 세번째 되돌아가셔서 다시 같은 말씀으로 기도하셨다.","He left them and withdrew again and prayed a third time, saying the same thing again.","And he left them, and went away again, and prayed the third time, saying the same words.","So he left them and went away once more and prayed the third time, saying the same thing.","Et relictis illis, iterum abiit et oravit tertio, eundem sermonem iterum dicens.","ויניחם ויוסף ללכת ויתפלל שלישית באמרו עוד הפעם כדבר הזה׃"],["47","26","45","그리고 제자들에게 돌아와 말씀하셨다. “아직도 자고 있느냐? 아직도 쉬고 있느냐? 이제 때가 가까웠다. 사람의 아들은 죄인들의 손에 넘어간다.","그리고 제자들에게 돌아와 이렇게 말씀하셨다. \"아직도 자고 있느냐? 자, 때가 왔다. 사람의 아들이 죄인들 손에 넘어가게 되었다.","이에 제자들에게 오사 이르시되 이제는 자고 쉬라 보라 때가 가까이 왔으니 인자가 죄인의 손에 팔리느니라","이에 제자들에게 오사 이르시되 이제는 자고 쉬라 보라 때가 가까왔으니 인자가 죄인의 손에 팔리우느니라","그리고 제자들에게 오셔서 말씀하셨다. \"아직도 자고 있느냐? 그렇게도 피곤하더란 말이냐? 하지만 때가 왔다. 인자는 악한 자들의 다에 넘겨지게 될 것이다.","Then he returned to his disciples and said to them, “Are you still sleeping and taking your rest? Behold, the hour is at hand when the Son of Man is to be handed over to sinners.","Then cometh he to his disciples, and saith unto them, Sleep on now, and take your rest: behold, the hour is at hand, and the Son of man is betrayed into the hands of sinners.","Then he returned to the disciples and said to them, \"Are you still sleeping and resting? Look, the hour is near, and the Son of Man is betrayed into the hands of sinners.","Tunc venit ad discipulos et dicit illis:  “Dormite iam et requiescite; ecce appropinquavit hora, et Filius hominis traditur in manus peccatorum.","ויבא אל התלמידים ויאמר אליהם נומו מעתה ונוחו הנה השעה קרובה ובן האדם נמסר לידי חטאים׃"],["47","26","46","일어나 가자. 보라, 나를 팔아넘길 자가 가까이 왔다.”","일어나 가자. 나를 넘겨줄 자가 가까이 와 있다.\"","일어나라 함께 가자 보라 나를 파는 자가 가까이 왔느니라","일어나라 함께 가자 보라 나를 파는 자가 가까이 왔느니라","일어나 가자. 보라! 나를 넘겨 줄 자가 가까이 와 있다\"","Get up, let us go. Look, my betrayer is at hand.”","Rise, let us be going: behold, he is at hand that doth betray me.","Rise, let us go! Here comes my betrayer!\"","Surgite, eamus; ecce appropinquavit, qui me tradit “.","קומו ונלכה הנה הלך וקרב המסר אותי׃"],["47","26","47","예수님께서 아직 말씀하고 계실 때에 바로 열두 제자 가운데 하나인 유다가 왔다. 그와 함께 수석 사제들과 백성의 원로들이 보낸 큰 무리도 칼과 몽둥이를 들고 왔다.","예수의 말씀이 채 끝나기도 전에 열두 제자의 하나인 유다가 다가왔다. 그를 따라 대사제들과 백성의 원로들이 보낸 무리가 칼과 몽둥이를 들고 몰려왔다.","말씀하실 때에 열둘 중의 하나인 유다가 왔는데 대제사장들과 백성의 장로들에게서 파송된 큰 무리가 칼과 몽치를 가지고 그와 함께 하였더라","말씀하실 때에 열 둘 중에 하나인 유다가 왔는데 대제사장들과 백성의 장로들에게서 파송된 큰 무리가 검과 몽치를 가지고 그와 함께 하였더라","예수의 말씀이 채 끝나기도 전에 열두 제자 가운데 하나인 유다가 대제사장들과 유대 지도자들이 보낸 많은 무리와 함께 왔다. 그들은 칼과 몽둥이를 들고 있었다.","While he was still speaking, Judas, one of the Twelve, arrived, accompanied by a large crowd, with swords and clubs, who had come from the chief priests and the elders of the people.","And while he yet spake, lo, Judas, one of the twelve, came, and with him a great multitude with swords and staves, from the chief priests and elders of the people.","While he was still speaking, Judas, one of the Twelve, arrived. With him was a large crowd armed with swords and clubs, sent from the chief priests and the elders of the people.","Et adhuc ipso loquente, ecce Iudas, unus de Duodecim, venit, et cum eo turba multa cum gladiis et fustibus, missi a principibus sacerdotum et senioribus populi.","עודנו מדבר והנה בא יהודה אחד משנים העשר ועמו המון רב ברחבות ובמקלות מאת ראשי הכהנים וזקני העם׃"],["47","26","48","그분을 팔아넘길 자는, “내가 입 맞추는 이가 바로 그 사람이니 그를 붙잡으시오.” 하고 그들에게 미리 신호를 일러두었다.","배반자는 그들과 미리 암호를 짜고 \"내가 입맞추는 사람이 바로 그 사람이니 붙잡아라.\" 하고 일러두었던 것이다.","예수를 파는 자가 그들에게 군호를 짜 이르되 내가 입맞추는 자가 그이니 그를 잡으라 한지라","예수를 파는 자가 그들에게 군호를 짜 가로되 내가 입맞추는 자가 그이니 그를 잡으라 하였는지라","유다는 그들에게 자기가 입맞추는 사람이 바로 예수이니 그를 잡으라고 미리 말해 두었다. 그래서 유다는","His betrayer had arranged a sign with them, saying, “The man I shall kiss is the one; arrest him.”","Now he that betrayed him gave them a sign, saying, Whomsoever I shall kiss, that same is he: hold him fast.","Now the betrayer had arranged a signal with them: \"The one I kiss is the man; arrest him.\"","Qui autem tradidit eum, dedit illis signum dicens:  “Quemcumque osculatus fuero, ipse est; tenete eum! “.","והמסר אתו נתן להם אות לאמר האיש אשר אשקהו זה הוא תפשוהו׃"],["47","26","49","그는 곧바로 예수님께 다가가, “스승님, 안녕하십니까?” 하고 나서 그분께 입을 맞추었다.","그는 예수께 다가와서 \"선생님, 안녕하십니까?\" 하고 인사하면서 입을 맞추었다.","곧 예수께 나아와 랍비여 안녕하시옵니까 하고 입을 맞추니","곧 예수께 나아와 랍비여 안녕하시옵니까 하고 입을 맞추니","곧 바로 예수께 다가가서 \"선생님, 안녕하십니까?\" 하고 다정하게 껴안으며 입맞추었다.","Immediately he went over to Jesus and said, “Hail, Rabbi!” and he kissed him.","And forthwith he came to Jesus, and said, Hail, master; and kissed him.","Going at once to Jesus, Judas said, \"Greetings, Rabbi!\" and kissed him.","Et confestim accedens ad Iesum dixit:  “Ave, Rabbi! “ et osculatus est eum.","ומיד נגש אל ישוע ויאמר שלום לך רבי וינשק לו׃"],["47","26","50","예수님께서 “친구야, 네가 하러 온 일을 하여라.” 하고 말씀하셨다. 그때에 그들이 다가와 예수님께 손을 대어 그분을 붙잡았다.","예수께서 \"자, 이 사람아, 어서 할 일이나 하여라.\" 하고 말씀하시자 무리가 달려들어 예수를 붙잡았다.","예수께서 이르시되 친구여 네가 무엇을 하려고 왔는지 행하라 하신대 이에 그들이 나아와 예수께 손을 대어 잡는지라","예수께서 가라사대 친구여 네가 무엇을 하려고 왔는지 행하라 하신대 이에 저희가 나아와 예수께 손을 대어 잡는지라","예수께서 \"친구여, 어서 네가 하고자 하는 일을 하라\" 하고 말씀하시자 사람들이 달려들어 예수를 붙잡았다.","Jesus answered him, “Friend, do what you have come for.” Then stepping forward they laid hands on Jesus and arrested him.","And Jesus said unto him, Friend, wherefore art thou come? Then came they, and laid hands on Jesus and took him.","Jesus replied, \"Friend, do what you came for.\" Then the men stepped forward, seized Jesus and arrested him.","Iesus autem dixit illi:  “Amice, ad quod venisti! “. Tunc accesserunt et manus iniecerunt in Iesum et tenuerunt eum.","ויאמר אליו ישוע רעי על מה באת ויגשו וישלחו את ידיהם בישוע ויתפשו אתו׃"],["47","26","51","그러자 예수님과 함께 있던 이들 가운데 한 사람이 칼을 빼어 들고, 대사제의 종을 쳐서 그의 귀를 잘라 버렸다.","그 때 예수와 함께 있던 사람들 중 하나가 칼을 빼어 대사제의 종의 귀를 쳐서 잘라버렸다.","예수와 함께 있던 자 중의 하나가 손을 펴 칼을 빼어 대제사장의 종을 쳐 그 귀를 떨어뜨리니","예수와 함께 있던 자 중에 하나가 손을 펴 검을 빼어 대제사장의 종을 쳐 그 귀를 떨어뜨리니","그때 예수와 함께 있던 사람 하나가 대제사장의 종의 귀를 칼로 내려쳤다.","And behold, one of those who accompanied Jesus put his hand to his sword, drew it, and struck the high priest’s servant, cutting off his ear.","And, behold, one of them which were with Jesus stretched out his hand, and drew his sword, and struck a servant of the high priest's, and smote off his ear.","With that, one of Jesus' companions reached for his sword, drew it out and struck the servant of the high priest, cutting off his ear.","Et ecce unus ex his, qui erant cum Iesu, extendens manum exemit gladium suum et percutiens servum principis sacerdotum amputavit auriculam eius.","והנה אחד מן האנשים אשר עם ישוע שלח ידו וישלף חרבו ויך את עבד הכהן הגדול ויקצץ את אזנו׃"],["47","26","52","그때에 예수님께서 그에게 이르셨다. “칼을 칼집에 도로 꽂아라. 칼을 잡는 자는 모두 칼로 망한다.","그것을 보시고 예수께서는 그에게 \"칼을 도로 칼집에 꽂아라. 칼을 쓰는 사람은 칼로 망하는 법이다.","이에 예수께서 이르시되 네 칼을 도로 칼집에 꽂으라 칼을 가지는 자는 다 칼로 망하느니라","이에 예수께서 이르시되 네 검을 도로 집에 꽂으라 검을 가지는 자는 다 검으로 망하느니라","그러자 예수께서 말씀하셨다. \"네 칼을 칼집에 도로 꽂으라. 칼을 쓰는 사람은 칼로 망한다.","Then Jesus said to him, “Put your sword back into its sheath, for all who take the sword will perish by the sword.","Then said Jesus unto him, Put up again thy sword into his place: for all they that take the sword shall perish with the sword.","\"Put your sword back in its place,\" Jesus said to him, \"for all who draw the sword will die by the sword.","Tunc ait illi Iesus:  “Converte gladium tuum in locum suum. Omnes enim, qui acceperint gladium, gladio peribunt.","ויאמר אליו ישוע השב את חרבך אל תערה כי כל אחזי חרב בחרב יאבדו׃"],["47","26","53","너는 내가 내 아버지께 청할 수 없다고 생각하느냐? 청하기만 하면 당장에 열두 군단이 넘는 천사들을 내 곁에 세워 주실 것이다.","내가 아버지께 청하기만 하면 당장에 열두 군단도 넘는 천사를 보내주실 수 있다는 것을 모르느냐?","너는 내가 내 아버지께 구하여 지금 열두 군단 더 되는 천사를 보내시게 할 수 없는 줄로 아느냐","너는 내가 내 아버지께 구하여 지금 열 두 영 더되는 천사를 보내시게 할 수 없는 줄로 아느냐","너희는 내가 내 아버지께 청하기만 하면 당장에 열두 군단도 더 넘는 천사들을 보내어 우리를 지켜 주실 수 있다는 것을 모르느냐?","Do you think that I cannot call upon my Father and he will not provide me at this moment with more than twelve legions of angels?","Thinkest thou that I cannot now pray to my Father, and he shall presently give me more than twelve legions of angels?","Do you think I cannot call on my Father, and he will at once put at my disposal more than twelve legions of angels?","An putas quia non possum rogare Patrem meum, et exhibebit mihi modo plus quam duodecim legiones angelorum?","או היחשב לבך כי לא יכלתי לשאל עתה מאת אבי והוא יצוה לי יותר משנים עשר לגיונות של מלאכים׃"],["47","26","54","그러면 일이 이렇게 되어야 한다는 성경 말씀이 어떻게 이루어지겠느냐?”","그러나 그렇게 한다면 이런 일이 반드시 일어나리라고 한 성서의 말씀이 어떻게 이루어지겠느냐?\" 하시고는","내가 만일 그렇게 하면 이런 일이 있으리라 한 성경이 어떻게 이루어지겠느냐 하시더라","내가 만일 그렇게 하면 이런 일이 있으리라 한 성경이 어떻게 이루어지리요 하시더라","그러나 만일 내가 그렇게 한다면 이미 이 일이 일어나리라고 한 성경의 말씀이 어떻게 이루어지겠느냐?\"","But then how would the scriptures be fulfilled which say that it must come to pass in this way?”","But how then shall the scriptures be fulfilled, that thus it must be?","But how then would the Scriptures be fulfilled that say it must happen in this way?\"","Quomodo ergo implebuntur Scripturae quia sic oportet fieri? “.","ואיככה אפוא ימלאו הכתובים כי כן היה תהיה׃"],["47","26","55","그때에 예수님께서는 그 무리에게도 이렇게 이르셨다. “너희는 강도라도 잡을 듯이 칼과 몽둥이를 들고 나를 잡으러 나왔단 말이냐? 내가 날마다 성전에 앉아 가르쳤지만 너희는 나를 붙잡지 않았다.","무리를 둘러보시며 이렇게 말씀하셨다. \"너희는 전에 내가 날마다 성전에 앉아서 가르치고 있을 때에는 나를 잡지 않다가 지금은 칼과 몽둥이를 들고 잡으러 왔으니 내가 강도란 말이냐?","그 때에 예수께서 무리에게 말씀하시되 너희가 강도를 잡는 것 같이 칼과 몽치를 가지고 나를 잡으러 나왔느냐 내가 날마다 성전에 앉아 가르쳤으되 너희가 나를 잡지 아니하였도다","그 때에 예수께서 무리에게 말씀하시되 너희가 강도를 잡는 것 같이 검과 몽치를 가지고 나를 잡으러 나왔느냐 내가 날마다 성전에 앉아 가르쳤으되 너희가 나를 잡지 아니하였도다","그리고 예수께서는 무리를 향해 이렇게 말씀하셨다. \"내가 마치 위험한 강도라도 되듯이 칼과 몽둥이를 들고 나를 잡으러 왔느냐? 내가 전에 날마다 성전에서 너희를 가르칠 때는 가만 있지 않았느냐?","At that hour Jesus said to the crowds, “Have you come out as against a robber, with swords and clubs to seize me? Day after day I sat teaching in the temple area, yet you did not arrest me.","In that same hour said Jesus to the multitudes, Are ye come out as against a thief with swords and staves for to take me? I sat daily with you teaching in the temple, and ye laid no hold on me.","At that time Jesus said to the crowd, \"Am I leading a rebellion, that you have come out with swords and clubs to capture me? Every day I sat in the temple courts teaching, and you did not arrest me.","In illa hora dixit Iesus turbis:  “Tamquam ad latronem existis cum gladiis et fustibus comprehendere me? Cotidie sedebam docens in templo, et non me tenuistis “.","בשעה ההיא אמר ישוע אל המון העם כעל פריץ יצאתם בחרבות ובמקלות לתפשני ויום יום הייתי ישב ומלמד אצלכם במקדש ולא החזקתם בי׃"],["47","26","56","예언자들이 기록한 성경 말씀이 이루어지려고 이 모든 일이 일어난 것이다.” 그때에 제자들은 모두 예수님을 버리고 달아났다.","그러나 이 모든 것은 예언자들이 기록한 말씀을 이루려고 일어난 것이다.\" 그 때에 제자들은 예수를 버리고 모두 달아났다.","그러나 이렇게 된 것은 다 선지자들의 글을 이루려 함이니라 하시더라 이에 제자들이 다 예수를 버리고 도망하니라","그러나 이렇게 된 것은 다 선지자들의 글을 이루려 함이니라 하시더라 이에 제자들이 다 예수를 버리고 도망하니라","그러나 이 모든 것이 이렇게 된 것은 성경에 기록된 예언자들의 말씀을 이루려는 것이다.\" 그동안 제자들은 예수를 버리고 모두 달아났다.","But all this has come to pass that the writings of the prophets may be fulfilled.” Then all the disciples left him and fled.","But all this was done, that the scriptures of the prophets might be fulfilled. Then all the disciples forsook him, and fled.","But this has all taken place that the writings of the prophets might be fulfilled.\" Then all the disciples deserted him and fled.","Hoc autem totum factum est, ut implerentur scripturae Prophetarum. Tunc discipuli omnes, relicto eo, fugerunt.","וכל זאת היתה למלאת כתבי הנביאים אז עזבוהו התלמידים כלם וינוסו׃"],["47","26","57","그들은 예수님을 붙잡아 카야파 대사제에게 끌고 갔다. 그곳에는 율법 학자들과 원로들이 모여 있었다.","사람들은 예수를 붙잡아 대사제 가야파의 집으로 끌고 갔는데 거기에는 율법학자들과 원로들이 모여 있었다.","예수를 잡은 자들이 그를 끌고 대제사장 가야바에게로 가니 거기 서기관과 장로들이 모여 있더라","예수를 잡은 자들이 끌고 대제사장 가야바에게로 가니 거기 서기관과 장로들이 모여 있더라","그들은 예수를 끌고 대제사장 가야바의 집으로 갔다. 거기에는 율법학자들과 모든 유대 지도자들이 모여 있었다.","Those who had arrested Jesus led him away to Caiaphas the high priest, where the scribes and the elders were assembled.","And they that had laid hold on Jesus led him away to Caiaphas the high priest, where the scribes and the elders were assembled.","Those who had arrested Jesus took him to Caiaphas, the high priest, where the teachers of the law and the elders had assembled.","Illi autem tenentes Iesum duxerunt ad Caipham principem sacerdotum, ubi scribae et seniores convenerant.","והאנשים אשר תפשו את ישוע הוליכהו אל קיפא הכהן הגדול אשר נקהלו שם הסופרים והזקנים׃"],["47","26","58","베드로는 멀찍이 떨어져 예수님을 뒤따라 대사제의 저택까지 가서, 결말을 보려고 안뜰로 들어가 시종들과 함께 앉았다.","베드로는 멀찍이 떨어져서 예수를 뒤따라 대사제의 관저에까지 가서 일의 결말을 보려고 안으로 들어가 경비원들 틈에 끼여 앉아 있었다.","베드로가 멀찍이 예수를 따라 대제사장의 집 뜰에까지 가서 그 결말을 보려고 안에 들어가 하인들과 함께 앉아 있더라","베드로가 멀찍이 예수를 좇아 대제사장의 집 뜰에까지 가서 그 결국을 보려고 안에 들어가 하속들과 함께 앉았더라","한편 멀찍이 뒤를 따라간 베드로는 대제사장의 집 안뜰에까지 들어가 예수께 무슨 일이 일어나는가 보려고 군인들 사이에 끼여 앉아 있었다.","Peter was following him at a distance as far as the high priest’s courtyard, and going inside he sat down with the servants to see the outcome.","But Peter followed him afar off unto the high priest's palace, and went in, and sat with the servants, to see the end.","But Peter followed him at a distance, right up to the courtyard of the high priest. He entered and sat down with the guards to see the outcome.","Petrus autem sequebatur eum a longe usque in aulam principis sacerdotum; et ingressus intro sede bat cum ministris, ut videret finem.","ופטרוס הלך אחריו מרחוק עד לחצר הכהן הגדול ויבא פנימה וישב לו אצל המשרתים לראות את אחרית הדבר׃"],["47","26","59","수석 사제들과 온 최고 의회는 예수님을 사형에 처하려고 그분에 대한 거짓 증언을 찾았다.","대사제들과 온 의회는 예수를 사형에 처하려고 그에 대한 거짓 증거를 찾고 있었다.","대제사장들과 온 공회가 예수를 죽이려고 그를 칠 거짓 증거를 찾으매","대제사장들과 온 공회가 예수를 죽이려고 그를 칠 거짓증거를 찾으매","대제사장들과 모든 의회원들은 예수를 사형에 처하려고 거짓 증거를 찾고 있었다.","The chief priests and the entire Sanhedrin kept trying to obtain false testimony against Jesus in order to put him to death,","Now the chief priests, and elders, and all the council, sought false witness against Jesus, to put him to death;","The chief priests and the whole Sanhedrin were looking for false evidence against Jesus so that they could put him to death.","Principes autem sacerdotum et omne concilium quaerebant falsum testimonium contra Iesum, ut eum morti traderent,","והכהנים הגדולים והסופרים וכל הסנהדרין בקשו עדות שקר בישוע להמיתו ולא מצאו׃"],["47","26","60","거짓 증인들이 많이 나섰지만 하나도 찾아내지 못하였다. 마침내 두 사람이 나서서,","많은 사람이 와서 거짓 증언을 하였지만 이렇다 할 증거를 얻지 못하였다. 그러다가 마침내 두 사람이 나타나서","거짓 증인이 많이 왔으나 얻지 못하더니 후에 두 사람이 와서","거짓 증인이 많이 왔으나 얻지 못하더니 후에 두 사람이 와서","많은 사람이 거짓 증언을 하였지만 제각각이어서 증언이 서로 일치하지 않았다. 마침내 두 사람이 앞에 나서며 말하였다.","but they found none, though many false witnesses came forward. Finally two came forward","But found none: yea, though many false witnesses came, yet found they none. At the last came two false witnesses,","But they did not find any, though many false witnesses came forward. Finally two came forward","et non invenerunt, cum multi falsi testes accessissent. Novissime autem venientes duo","ואף בעמד שם עדי שקר רבים לא מצאו ובאחרונה נגשו שני עדי שקר׃"],["47","26","61","“이자가 ‘나는 하느님의 성전을 허물고 사흘 안에 다시 세울 수 있다.’고 말하였습니다.” 하였다.","\"이 사람이 하느님의 성전을 헐었다가 사흘 만에 다시 세울 수 있다고 말하였습니다.\" 하고 증언하였다.","이르되 이 사람의 말이 내가 하나님의 성전을 헐고 사흘 동안에 지을 수 있다 하더라 하니","가로되 이 사람의 말이 내가 하나님의 성전을 헐고 사흘에 지을 수 있다 하더라 하니","\"이 사람이 \"내가 하나님의 성전을 헐었다가 사흘만에 다시 세울 수 있다\"고 말하였습니다.\"","who stated, “This man said, ‘I can destroy the temple of God and within three days rebuild it.’”","And said, This fellow said, I am able to destroy the temple of God, and to build it in three days.","and declared, \"This fellow said, 'I am able to destroy the temple of God and rebuild it in three days.'\"","dixerunt:  “Hic dixit:  “Possum destruere templum Dei et post triduum aedificare illud “ “.","ויאמרו זה אמר יש ביכלתי להרס את היכל האלהים ולשוב לבנותו בשלשת ימים׃"],["47","26","62","그러자 대사제가 일어나 예수님께, “당신은 아무런 대답도 하지 않소? 이자들이 당신에게 불리한 증언을 하는데 어찌 된 일이오?” 하고 물었다.","이 말을 듣고 대사제가 일어나 예수께 \"이 사람들이 그대에게 이렇게 불리한 증언을 하는데 할 말이 없는가?\" 하고 물었다.","대제사장이 일어서서 예수께 묻되 아무 대답도 없느냐 이 사람들이 너를 치는 증거가 어떠하냐 하되","대제사장이 일어서서 예수께 묻되 아무 대답도 없느냐 이 사람들의 너를 치는 증거가 어떠하뇨 하되","그러자 대제사장이 일어나서 예수께 물었다. \"자, 당신이 그런 말을 하였는가? 아니면 하지 않았는가?\"","The high priest rose and addressed him, “Have you no answer? What are these men testifying against you?”","And the high priest arose, and said unto him, Answerest thou nothing? what is it which these witness against thee?","Then the high priest stood up and said to Jesus, \"Are you not going to answer? What is this testimony that these men are bringing against you?\"","Et surgens princeps sacerdotum ait illi:  “Nihil respondes? Quid isti adversum te testificantur? “.","ויקם הכהן הגדול ויאמר אליו האינך משיב דבר על אשר ענו בך אלה׃"],["47","26","63","그러나 예수님께서는 입을 다물고 계셨다. 대사제가 말하였다. “내가 명령하오. ‘살아 계신 하느님 앞에서 맹세를 하고 당신이 하느님의 아들 메시아인지 밝히시오.’”","그러나 예수께서는 아무 말씀도 하지 않으셨다. 대사제는 다시 \"내가 살아 계신 하느님의 이름으로 명령하니 분명히 대답하여라. 그대가 과연 하느님의 아들 그리스도인가?\" 하고 물었다.","예수께서 침묵하시거늘 대제사장이 이르되 내가 너로 살아 계신 하나님께 맹세하게 하노니 네가 하나님의 아들 그리스도인지 우리에게 말하라","예수께서 잠잠하시거늘 대제사장이 가로되 내가 너로 살아 계신 하나님께 맹세하게 하노니 네가 하나님의 아들 그리스도인지 우리에게 말하라","그러나 예수께서는 침묵만 지키셨다. 그때 대제사장이 예수께 다시 물었다. \"살아 계신 하나님의 이름으로 당신에게 묻는다. 당신이 하나님의 아들 그리스도인가?\"","But Jesus was silent. Then the high priest said to him, “I order you to tell us under oath before the living God whether you are the Messiah, the Son of God.”","But Jesus held his peace, And the high priest answered and said unto him, I adjure thee by the living God, that thou tell us whether thou be the Christ, the Son of God.","But Jesus remained silent. The high priest said to him, \"I charge you under oath by the living God: Tell us if you are the Christ, the Son of God.\"","Iesus autem tacebat. Et princeps sacerdotum ait illi:  “Adiuro te per Deum vivum, ut dicas nobis, si tu es Christus Filius Dei “.","וישוע החריש ויען הכהן הגדול ויאמר לו משביעך אני באלהים חיים שתאמר לנו אם אתה הוא המשיח בן האלהים׃"],["47","26","64","예수님께서 그에게 말씀하셨다. “네가 그렇게 말하였다. 나는 너희에게 말한다. 이제부터 ‘너희는 사람의 아들이 전능하신 분의 오른쪽에 앉아 있는 것과 하늘의 구름을 타고 오는 것을 볼 것이다.’”","예수께서는 그에게 \"그것은 너의 말이다.\" 하시고는 \"잘 들어두어라. 너희는 이제부터 3)사람의 아들이 전능하신 분의 오른편에 앉아 있는 것과 또 하늘의 구름을 타고 오는 것을 볼 것이다.\" 하고 말씀하셨다. 시편 110:1; 다니 7:13.","예수께서 이르시되 네가 말하였느니라 그러나 내가 너희에게 이르노니 이 후에 인자가 권능의 우편에 앉아 있는 것과 하늘 구름을 타고 오는 것을 너희가 보리라 하시니","예수께서 가라사대 네가 말하였느니라 그러나 내가 너희에게 이르노니 이 후에 인자가 권능의 우편에 앉은 것과 하늘 구름을 타고 오는 것을 너희가 보리라 하시니","예수께서 말씀하셨다. \"그렇다. 장차 너희는 ㄱ) 인자가 하나님의 오른편에 앉아 있는 것과 하늘 구름을 타고 오는 것을 볼 것이다.\" (ㄱ. 시110:1,단7:13)","Jesus said to him in reply, “You have said so. But I tell you: From now on you will see ‘the Son of Man seated at the right hand of the Power’ and ‘coming on the clouds of heaven.’”","Jesus saith unto him, Thou hast said: nevertheless I say unto you, Hereafter shall ye see the Son of man sitting on the right hand of power, and coming in the clouds of heaven.","\"Yes, it is as you say,\" Jesus replied. \"But I say to all of you: In the future you will see the Son of Man sitting at the right hand of the Mighty One and coming on the clouds of heaven.\"","Dicit illi Iesus:  “Tu dixisti. Verumtamen dico vobis: Amodo videbitis Filium hominis sedentem a dextris Virtutis et venientem in nubibus caeli “.","ויאמר אליו ישוע אתה אמרת אבל אני אמר לכם כי מעתה תראו את בן האדם ישב לימין הגבורה ובא עם ענני השמים׃"],["47","26","65","그때에 대사제가 자기 겉옷을 찢고 이렇게 말하였다. “이자가 하느님을 모독하였습니다. 이제 우리에게 무슨 증인이 더 필요합니까? 방금 여러분은 하느님을 모독하는 말을 들었습니다.","이 말을 듣고 대사제가 자기 옷을 찢으며 \"이 사람이 이렇게 하느님을 모독했으니 이 이상 무슨 증거가 필요하겠소? 여러분은 방금 하느님을 모독하는 말을 듣지 않았소?","이에 대제사장이 자기 옷을 찢으며 이르되 그가 신성모독 하는 말을 하였으니 어찌 더 증인을 요구하리요 보라 너희가 지금 이 신성모독 하는 말을 들었도다","이에 대제사장이 자기 옷을 찢으며 가로되 저가 참람한 말을 하였으니 어찌 더 증인을 요구하리요 보라 너희가 지금 이 참람한 말을 들었도다","이 말을 듣자 대제사장은 자기 옷을 찢으며 큰소리로 말하였다. \"이자가 하나님을 모독하는구나! 이 이상 무슨 증거가 더 필요하겠소? 여러분은 모두 이자가 말하는 것을 듣지 않았소?","Then the high priest tore his robes and said, “He has blasphemed! What further need have we of witnesses? You have now heard the blasphemy;","Then the high priest rent his clothes, saying, He hath spoken blasphemy; what further need have we of witnesses? behold, now ye have heard his blasphemy.","Then the high priest tore his clothes and said, \"He has spoken blasphemy! Why do we need any more witnesses? Look, now you have heard the blasphemy.","Tunc princeps sacerdotum scidit vestimenta sua dicens:  “Blasphemavit! Quid adhuc egemus testibus? Ecce nunc audistis blasphemiam.","ויקרע הכהן הגדול את בגדיו ויאמר הוא גדף ומה לנו עוד לבקש עדים הנה עתה שמעתם את גדופו׃"],["47","26","66","여러분의 의견은 어떻습니까?” 그들이 대답하였다. “그자는 죽을죄를 지었습니다.”","자, 어떻게 했으면 좋겠소?\" 하고 묻자 사람들은 모두 \"사형에 처해야 합니다.\" 하고 아우성쳤다.","너희 생각은 어떠하냐 대답하여 이르되 그는 사형에 해당하니라 하고","생각이 어떠하뇨 대답하여 가로되 저는 사형에 해당하니라 하고","여러분의 생각은 어떻소?\" 그러자 사람들은 \"사형이오! 사형이오! 사형이오!\" 하고 아우성을 쳤다.","what is your opinion?” They said in reply, “He deserves to die!”","What think ye? They answered and said, He is guilty of death.","What do you think?\" \"He is worthy of death,\" they answered.","Quid vobis videtur? “. Illi autem respondentes dixerunt:  “Reus est mortis! “.","מה דעתכם ויענו ויאמרו איש מות הוא׃"],["47","26","67","그때에 그들은 예수님의 얼굴에 침을 뱉고 그분을 주먹으로 쳤다. 더러는 손찌검을 하면서,","그리고 그들은 예수의 얼굴에 침을 뱉고 주먹으로 치고 또 어떤 자들은 뺨을 때리면서","이에 예수의 얼굴에 침 뱉으며 주먹으로 치고 어떤 사람은 손바닥으로 때리며","이에 예수의 얼굴에 침 뱉으며 주먹으로 치고 혹은 손바닥으로 때리며","그리고 그들은 예수의 얼굴에 침을 뱉고 주먹으로 때렸다. 어떤 사람은 손바닥으로 뺨을 때리면서","Then they spat in his face and struck him, while some slapped him,","Then did they spit in his face, and buffeted him; and others smote him with the palms of their hands,","Then they spit in his face and struck him with their fists. Others slapped him","Tunc exspuerunt in faciem eius et colaphis eum ceciderunt; alii autem palmas in faciem ei dederunt","וירקו בפניו ויכהו באגרוף ואחרים הכהו על הלחי׃"],["47","26","68","“메시아야, 알아맞혀 보아라. 너를 친 사람이 누구냐?” 하였다.","\"그리스도야, 너를 때린 사람이 누구인지 알아맞혀 보아라.\" 하며 조롱하였다.","이르되 그리스도야 우리에게 선지자 노릇을 하라 너를 친 자가 누구냐 하더라","가로되 그리스도야 우리에게 선지자 노릇을 하라 너를 친 자가 누구냐 하더라","\"알아맞혀 보시지, 그리스도 양반. 당신을 친 사람이 누구인가?\" 하고 조롱하였다.","saying, “Prophesy for us, Messiah: who is it that struck you?”","Saying, Prophesy unto us, thou Christ, Who is he that smote thee?","and said, \"Prophesy to us, Christ. Who hit you?\"","dicentes:  “Prophetiza nobis, Christe: Quis est, qui te percussit? “.","ויאמרו הנבא לנו המשיח מי הוא המכה אותך׃"],["47","26","69","베드로는 안뜰 바깥쪽에 앉아 있었는데 하녀 하나가 그에게 다가와 말하였다. “당신도 저 갈릴래아 사람 예수와 함께 있었지요?”","그 동안 베드로는 바깥 뜰에 앉아 있었는데 여종 하나가 그에게 다가와 \"당신도 저 갈릴래아 사람 예수와 함께 다니던 사람이군요.\" 하고 말하였다.","베드로가 바깥 뜰에 앉았더니 한 여종이 나아와 이르되 너도 갈릴리 사람 예수와 함께 있었도다 하거늘","베드로가 바깥 뜰에 앉았더니 한 비자가 나아와 가로되 너도 갈릴리 사람 예수와 함께 있었도다 하거늘","그동안 베드로는 바깥뜰에 앉아 있었다. 그때 여종 하나가 다가와서 \"당신도 저 갈릴리 사람 예수와 같이 다니던 사람이지요?\" 하고 말하였다.","Now Peter was sitting outside in the courtyard. One of the maids came over to him and said, “You too were with Jesus the Galilean.”","Now Peter sat without in the palace: and a damsel came unto him, saying, Thou also wast with Jesus of Galilee.","Now Peter was sitting out in the courtyard, and a servant girl came to him. \"You also were with Jesus of Galilee,\" she said.","Petrus vero sedebat foris in atrio; et accessit ad eum una ancilla dicens:  “Et tu cum Iesu Galilaeo eras! “.","ופטרוס ישב מחוץ לבית בחצר ותגש אליו שפחה לאמר גם אתה היית עם ישוע הגלילי׃"],["47","26","70","그러자 베드로는 모든 사람 앞에서, “나는 당신이 무슨 말을 하는지 모르겠소.” 하고 부인하였다.","베드로는 여러 사람 앞에서 \"무슨 소린지 나는 모르겠소.\" 하고 부인하였다.","베드로가 모든 사람 앞에서 부인하여 이르되 나는 네가 무슨 말을 하는지 알지 못하겠노라 하며","베드로가 모든 사람 앞에서 부인하여 가로되 나는 네 말하는 것이 무엇인지 알지 못하겠노라 하며","그러자 베드로는 큰소리로 \"네가 무슨 소리를 하고 있는지 모르겠다\" 하고 화를 내며 부인하였다.","But he denied it in front of everyone, saying, “I do not know what you are talking about!”","But he denied before them all, saying, I know not what thou sayest.","But he denied it before them all. \"I don't know what you're talking about,\" he said.","At ille negavit coram omnibus dicens:  “Nescio quid dicis! “.","ויכחש בפני כלם לאמר לא ידעתי מה את אמרת׃"],["47","26","71","그가 대문께로 나가자 다른 하녀가 그를 보고 거기에 있는 이들에게, “이이는 나자렛 사람 예수와 함께 있었어요.” 하고 말하였다.","그리고 베드로가 대문께로 나가자 다른 여종이 그를 보고는 거기 있는 사람들에게 \"이 사람은 나자렛의 예수와 함께 다니던 사람이오.\" 하고 말하였다.","앞문까지 나아가니 다른 여종이 그를 보고 거기 있는 사람들에게 말하되 이 사람은 나사렛 예수와 함께 있었도다 하매","앞문까지 나아가니 다른 비자가 저를 보고 거기 있는 사람들에게 말하되 이 사람은 나사렛 예수와 함께 있었도다 하매","조금 지나서 베드로가 대문 곁으로 가니 다른 여종이 그를 보고 둘러서 있는 사람들에게 \"이 사람도 나사렛 예수와 같이 다니던 사람이에요\" 하고 말하였다.","As he went out to the gate, another girl saw him and said to those who were there, “This man was with Jesus the Nazorean.”","And when he was gone out into the porch, another maid saw him, and said unto them that were there, This fellow was also with Jesus of Nazareth.","Then he went out to the gateway, where another girl saw him and said to the people there, \"This fellow was with Jesus of Nazareth.\"","Exeunte autem illo ad ianuam, vidit eum alia et ait his, qui erant ibi:  “Hic erat cum Iesu Nazareno! “.","ויצא אל פתח השער ותרא אותו אחרת ותאמר לאנשים אשר שם גם זה היה עם ישוע הנצרי׃"],["47","26","72","그러자 베드로는 맹세까지 하면서 “나는 그 사람을 알지 못하오.” 하고 다시 부인하였다.","베드로는 맹세까지 하면서 \"나는 그 사람을 알지 못하오.\" 하고 다시 부인하였다.","베드로가 맹세하고 또 부인하여 이르되 나는 그 사람을 알지 못하노라 하더라","베드로가 맹세하고 또 부인하여 가로되 내가 그 사람을 알지 못하노라 하더라","베드로는 또 그 말을 부인하고 이번에는 맹세까지 하면서 \"나는 그 사람을 전혀 알지 못하오\" 하고 말하였다.","Again he denied it with an oath, “I do not know the man!”","And again he denied with an oath, I do not know the man.","He denied it again, with an oath: \"I don't know the man!\"","Et iterum negavit cum iuramento:  “Non novi hominem! “.","ויוסף לכחש וישבע לאמר לא ידעתי את האיש׃"],["47","26","73","그런데 조금 뒤에 거기 서 있던 이들이 베드로에게 다가와, “당신도 그들과 한패임이 틀림없소. 당신의 말씨를 들으니 분명하오.” 하고 말하였다.","조금 뒤에 거기 섰던 사람들이 베드로에게 다가오며 \"틀림없이 당신도 그들과 한 패요. 당신의 말씨만 들어도 알 수 있소.\" 하고 말하였다.","조금 후에 곁에 섰던 사람들이 나아와 베드로에게 이르되 너도 진실로 그 도당이라 네 말소리가 너를 표명한다 하거늘","조금 후에 곁에 섰던 사람들이 나아와 베드로에게 이르되 너도 진실로 그 당이라 네 말소리가 너를 표명한다 하거늘","그러나 조금 후에 거기 서 있던 사람들이 베드로에게 다가와서 \"당신은 그 사람의 제자인게 틀림없소. 당신의 갈릴리 말투를 보아 분명하오\" 하자","A little later the bystanders came over and said to Peter, “Surely you too are one of them; even your speech gives you away.”","And after a while came unto him they that stood by, and said to Peter, Surely thou also art one of them; for thy speech bewrayeth thee.","After a little while, those standing there went up to Peter and said, \"Surely you are one of them, for your accent gives you away.\"","Post pusillum autem accesserunt, qui stabant, et dixerunt Petro:  “Vere et tu ex illis es, nam et loquela tua manifestum te facit “.","וכמעט אחרי כן ויגשו העמדים שם ויאמרו אל פטרוס אמת כי גם אתה מהם כי גם לשונך מגלה אותך׃"],["47","26","74","그때에 베드로는 거짓이면 천벌을 받겠다고 맹세하기 시작하며, “나는 그 사람을 알지 못하오.” 하였다. 그러자 곧 닭이 울었다.","그러자 베드로는 거짓말이라면 천벌이라도 받겠다고 맹세하면서 \"나는 그 사람을 알지 못하오.\" 하고 잡아떼었다. 바로 그 때에 닭이 울었다.","그가 저주하며 맹세하여 이르되 나는 그 사람을 알지 못하노라 하니 곧 닭이 울더라","저가 저주하며 맹세하여 가로되 내가 그 사람을 알지 못하노라 하니 닭이 곧 울더라","베드로는 저주하고 맹세하면서 \"내가 그 사람을 안다면 천벌을 받겠소. 나는 정말 그 사람을 알지 못하오\" 하고 부인하였다. 그러자 곧 닭이 울었다.","At that he began to curse and to swear, “I do not know the man.” And immediately a cock crowed.","Then began he to curse and to swear, saying, I know not the man. And immediately the cock crew.","Then he began to call down curses on himself and he swore to them, \"I don't know the man!\" Immediately a rooster crowed.","Tunc coepit detestari et iurare:  “Non novi hominem! “. Et continuo gallus cantavit;","ויחל להחרים את נפשו ולהשבע לאמר לא ידעתי את האיש ומיד קרא התרנגול׃"],["47","26","75","베드로는 “닭이 울기 전에 너는 세 번이나 나를 모른다고 할 것이다.” 하신 예수님의 말씀이 생각나서, 밖으로 나가 슬피 울었다.","베드로는 \"닭이 울기 전에 세 번이나 나를 모른다고 할 것이다.\" 하신 예수의 말씀이 떠올라 밖으로 나가 몹시 울었다.","이에 베드로가 예수의 말씀에 닭 울기 전에 네가 세 번 나를 부인하리라 하심이 생각나서 밖에 나가서 심히 통곡하니라","이에 베드로가 예수의 말씀에 닭 울기 전에 네가 세번 나를 부인하리라 하심이 생각나서 밖에 나가서 심히 통곡하니라","베드로는 \"닭이 울기 전에 네가 세 번 나를 모른다고 할 것이다\"고 하시던 예수의 말씀이 생각나서 밖으로 나가 통곡하였다.","Then Peter remembered the word that Jesus had spoken: “Before the cock crows you will deny me three times.” He went out and began to weep bitterly.","And Peter remembered the word of Jesus, which said unto him, Before the cock crow, thou shalt deny me thrice. And he went out, and wept bitterly.","Then Peter remembered the word Jesus had spoken: \"Before the rooster crows, you will disown me three times.\" And he went outside and wept bitterly.","et recordatus est Petrus verbi Iesu, quod dixerat:  “Priusquam gallus cantet, ter me negabis “. Et egressus foras ploravit amare.","ויזכר פטרוס את דבר ישוע אשר אמר אליו לאמר בטרם יקרא התרנגול תכחש בי שלש פעמים ויצא החוצה וימרר בבכי׃"],["47","27","1","아침이 되자 모든 수석 사제들과 백성의 원로들은 예수님을 사형에 처하기로 결의한 끝에,","이른 아침에 모든 대사제들과 백성의 원로들이 예수를 죽일 계획을 짜고","새벽에 모든 대제사장과 백성의 장로들이 예수를 죽이려고 함께 의논하고","새벽에 모든 대제사장과 백성의 장로들이 예수를 죽이려고 함께 의논하고","아침이 되자 대제사장들과 유대 지도자들은 다시 회의를 열어 예수를 로마 정부에 인계하여 사형에 처할 방법을 모의한 뒤에","When it was morning, all the chief priests and the elders of the people took counsel against Jesus to put him to death.","When the morning was come, all the chief priests and elders of the people took counsel against Jesus to put him to death:","Early in the morning, all the chief priests and the elders of the people came to the decision to put Jesus to death.","Mane autem facto, consi lium inierunt omnes princi pes sacerdotum et seniores populi adversus Iesum, ut eum morti traderent.","ויהי לפנות הבקר ויתיעצו כל ראשי הכהנים וזקני העם על ישוע להמיתו׃"],["47","27","2","그를 결박하여 끌고 가서 빌라도 총독에게 넘겼다.","그를 결박하여 총독 빌라도에게 끌고 가서 넘겨주었다.","결박하여 끌고 가서 총독 빌라도에게 넘겨 주니라","결박하여 끌고 가서 총독 빌라도에게 넘겨주니라","예수를 결박하여 로마 총독빌라도에게 보냈다.","They bound him, led him away, and handed him over to Pilate, the governor.","And when they had bound him, they led him away, and delivered him to Pontius Pilate the governor.","They bound him, led him away and handed him over to Pilate, the governor.","Et vinctum adduxerunt eum et tradiderunt Pilato praesidi.","ויאסרו אתו ויוליכהו משם וימסרהו אל פונטיוס פילטוס ההגמון׃"],["47","27","3","그때에 예수님을 팔아넘긴 유다는 그분께서 사형 선고를 받으신 것을 보고 뉘우치고서는, 그 은돈 서른 닢을 수석 사제들과 원로들에게 돌려주면서","그 때에 배반자 유다는 예수께서 유죄 판결을 받으신 것을 보고 자기가 저지른 일을 뉘우쳤다. 그래서 은전 서른 닢을 대사제들과 원로들에게 돌려주며","그 때에 예수를 판 유다가 그의 정죄됨을 보고 스스로 뉘우쳐 그 은 삼십을 대제사장들과 장로들에게 도로 갖다 주며","때에 예수를 판 유다가 그의 정죄됨을 보고 스스로 뉘우쳐 그 은 삼십을 대제사장들과 장로들에게 도로 갖다 주며","그때 예수를 배신한 유다는 예수께서 사형 판결을 받으신 것을 보고 깊이 뉘우쳤다. 그래서 그 은전 서른 닢을 대제사장들과 유대 지도자들에게 돌려주며","Then Judas, his betrayer, seeing that Jesus had been condemned, deeply regretted what he had done. He returned the thirty pieces of silver to the chief priests and elders,","Then Judas, which had betrayed him, when he saw that he was condemned, repented himself, and brought again the thirty pieces of silver to the chief priests and elders,","When Judas, who had betrayed him, saw that Jesus was condemned, he was seized with remorse and returned the thirty silver coins to the chief priests and the elders.","Tunc videns Iudas, qui eum tradidit, quod damnatus esset, paenitentia ductus, rettulit triginta argenteos principibus sacerdotum et senioribus","וירא יהודה המסר אותו כי הרשיעהו וינחם וישב את שלשים הכסף אל הכהנים הגדולים והזקנים לאמר׃"],["47","27","4","말하였다. “죄 없는 분을 팔아넘겨 죽게 만들었으니 나는 죄를 지었소.” 그러나 그들은 “우리와 무슨 상관이냐? 그것은 네 일이다.” 하였다.","\"내가 죄없는 사람을 배반하여 그의 피를 흘리게 하였으니 나는 죄인입니다.\" 하였다. 그러나 그들은 \"우리가 알 바 아니다. 그대가 알아서 처리하여라.\" 하고 말하였다.","이르되 내가 무죄한 피를 팔고 죄를 범하였도다 하니 그들이 이르되 그것이 우리에게 무슨 상관이냐 네가 당하라 하거늘","가로되 내가 무죄한 피를 팔고 죄를 범하였도다 하니 저희가 가로되 그것이 우리에게 무슨 상관이 있느냐 네가 당하라 하거늘","\"내가 죄를 지었소. 내가 죄 없는 분의 피를 팔았소\" 하고 말하였다. 그러나 그들은 \"그것이 우리와 무슨 상관이 있소? 그것은 당신이 알아서 할 문제요\" 라고 대꾸하였다.","saying, “I have sinned in betraying innocent blood.” They said, “What is that to us? Look to it yourself.”","Saying, I have sinned in that I have betrayed the innocent blood. And they said, What is that to us? see thou to that.","\"I have sinned,\" he said, \"for I have betrayed innocent blood.\" \"What is that to us?\" they replied. \"That's your responsibility.\"","dicens:  “Peccavi tradens sanguinem innocentem “. At illi dixerunt:  “Quid ad nos? Tu videris! “.","חטאתי כי דם נקי הסגרתי והם אמרו מה לנו ולזאת אתה תראה׃"],["47","27","5","유다는 그 은돈을 성전 안에다 내던지고 물러가서 목을 매달아 죽었다.","유다는 그 은전을 성소에 내동댕이치고 물러가서 스스로 목매달아 죽었다.","유다가 은을 성소에 던져 넣고 물러가서 스스로 목매어 죽은지라","유다가 은을 성소에 던져 넣고 물러가서 스스로 목매어 죽은지라","유다는 은전을 성소에 내던지고 나가서 목매달아 죽었다.","Flinging the money into the temple, he departed and went off and hanged himself.","And he cast down the pieces of silver in the temple, and departed, and went and hanged himself.","So Judas threw the money into the temple and left. Then he went away and hanged himself.","Et proiectis argenteis in templo, recessit et abiens laqueo se suspendit.","וישלך את הכסף אל ההיכל ויפן וילך ויחנק׃"],["47","27","6","수석 사제들은 그 은돈을 거두면서, “이것은 피 값이니 성전 금고에 넣어서는 안 되겠소.” 하고 말하였다.","대사제들은 그 은전을 주워 들고 \"이것은 피 값이니 헌금궤에 넣어서는 안 되겠소.\" 하며","대제사장들이 그 은을 거두며 이르되 이것은 핏값이라 성전고에 넣어 둠이 옳지 않다 하고","대제사장들이 그 은을 거두며 가로되 이것은 피 값이라 성전고에 넣어 둠이 옳지 않다 하고","대제사장들은 그 은전을 주워 들고 \"이것은 피값이므로 헌금궤에 넣을 수가 없겠소. 이런 돈을 받아넣는 것은 우리 율법에 어긋나는 일이니 말이오\" 하고","The chief priests gathered up the money, but said, “It is not lawful to deposit this in the temple treasury, for it is the price of blood.”","And the chief priests took the silver pieces, and said, It is not lawful for to put them into the treasury, because it is the price of blood.","The chief priests picked up the coins and said, \"It is against the law to put this into the treasury, since it is blood money.\"","Principes autem sacerdotum, acceptis argenteis, dixerunt:  “Non licet mittere eos in corbanam, quia pretium sanguinis est “.","ויקחו ראשי הכהנים את הכסף ויאמרו לא נכון לנו לתתו אל ארון הקרבן כי מחיר דמים הוא׃"],["47","27","7","그들은 의논한 끝에 그 돈으로 옹기장이 밭을 사서 이방인들의 묘지로 쓰기로 하였다.","의논한 끝에 그 돈으로 옹기장이의 밭을 사서 나그네의 묘지로 사용하기로 하였다.","의논한 후 이것으로 토기장이의 밭을 사서 나그네의 묘지를 삼았으니","의논한 후 이것으로 토기장이의 밭을 사서 나그네의 묘지를 삼았으니","의논한 끝에 그 돈으로 옹기장이의 밭을 사서 예루살렘에서 죽은 이방인의 묘지로 쓰기로 하였다.","After consultation, they used it to buy the potter’s field as a burial place for foreigners.","And they took counsel, and bought with them the potter's field, to bury strangers in.","So they decided to use the money to buy the potter's field as a burial place for foreigners.","Consilio autem inito, emerunt ex illis agrum Figuli in sepulturam peregrinorum.","ויתיעצו ויקנו בו את שדה היוצר לקבורת הגרים׃"],["47","27","8","그래서 그 밭은 오늘날까지 ‘피밭’이라고 불린다.","그래서 그 밭은 오늘날까지 \"피의 밭\"이라고 불린다.","그러므로 오늘날까지 그 밭을 피밭이라 일컫느니라","그러므로 오늘날까지 그 밭을 피밭이라 일컫느니라","그 밭은 오늘날까지 \"피의 밭\"이라고 불린다.","That is why that field even today is called the Field of Blood.","Wherefore that field was called, The field of blood, unto this day.","That is why it has been called the Field of Blood to this day.","Propter hoc vocatus est ager ille ager Sanguinis usque in hodiernum diem.","על כן שם השדה ההוא שדה הדם עד היום הזה׃"],["47","27","9","그리하여 예레미야 예언자를 통하여 하신 말씀이 이루어졌다. “그들은 은돈 서른 닢, 값어치가 매겨진 이의 몸값, 이스라엘 자손들이 값어치를 매긴 사람의 몸값을 받아","이리하여 예언자 예레미야를 시켜 \"1)이스라엘의 자손들이 정한 한 사람의 몸값, 은전 서른 닢을 받아서 즈가 11:12-13.","이에 선지자 예레미야를 통하여 하신 말씀이 이루어졌나니 일렀으되 ㄱ)그들이 그 가격 매겨진 자 곧 이스라엘 자손 중에서 가격 매긴 자의 가격 곧 은 삼십을 가지고","이에 선지자 예레미야로 하신 말씀이 이루었나니 일렀으되 ㄱ)저희가 그 정가 된 자 곧 이스라엘 자손 중에서 정가한 자의 가격 곧 은 삼십을 가지고 슥 11:12, 13","이렇게 하여 예레미야의 예언이 이루어진 것이다. ㄱ) \"그들은 은전 서른 닢을 받았으니 이는 이스라엘 사람에게 팔려 간 그의 몸값이다. (ㄱ. 슥11:12-13)","Then was fulfilled what had been said through Jeremiah the prophet, “And they took the thirty pieces of silver, the value of a man with a price on his head, a price set by some of the Israelites,","Then was fulfilled that which was spoken by Jeremy the prophet, saying, And they took the thirty pieces of silver, the price of him that was valued, whom they of the children of Israel did value;","Then what was spoken by Jeremiah the prophet was fulfilled: \"They took the thirty silver coins, the price set on him by the people of Israel,","Tunc impletum est quod dictum est per Ieremiam prophetam di centem:  “Et acceperunt triginta argenteos, pretium appretiati quem appretiaverunt a filiis Israel,","אז נתמלא מה שנאמר ביד ירמיה הנביא ויקחו שלשים הכסף אדר היקר אשר יקר מעל בני ישראל׃"],["47","27","10","주님께서 나에게 분부하신 대로 옹기장이 밭 값으로 내놓았다.”","주께서 나에게 명하신 대로 옹기장이의 밭 값을 치렀다.\" 하신 말씀이 이루어졌다.","토기장이의 밭 값으로 주었으니 이는 주께서 내게 명하신 바와 같으니라 하였더라","토기장이의 밭 값으로 주었으니 이는 주께서 내게 명하신 바와 같으니라 하였더라","이것으로 옹기장이의 밭을 샀으니 주께서 내게 명하신 대로이다.\"","and they paid it out for the potter’s field just as the Lord had commanded me.”","And gave them for the potter's field, as the Lord appointed me.","and they used them to buy the potter's field, as the Lord commanded me.\"","et dederunt eos in agrum Figuli, sicut constituit mihi Dominus “.","ויתנו אתם אל שדה היוצר כאשר צוני יהוה׃"],["47","27","11","예수님께서 총독 앞에 서셨다. “당신이 유다인들의 임금이오?” 하고 총독이 묻자, 예수님께서 “네가 그렇게 말하고 있다.” 하고 대답하셨다.","예수께서 총독 앞에 서시자 총독은 \"네가 유다인의 왕인가?\" 하고 물었다. 예수께서는 \"그것은 네 말이다.\" 하고 대답하셨다.","예수께서 총독 앞에 섰으매 총독이 물어 이르되 네가 유대인의 왕이냐 예수께서 대답하시되 네 말이 옳도다 하시고","예수께서 총독 앞에 섰으매 총독이 물어 가로되 네가 유대인의 왕이냐 예수께서 대답하시되 네 말이 옳도다 하시고","예수께서 로마 총독 빌라도 앞에 서시자 총독은 \"당신이 유대인의 왕인가?\" 하고 물었다. 그러자 예수께서는 \"네 말대로다\"하고 말씀하셨다.","Now Jesus stood before the governor, and he questioned him, “Are you the king of the Jews?” Jesus said, “You say so.”","And Jesus stood before the governor: and the governor asked him, saying, Art thou the King of the Jews? And Jesus said unto him, Thou sayest.","Meanwhile Jesus stood before the governor, and the governor asked him, \"Are you the king of the Jews?\" \"Yes, it is as you say,\" Jesus replied.","Iesus autem stetit ante praesidem; et interrogavit eum praeses dicens:  “Tu es Rex Iudaeorum? “. Dixit autem Iesus:  “Tu dicis “.","וישוע העמד לפני ההגמון וישאלהו ההגמון לאמר האתה הוא מלך היהודים ויאמר ישוע אתה אמרת׃"],["47","27","12","그러나 수석 사제들과 원로들이 당신을 고소하는 말에는 아무 대답도 하지 않으셨다.","그러나 대사제들과 원로들이 고발하는 말에는 아무 대답도 하지 않으셨다.","대제사장들과 장로들에게 고발을 당하되 아무 대답도 아니하시는지라","대제사장들과 장로들에게 고소를 당하되 아무 대답도 아니하시는지라","그러나 대제사장들과 유대 지도자들이 고발하여 떠들어대는 데는 아무 대답도 하시지 않았다.","And when he was accused by the chief priests and elders, he made no answer.","And when he was accused of the chief priests and elders, he answered nothing.","When he was accused by the chief priests and the elders, he gave no answer.","Et cum accusaretur a principibus sacerdotum et senioribus, nihil respondit.","וידברו עליו שטנה הכהנים הגדולים והזקנים והוא לא ענה דבר׃"],["47","27","13","그때에 빌라도가 예수님께, “저들이 갖가지로 당신에게 불리한 증언을 하는데 들리지 않소?” 하고 물었으나,","그래서 빌라도가 \"사람들이 저렇게 여러 가지 죄목을 들어서 고발하고 있는데 그 말이 들리지 않느냐?\" 하고 다시 물었지만","이에 빌라도가 이르되 그들이 너를 쳐서 얼마나 많은 것으로 증언하는지 듣지 못하느냐 하되","이에 빌라도가 이르되 저희가 너를 쳐서 얼마나 많은 것으로 증거하는지 듣지 못하느냐 하되","그래서 빌라도가 \"저 사람들이 하는 말이 들리지 않는가?\" 하고 물었으나 여전히","Then Pilate said to him, “Do you not hear how many things they are testifying against you?”","Then said Pilate unto him, Hearest thou not how many things they witness against thee?","Then Pilate asked him, \"Don't you hear the testimony they are bringing against you?\"","Tunc dicit illi Pilatus:  “Non audis quanta adversum te dicant testimonia? “.","ויאמר אליו פילטוס האינך שמע כמה הם מעידים בך׃"],["47","27","14","예수님께서는 어떠한 고소의 말에도 대답을 하지 않으셨다. 그래서 총독은 매우 이상하게 여겼다.","예수께서는 총독이 매우 이상하게 여길 정도로 아무런 대답도 하지 않으셨다.","한 마디도 대답하지 아니하시니 총독이 크게 놀라워하더라","한마디도 대답지 아니하시니 총독이 심히 기이히 여기더라","예수께서는 한마디도 대답하시지 않았다. 총독은 이를 매우 이상히 여겼다.","But he did not answer him one word, so that the governor was greatly amazed.","And he answered him to never a word; insomuch that the governor marvelled greatly.","But Jesus made no reply, not even to a single charge--to the great amazement of the governor.","Et non respondit ei ad ullum verbum, ita ut miraretur praeses vehementer.","ולא ענהו אף דבר אחד ויתמה ההגמון עד מאד׃"],["47","27","15","축제 때마다 군중이 원하는 죄수 하나를 총독이 풀어 주는 관례가 있었다.","명절이 되면 총독은 군중이 요구하는 대로 죄수 하나를 놓아주는 관례가 있었다.","명절이 되면 총독이 무리의 청원대로 죄수 한 사람을 놓아 주는 전례가 있더니","명절을 당하면 총독이 무리의 소원대로 죄수 하나를 놓아 주는 전례가 있더니","유월절 잔치기간 중에는 총독이 군중의 요청대로 누구든지 유대인 죄수 하나를 놓아 주는 관례가 있었다.","Now on the occasion of the feast the governor was accustomed to release to the crowd one prisoner whom they wished.","Now at that feast the governor was wont to release unto the people a prisoner, whom they would.","Now it was the governor's custom at the Feast to release a prisoner chosen by the crowd.","Per diem autem sollemnem consueverat praeses dimittere turbae unum vinctum, quem voluissent.","ומנהג ההגמון היה לפטר לעם בכל חג אסיר אחד את אשר יחפצו׃"],["47","27","16","마침 그때에 예수 바라빠라는 이름난 죄수가 있었다.","마침 그 때에 2)(예수) 바라빠라는 이름난 죄수가 있었다. \"예수\"가 들어 있지 않은 사본도 있다.","그 때에 바라바라 하는 유명한 죄수가 있는데","그 때에 바라바라 하는 유명한 죄수가 있는데","마침 그 해에는 바라바라는 이름난 죄수가 갇혀 있었다.","And at that time they had a notorious prisoner called [Jesus] Barabbas.","And they had then a notable prisoner, called Barabbas.","At that time they had a notorious prisoner, called Barabbas.","Habebant autem tunc vinctum insignem, qui dicebatur Barabbas.","ובעת ההיא היה להם אסיר ידוע ושמו בר אבא׃"],["47","27","17","사람들이 모여들자 빌라도가 그들에게, “내가 누구를 풀어 주기를 원하오? 예수 바라빠요 아니면 메시아라고 하는 예수요?” 하고 물었다.","빌라도는 모여든 군중에게 \"누구를 놓아주면 좋겠느냐? 3)바라빠라는 예수냐? 그리스도라는 예수냐?\" 하고 물었다. 어떤 사본에는 \"바라빠\"라고만 되어 있다.","그들이 모였을 때에 빌라도가 물어 이르되 너희는 내가 누구를 너희에게 놓아 주기를 원하느냐 바라바냐 그리스도라 하는 예수냐 하니","저희가 모였을 때에 빌라도가 물어 가로되 너희는 내가 누구를 너희에게 놓아 주기를 원하느냐 바라바냐 그리스도라 하는 예수냐 하니","빌라도는 명절날 아침 관저 앞에 모여든 군중에게 물었다. \"내가 누구를 놓아 주기 바라는가? 바라바인가? 아니면 그리스도라 하는 예수인가?\"","So when they had assembled, Pilate said to them, “Which one do you want me to release to you, [Jesus] Barabbas, or Jesus called Messiah?”","Therefore when they were gathered together, Pilate said unto them, Whom will ye that I release unto you? Barabbas, or Jesus which is called Christ?","So when the crowd had gathered, Pilate asked them, \"Which one do you want me to release to you: Barabbas, or Jesus who is called Christ?\"","Congregatis ergo illis dixit Pilatus:  “Quem vultis dimittam vobis: Barabbam an Iesum, qui dicitur Christus? “.","ויהי כאשר נקהלו ויאמר אליהם פילטוס את מי תחפצו כי אפטר לכם את בר אבא או את ישוע הנקרא בשם משיח׃"],["47","27","18","그는 그들이 예수님을 시기하여 자기에게 넘겼음을 알고 있었던 것이다.","빌라도는 예수가 군중에게 끌려온 것이 그들의 시기 때문임을 잘 알고 있었다.","이는 그가 그들의 시기로 예수를 넘겨 준 줄 앎이더라","이는 저가 그들의 시기로 예수를 넘겨준줄 앎이러라","빌라도는 백성 사이에 예수를 존경하는 자가 많아지자 유대 지도자들이 시기하여 예수를 붙잡아 온 것임을 잘 알고 이렇게 물은 것이었다.","For he knew that it was out of envy that they had handed him over.","For he knew that for envy they had delivered him.","For he knew it was out of envy that they had handed Jesus over to him.","Sciebat enim quod per invidiam tradidissent eum.","כי ידע אשר רק מקנאה מסרו אתו׃"],["47","27","19","빌라도가 재판석에 앉아 있는데 그의 아내가 사람을 보내어, “당신은 그 의인의 일에 관여하지 마세요. 지난밤 꿈에 내가 그 사람 때문에 큰 괴로움을 당했어요.” 하고 말하였다.","빌라도가 재판을 하고 있을 때에 그의 아내가 전갈을 보내어 \"당신은 그 무죄한 사람의 일에 관여하지 마십시오. 간밤에 저는 그 사람의 일로 꿈자리가 몹시 사나웠습니다.\" 하고 당부하였다.","총독이 재판석에 앉았을 때에 그의 아내가 사람을 보내어 이르되 저 옳은 사람에게 아무 상관도 하지 마옵소서 오늘 꿈에 내가 그 사람으로 인하여 애를 많이 태웠나이다 하더라","총독이 재판 자리에 앉았을 때에 그 아내가 사람을 보내어 가로되 저 옳은 사람에게 아무 상관도 하지 마옵소서 오늘 꿈에 내가 그 사람을 인하여 애를 많이 썼나이다 하더라","빌라도가 재판을 하고 있을 때 빌라도의 아내가 전갈을 보내어 \"당신은 그 무고한 사람의 일에 상관하지 마십시오. 간밤에 그 사람의 일로 꿈자리가 몹시 사나웠습니다\" 하고 당부하였다.","While he was still seated on the bench, his wife sent him a message, “Have nothing to do with that righteous man. I suffered much in a dream today because of him.”","When he was set down on the judgment seat, his wife sent unto him, saying, Have thou nothing to do with that just man: for I have suffered many things this day in a dream because of him.","While Pilate was sitting on the judge's seat, his wife sent him this message: \"Don't have anything to do with that innocent man, for I have suffered a great deal today in a dream because of him.\"","Sedente autem illo pro tribunali, misit ad illum uxor eius dicens:  “Nihil tibi et iusto illi. Multa enim passa sum hodie per visum propter eum “.","ויהי כשבתו על כסא הדין ותשלח אליו אשתו לאמר אל יהי לך דבר עם הצדיק הזה כי בעבורו עניתי הרבה היום בחלום׃"],["47","27","20","그동안 수석 사제들과 원로들은 군중을 구슬려 바라빠를 풀어 주도록 요청하고 예수님은 없애 버리자고 하였다.","그 동안 대사제들과 원로들은 군중을 선동하여 바라빠를 놓아주고 예수는 죽여달라고 요구하게 하였다.","대제사장들과 장로들이 무리를 권하여 바라바를 달라 하게 하고 예수를 죽이자 하게 하였더니","대제사장들과 장로들이 무리를 권하여 바라바를 달라 하게 하고 예수를 멸하자 하게 하였더니","한편 대제사장들과 유대 지도자들은 군중을 충동하여 바라바를 놓아 주고 예수는 죽이라고 청하게 하였다.","The chief priests and the elders persuaded the crowds to ask for Barabbas but to destroy Jesus.","But the chief priests and elders persuaded the multitude that they should ask Barabbas, and destroy Jesus.","But the chief priests and the elders persuaded the crowd to ask for Barabbas and to have Jesus executed.","Principes autem sacerdotum et seniores persuaserunt turbis, ut peterent Barabbam, Iesum vero perderent.","והכהנים הגדולים והזקנים פתו את המון העם לשאל להם את בר אבא ולאבד את ישוע׃"],["47","27","21","총독이 그들에게 “두 사람 가운데에서 누구를 풀어 주기를 바라는 것이오?” 하고 물었다. 그들은 “바라빠요.” 하고 대답하였다.","총독이 \"이 두 사람 중에서 누구를 놓아달라는 말이냐?\" 하고 묻자 그들은 \"바라빠요.\" 하고 소리질렀다.","총독이 대답하여 이르되 둘 중의 누구를 너희에게 놓아 주기를 원하느냐 이르되 바라바로소이다","총독이 대답하여 가로되 둘 중에 누구를 너희에게 놓아 주기를 원하느냐 가로되 바라바로소이다","그래서 총독이 다시 \"이 두 사람 중에서 누구를 놓아 주기 바라는가?\" 하고 묻자 군중은 소리를 지르며 \"바라바입니다!\" 하고 대답하였다.","The governor said to them in reply, “Which of the two do you want me to release to you?” They answered, “Barabbas!”","The governor answered and said unto them, Whether of the twain will ye that I release unto you? They said, Barabbas.","\"Which of the two do you want me to release to you?\" asked the governor. \"Barabbas,\" they answered.","Respondens autem praeses ait illis:  “Quem vultis vobis de duobus dimittam? “. At illi dixerunt:  “Barabbam! “.","ויען ההגמון ויאמר אליהם את מי משניהם תחפצו כי אפטר לכם ויאמרו את בר אבא׃"],["47","27","22","빌라도가 그들에게 “그러면 메시아라고 하는 이 예수는 어떻게 하라는 말이오?” 하니, 그들은 모두 “십자가에 못 박으시오!” 하였다.","그래서 \"그리스도라는 예수는 어떻게 하면 좋겠느냐?\" 하자 모두들 \"십자가에 못박으시오!\" 하고 소리질렀다.","빌라도가 이르되 그러면 그리스도라 하는 예수를 내가 어떻게 하랴 그들이 다 이르되 십자가에 못 박혀야 하겠나이다","빌라도가 가로되 그러면 그리스도라 하는 예수를 내가 어떻게 하랴 저희가 다 가로되 십자가에 못 박혀야 하겠나이다","빌라도가 다시 물었다. \"그러면 당신들의 그리스도라 하는 예수는 어떻게 해야 하는가?\" 군중은 입을 모아 소리를 질렀다. \"십자가에 못박으시오!\"","Pilate said to them, “Then what shall I do with Jesus called Messiah?” They all said, “Let him be crucified!”","Pilate saith unto them, What shall I do then with Jesus which is called Christ? They all say unto him, Let him be crucified.","\"What shall I do, then, with Jesus who is called Christ?\" Pilate asked. They all answered, \"Crucify him!\"","Dicit illis Pilatus:  “Quid igitur faciam de Iesu, qui dicitur Christus? “. Dicunt omnes:  “Crucifigatur! “.","ויאמר אליהם פילטוס ומה אעשה לישוע הנקרא בשם משיח ויענו כלם יצלב׃"],["47","27","23","빌라도가 다시 “도대체 그가 무슨 나쁜 짓을 하였다는 말이오?” 하자, 그들은 더욱 큰 소리로 “십자가에 못 박으시오!” 하고 외쳤다.","빌라도가 \"도대체 그 사람의 잘못이 무엇이냐?\" 하고 물었으나 사람들은 더 악을 써 가며 \"십자가에 못박으시오!\" 하고 외쳤다.","빌라도가 이르되 어찜이냐 무슨 악한 일을 하였느냐 그들이 더욱 소리 질러 이르되 십자가에 못 박혀야 하겠나이다 하는지라","빌라도가 가로되 어찜이뇨 무슨 악한 일을 하였느냐 저희가 더욱 소리질러 가로되 십자가에 못 박혀야 하겠나이다 하는지라","\"그의 죄목이 무엇인가?\" 하고 빌라도가 묻자 그들은 더욱 크게 \"십자가에 못박으시오! 십자가에 못박으시오!\" 하고 소리를 질렀다.","But he said, “Why? What evil has he done?” They only shouted the louder, “Let him be crucified!”","And the governor said, Why, what evil hath he done? But they cried out the more, saying, Let him be crucified.","\"Why? What crime has he committed?\" asked Pilate. But they shouted all the louder, \"Crucify him!\"","Ait autem:  “Quid enim mali fecit? “. At illi magis clamabant dicentes:  “Crucifigatur! “.","ויאמר ההגמון מה אפוא הרעה אשר עשה ויוסיפו עוד צעק לאמר יצלב׃"],["47","27","24","빌라도는 더 이상 어찌할 수가 없을 뿐만 아니라 오히려 폭동이 일어나려는 것을 보고, 물을 받아 군중 앞에서 손을 씻으며 말하였다. “나는 이 사람의 피에 책임이 없소. 이것은 여러분의 일이오.”","빌라도는 그 이상 더 말해 보아야 아무런 소용도 없다는 것을 알았을 뿐만 아니라 오히려 폭동이 일어나려는 기세가 보였으므로 물을 가져다가 군중 앞에서 손을 씻으며 \"너희가 맡아서 처리하여라. 나는 이 사람의 피에 대해서는 책임이 없다.\" 하고 말하였다.","빌라도가 아무 성과도 없이 도리어 민란이 나려는 것을 보고 물을 가져다가 무리 앞에서 손을 씻으며 이르되 이 사람의 피에 대하여 나는 무죄하니 너희가 당하라","빌라도가 아무 효험도 없이 도리어 민란이 나려는 것을 보고 물을 가져다가 무리 앞에서 손을 씻으며 가로되 1)이 사람의 피에 대하여 나는 무죄하니 너희가 당하라 어떤 사본에, 이 옳은 사람의","빌라도는 더 이상 계속해야 소용도 없고 폭동으로 번질 것 같아서 그릇에 물을 떠오게 하여 군중 앞에서 손을 씻으며 말하였다. \"나는 이 사람의 피에 대해서 책임이 없소. 책임은 당신들이 지시오.\"","When Pilate saw that he was not succeeding at all, but that a riot was breaking out instead, he took water and washed his hands in the sight of the crowd, saying, “I am innocent of this man’s blood. Look to it yourselves.”","When Pilate saw that he could prevail nothing, but that rather a tumult was made, he took water, and washed his hands before the multitude, saying, I am innocent of the blood of this just person: see ye to it.","When Pilate saw that he was getting nowhere, but that instead an uproar was starting, he took water and washed his hands in front of the crowd. \"I am innocent of this man's blood,\" he said. \"It is your responsibility!\"","Videns autem Pilatus quia nihil proficeret, sed magis tumultus fieret, accepta aqua, lavit manus coram turba dicens:  “Innocens ego sum a sanguine hoc; vos videritis! “.","ויהי כראות פילטוס כי לא יועיל מאומה ורבתה עוד המהודה ויקח מים וירחץ את ידיו לעיני העם ויאמר נקי אנכי מדם הצדיק הזה אתם תראו׃"],["47","27","25","그러자 온 백성이 “그 사람의 피에 대한 책임은 우리와 우리 자손들이 질 것이오.” 하고 대답하였다.","군중은 \"그 사람의 피에 대한 책임은 우리와 우리 자손들이 지겠습니다.\" 하고 소리쳤다.","백성이 다 대답하여 이르되 그 피를 우리와 우리 자손에게 돌릴지어다 하거늘","백성이 다 대답하여 가로되 그 피를 우리와 우리 자손에게 돌릴찌어다 하거늘","군중은 \"그 사람의 피에 대한 책임은 우리와 우리 자손들이 지겠습니다\" 하고 소리 질렀다.","And the whole people said in reply, “His blood be upon us and upon our children.”","Then answered all the people, and said, His blood be on us, and on our children.","All the people answered, \"Let his blood be on us and on our children!\"","Et respondens universus populus dixit:  “Sanguis eius super nos et super filios nostros “.","ויענו כל העם ויאמרו דמו עלינו ועל בנינו׃"],["47","27","26","그래서 빌라도는 바라빠를 풀어 주고 예수님을 채찍질하게 한 다음 십자가에 못 박으라고 넘겨주었다.","그래서 빌라도는 바라빠를 놓아주고 예수는 채찍질하게 한 다음, 십자가형에 처하라고 내어주었다.","이에 바라바는 그들에게 놓아 주고 예수는 채찍질하고 십자가에 못 박히게 넘겨 주니라","이에 바라바는 저희에게 놓아주고 예수는 채찍질하고 십자가에 못 박히게 넘겨주니라","빌라도는 바라바를 놓아 주었다. 그리고 예수는 채찍으로 때려 십자가에 못박으라고 내주었다.","Then he released Barabbas to them, but after he had Jesus scourged, he handed him over to be crucified.","Then released he Barabbas unto them: and when he had scourged Jesus, he delivered him to be crucified.","Then he released Barabbas to them. But he had Jesus flogged, and handed him over to be crucified.","Tunc dimisit illis Barabbam; Iesum autem flagellatum tradidit, ut crucifigeretur.","אז פטר להם את בר אבא ואת ישוע הכה בשוטים וימסר אותו להצלב׃"],["47","27","27","그때에 총독의 군사들이 예수님을 총독 관저로 데리고 가서 그분 둘레에 온 부대를 집합시킨 다음,","총독의 병사들이 예수를 총독 관저로 끌고 들어가서 전 부대원을 불러모아 예수를 에워쌌다.","이에 총독의 군병들이 예수를 데리고 관정 안으로 들어가서 온 군대를 그에게로 모으고","이에 총독의 군병들이 예수를 데리고 관정 안으로 들어가서 온 군대를 그에게로 모으고","총독의 병사들은 예수를 총독 관저로 끌고 들어가서 온 부대원을 그 앞에 소집시켰다.","Then the soldiers of the governor took Jesus inside the praetorium and gathered the whole cohort around him.","Then the soldiers of the governor took Jesus into the common hall, and gathered unto him the whole band of soldiers.","Then the governor's soldiers took Jesus into the Praetorium and gathered the whole company of soldiers around him.","Tunc milites praesidis suscipientes Iesum in praetorio congregaverunt ad eum universam cohortem.","ויקחו אנשי הצבא אשר להגמון את ישוע ויביאהו אל בית המשפט ויאספו עליו את כל הגדוד׃"],["47","27","28","그분의 옷을 벗기고 진홍색 외투를 입혔다.","그리고 예수의 옷을 벗기고 대신 주홍색 옷을 입힌 뒤","그의 옷을 벗기고 홍포를 입히며","그의 옷을 벗기고 홍포를 입히며","그리고 예수의 옷을 벗기고 주홍색 옷을 입힌 다음","They stripped off his clothes and threw a scarlet military cloak about him.","And they stripped him, and put on him a scarlet robe.","They stripped him and put a scarlet robe on him,","Et exuentes eum, clamydem coccineam circumdederunt ei","ויפשיטו אותו את בגדיו ויעטפהו מעיל שני׃"],["47","27","29","그리고 가시나무로 관을 엮어 그분 머리에 씌우고 오른손에 갈대를 들리고서는, 그분 앞에 무릎을 꿇고 “유다인들의 임금님, 만세!” 하며 조롱하였다.","가시로 왕관을 엮어 머리에 씌우고 오른손에 갈대를 들린 다음 그 앞에 무릎을 꿇고 \"유다인의 왕 만세!\" 하고 떠들며 조롱하였다.","가시관을 엮어 그 머리에 씌우고 갈대를 그 오른손에 들리고 그 앞에서 무릎을 꿇고 희롱하여 이르되 유대인의 왕이여 평안할지어다 하며","가시 면류관을 엮어 그 머리에 씌우고 갈대를 그 오른손에 들리고 그 앞에서 무릎을 꿇고 희롱하여 가로되 유대인의 왕이여 평안할찌어다 하며","가시로 왕관을 만들어 예수의 머리에 씌우고, 갈대 하나를 홀처럼 오른손에 들리고는 그 앞에 무릎을 꿇고 \"유대인의 왕 만세!\" 하고 고함을 치며 조롱하였다.","Weaving a crown out of thorns, they placed it on his head, and a reed in his right hand. And kneeling before him, they mocked him, saying, “Hail, King of the Jews!”","And when they had platted a crown of thorns, they put it upon his head, and a reed in his right hand: and they bowed the knee before him, and mocked him, saying, Hail, King of the Jews!","and then twisted together a crown of thorns and set it on his head. They put a staff in his right hand and knelt in front of him and mocked him. \"Hail, king of the Jews!\" they said.","et plectentes coronam de spinis posuerunt super caput eius et arundinem in dextera eius et, genu flexo ante eum, illudebant ei dicentes:  “Ave, rex Iudaeorum! “.","וישרגו קצים ויעשו עטרת וישימו על ראשו וקנה בימינו ויכרעו לפניו ויתלוצצו בו לאמר שלום לך מלך היהודים׃"],["47","27","30","또 그분께 침을 뱉고 갈대를 빼앗아 그분의 머리를 때렸다.","그리고 그에게 침을 뱉으며 갈대를 빼앗아 머리를 때렸다.","그에게 침 뱉고 갈대를 빼앗아 그의 머리를 치더라","그에게 침 뱉고 갈대를 빼앗아 그의 머리를 치더라","그들은 또 예수에게 침을 뱉고 갈대를 빼앗아 머리를 때렸다.","They spat upon him and took the reed and kept striking him on the head.","And they spit upon him, and took the reed, and smote him on the head.","They spit on him, and took the staff and struck him on the head again and again.","Et exspuentes in eum acceperunt arundinem et percutiebant caput eius.",null],["47","27","31","그렇게 예수님을 조롱하고 나서 외투를 벗기고 그분의 겉옷을 입혔다. 그리고 예수님을 십자가에 못 박으러 끌고 나갔다.","이렇게 희롱하고 나서 그 겉옷을 벗기고 예수의 옷을 도로 입혀 십자가에 못박으러 끌고 나갔다.","희롱을 다 한 후 홍포를 벗기고 도로 그의 옷을 입혀 십자가에 못 박으려고 끌고 나가니라","희롱을 다한 후 홍포를 벗기고 도로 그의 옷을 입혀 십자가에 못 박으려고 끌고 나가니라","이렇게 조롱한 후에 주홍색 옷을 벗기고 예수의 옷을 다시 입혀서 십자가에 못박으려고 끌고 나갔다.","And when they had mocked him, they stripped him of the cloak, dressed him in his own clothes, and led him off to crucify him.","And after that they had mocked him, they took the robe off from him, and put his own raiment on him, and led him away to crucify him.","After they had mocked him, they took off the robe and put his own clothes on him. Then they led him away to crucify him.","Et postquam illuserunt ei, exuerunt eum clamyde et induerunt eum vestimentis eius et duxerunt eum, ut crucifigerent.",null],["47","27","32","그들은 나가다가 시몬이라는 키레네 사람을 보고 강제로 예수님의 십자가를 지게 하였다.","그들이 나가다가 시몬이라는 키레네 사람을 만나자 그를 붙들어 억지로 예수의 십자가를 지고 가게 하였다.","나가다가 시몬이란 구레네 사람을 만나매 그에게 예수의 십자가를 억지로 지워 가게 하였더라","나가다가 시몬이란 구레네 사람을 만나매 그를 억지로 같이 가게 하여 예수의 십자가를 지웠더라","그들은 사형 집행장으로 가는 길에 구레네 사람 시몬을 만나자 그에게 억지로 예수의 십자가를 지고 가게 하였다.","As they were going out, they met a Cyrenian named Simon; this man they pressed into service to carry his cross.","And as they came out, they found a man of Cyrene, Simon by name: him they compelled to bear his cross.","As they were going out, they met a man from Cyrene, named Simon, and they forced him to carry the cross.","Exeuntes autem invenerunt hominem Cyrenaeum nomine Simonem; hunc angariaverunt, ut tolleret crucem eius.",null],["47","27","33","이윽고 골고타 곧 ‘해골 터’라는 곳에 이르렀다.","그리고 골고타 곧 해골산이라는 데에 이르렀을 때에","골고다 즉 해골의 곳이라는 곳에 이르러","골고다 즉 해골의 곳이라는 곳에 이르러","병사들은 \"해골산\"이란 뜻의 골고다에 닿자","And when they came to a place called Golgotha (which means Place of the Skull),","And when they were come unto a place called Golgotha, that is to say, a place of a skull,","They came to a place called Golgotha (which means The Place of the Skull).","Et venerunt in locum, qui dicitur Golgotha, quod est Calvariae locus,",null],["47","27","34","그들이 쓸개즙을 섞은 포도주를 예수님께 마시라고 건넸지만, 그분께서는 맛을 보시고서는 마시려고 하지 않으셨다.","그들은 예수께 쓸개를 탄 포도주를 마시라고 주었으나 예수께서는 맛만 보시고 마시려 하지 않으셨다.","쓸개 탄 포도주를 예수께 주어 마시게 하려 하였더니 예수께서 맛보시고 마시고자 하지 아니하시더라","쓸개 탄 포도주를 예수께 주어 마시게 하려 하였더니 예수께서 맛보시고 마시고자 아니하시더라","쓸개를 탄 포도주를 예수께 마시라고 주었다. 그러나 예수께서는 그것을 맛보고 마시기를 거절하셨다.","they gave Jesus wine to drink mixed with gall. But when he had tasted it, he refused to drink.","They gave him vinegar to drink mingled with gall: and when he had tasted thereof, he would not drink.","There they offered Jesus wine to drink, mixed with gall; but after tasting it, he refused to drink it.","et dederunt ei vinum bibere cum felle mixtum; et cum gustasset, noluit bibere.",null],["47","27","35","그들은 예수님을 십자가에 못 박고 나서 제비를 뽑아 그분의 겉옷을 나누어 가진 다음,","그들은 예수를 십자가에 못박고 나서 4)주사위를 던져 예수의 옷을 나누어 갖고 시편 22:18.","그들이 예수를 십자가에 못 박은 후에 그 옷을 제비 뽑아 나누고","저희가 예수를 십자가에 못 박은 후에 그 옷을 제비 뽑아 나누고","병사들은 예수를 십자가에 못박았다. 그러고 나서 주사위를 던져 ㄱ) 예수의 옷을 나누어 가진 다음 (ㄱ. 시22:18)","After they had crucified him, they divided his garments by casting lots;","And they crucified him, and parted his garments, casting lots: that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the prophet, They parted my garments among them, and upon my vesture did they cast lots.","When they had crucified him, they divided up his clothes by casting lots.","Postquam autem crucifixerunt eum, diviserunt vestimenta eius sortem mittentes",null],["47","27","36","거기에 앉아 예수님을 지켰다.","거기 앉아 예수를 지키고 있었다.","거기 앉아 지키더라","거기 앉아 지키더라","거기 앉아 십자가에 달린 예수를 지키고 있었다.","then they sat down and kept watch over him there.","And sitting down they watched him there;","And sitting down, they kept watch over him there.","et sedentes servabant eum ibi.",null],["47","27","37","그들은 또 그분의 머리 위에 죄명을 붙여 놓았다. 거기에는 ‘이자는 유다인들의 임금 예수다.’라고 쓰여 있었다.","그리고 예수의 머리 위에 죄목을 적어 붙였는데 거기에는 \"유다인의 왕 예수\"라고 적혀 있었다.","그 머리 위에 이는 유대인의 왕 예수라 쓴 죄패를 붙였더라","그 머리 위에 이는 유대인의 왕 예수라 쓴 죄패를 붙였더라","예수의 머리 위에는 \"유대인의 왕 예수\"라는 죄패가 붙어 있었다.","And they placed over his head the written charge against him: This is Jesus, the King of the Jews.","And set up over his head his accusation written, THIS IS JESUS THE KING OF THE JEWS.","Above his head they placed the written charge against him: THIS IS JESUS, THE KING OF THE JEWS.","Et imposuerunt super caput eius causam ipsius scriptam:  “Hic est Iesus Rex Iudaeorum “.",null],["47","27","38","그때에 강도 두 사람도 예수님과 함께 십자가에 못 박혔는데, 하나는 오른쪽에 하나는 왼쪽에 못 박혔다.","그 때에 강도 두 사람도 예수와 함께 십자가형을 받았는데 그 하나는 예수의 오른편에, 다른 하나는 왼편에 달렸다.","이 때에 예수와 함께 강도 둘이 십자가에 못 박히니 하나는 우편에, 하나는 좌편에 있더라","이때에 예수와 함께 강도 둘이 십자가에 못 박히니 하나는 우편에, 하나는 좌편에 있더라","그날 아침에는 강도 두 사람도 십자가형을 받아 예수의 양편에 달렸다.","Two revolutionaries were crucified with him, one on his right and the other on his left.","Then were there two thieves crucified with him, one on the right hand, and another on the left.","Two robbers were crucified with him, one on his right and one on his left.","Tunc crucifiguntur cum eo duo latrones: unus a dextris, et unus a sinistris.",null],["47","27","39","지나가던 자들이 머리를 흔들어 대며 예수님을 모독하면서","지나가던 사람들이 머리를 흔들며","지나가는 자들은 자기 머리를 흔들며 예수를 모욕하여","지나가는 자들은 자기 머리를 흔들며 예수를 모욕하여","지나가던 사람들이 예수께 욕을 퍼붓고 고개를 흔들며 말하였다.","Those passing by reviled him, shaking their heads","And they that passed by reviled him, wagging their heads,","Those who passed by hurled insults at him, shaking their heads","Praetereuntes autem blasphemabant eum moventes capita sua",null],["47","27","40","이렇게 말하였다. “성전을 허물고 사흘 안에 다시 짓겠다는 자야, 너 자신이나 구해 보아라. 네가 하느님의 아들이라면 십자가에서 내려와 보아라.”","\"성전을 헐고 사흘이면 다시 짓는다던 자야, 네 목숨이나 건져라. 네가 정말 하느님의 아들이거든, 어서 십자가에서 내려와 보아라.\" 하며 모욕하였다.","이르되 성전을 헐고 사흘에 짓는 자여 네가 만일 하나님의 아들이어든 자기를 구원하고 십자가에서 내려오라 하며","가로되 성전을 헐고 사흘에 짓는 자여 네가 만일 하나님의 아들이어든 자기를 구원하고 십자가에서 내려오라 하며","\"그래, 네가 성전을 헐고 사흘 만에 다시 짓겠다고 하였지? 자, 네가 정말 하나님의 아들이거든 어서 네 자신이나 구원하고 그 십자가에서 내려와 보시지.\"","and saying, “You who would destroy the temple and rebuild it in three days, save yourself, if you are the Son of God, [and] come down from the cross!”","And saying, Thou that destroyest the temple, and buildest it in three days, save thyself. If thou be the Son of God, come down from the cross.","and saying, \"You who are going to destroy the temple and build it in three days, save yourself! Come down from the cross, if you are the Son of God!\"","et dicentes:  “Qui destruis templum et in triduo illud reaedificas, salva temetipsum; si Filius Dei es, descende de cruce! “.",null],["47","27","41","수석 사제들도 이런 식으로 율법 학자들과 원로들과 함께 조롱하며 말하였다.","같은 모양으로 대사제들과 율법학자들과 원로들도","그와 같이 대제사장들도 서기관들과 장로들과 함께 희롱하여 이르되","그와 같이 대제사장들도 서기관들과 장로들과 함께 희롱하여 가로되","대제사장들과 율법학자들과 유대의 지도자들도 예수를 조롱하고 비웃었다.","Likewise the chief priests with the scribes and elders mocked him and said,","Likewise also the chief priests mocking him, with the scribes and elders, said,","In the same way the chief priests, the teachers of the law and the elders mocked him.","Similiter et principes sacerdotum illudentes cum scribis et senioribus dicebant:",null],["47","27","42","“다른 이들은 구원하였으면서 자신은 구원하지 못하는군. 이스라엘의 임금님이시면 지금 십자가에서 내려와 보시지. 그러면 우리가 믿을 터인데.","\"남은 살리면서 자기는 못 살리는구나. 저 사람이 이스라엘의 왕이래. 십자가에서 한번 내려와 보시지. 그러면 우리가 믿고 말고.","그가 남은 구원하였으되 자기는 구원할 수 없도다 그가 이스라엘의 왕이로다 지금 십자가에서 내려올지어다 그리하면 우리가 믿겠노라","저가 남은 구원하였으되 자기는 구원할 수 없도다 저가 이스라엘의 왕이로다 지금 십자가에서 내려올찌어다 그러면 우리가 믿겠노라","\"남은 구원한다면서 자신은 구원하지 못하는군! 그래, 유대인의 왕이라고? 십자가에서 내려와 보시지. 그럼 우리가 믿겠다!","“He saved others; he cannot save himself. So he is the king of Israel! Let him come down from the cross now, and we will believe in him.","He saved others; himself he cannot save. If he be the King of Israel, let him now come down from the cross, and we will believe him.","\"He saved others,\" they said, \"but he can't save himself! He's the King of Israel! Let him come down now from the cross, and we will believe in him.","Alios salvos fecit, seipsum non potest salvum facere. Rex Israel est; descendat nunc de cruce, et credemus in eum.",null],["47","27","43","하느님을 신뢰한다고 하니, 하느님께서 저자가 마음에 드시면 지금 구해 내 보시라지. ‘나는 하느님의 아들이다.’ 하였으니 말이야.”","저 사람이 하느님을 믿고 또 제가 하느님의 아들입네 했으니 하느님이 원하시면 어디 살려보시라지.\" 하며 조롱하였다.","그가 하나님을 신뢰하니 하나님이 원하시면 이제 그를 구원하실지라 그의 말이 나는 하나님의 아들이라 하였도다 하며","저가 하나님을 신뢰하니 하나님이 저를 기뻐하시면 이제 구원하실찌라 제 말이 나는 하나님의 아들이라 하였도다 하며","하나님을 믿고 있다니 하나님께 풀어 놓아 그 증거를 보여주시라고 해. \"내가 하나님의 아들\"이라고 큰소리를 치지 않았는가 말이야.\"","He trusted in God; let him deliver him now if he wants him. For he said, ‘I am the Son of God.’”","He trusted in God; let him deliver him now, if he will have him: for he said, I am the Son of God.","He trusts in God. Let God rescue him now if he wants him, for he said, 'I am the Son of God.'\"","Confidit in Deo; liberet nunc, si vult eum. Dixit enim:  “Dei Filius sum “ “.",null],["47","27","44","예수님과 함께 십자가에 못 박힌 강도들도 마찬가지로 그분께 비아냥거렸다.","예수와 함께 십자가에 달린 강도들도 예수를 모욕하였다.","함께 십자가에 못 박힌 강도들도 이와 같이 욕하더라","함께 십자가에 못 박힌 강도들도 이와 같이 욕하더라","함께 십자가에 못박힌 두 강도도 마찬가지로 예수를 모욕하였다.","The revolutionaries who were crucified with him also kept abusing him in the same way.","The thieves also, which were crucified with him, cast the same in his teeth.","In the same way the robbers who were crucified with him also heaped insults on him.","Idipsum autem et latrones, qui crucifixi erant cum eo, improperabant ei.",null],["47","27","45","낮 열두 시부터 어둠이 온 땅에 덮여 오후 세 시까지 계속되었다.","낮 열두 시부터 온 땅이 어둠에 덮여 오후 세 시까지 계속되었다.","제육시로부터 온 땅에 어둠이 임하여 제구시까지 계속되더니","제 육시로부터 온 땅에 어두움이 임하여 제 구시까지 계속하더니","그날 낮 12시부터 어둠이 온 땅을 덮더니 오후 3시까지 세 시간 동안 계속되었다.","From noon onward, darkness came over the whole land until three in the afternoon.","Now from the sixth hour there was darkness over all the land unto the ninth hour.","From the sixth hour until the ninth hour darkness came over all the land.","A sexta autem hora tenebrae factae sunt super universam terram usque ad horam nonam.",null],["47","27","46","오후 세 시쯤에 예수님께서 큰 소리로, “엘리 엘리 레마 사박타니?” 하고 부르짖으셨다. 이는 “저의 하느님, 저의 하느님, 어찌하여 저를 버리셨습니까?”라는 뜻이다.","세 시쯤 되어 예수께서 큰소리로 \"5)엘리 엘리 레마 사박타니?\" 하고 부르짖으셨다. 이 말씀은 \"나의 하느님, 나의 하느님, 어찌하여 나를 버리셨나이까?\"라는 뜻이다. 시편 22:1.","제구시쯤에 예수께서 크게 소리 질러 이르시되 ㄴ)엘리 엘리 라마 사박다니 하시니 이는 곧 나의 하나님, 나의 하나님, 어찌하여 나를 버리셨나이까 하는 뜻이라","제 구시 즈음에 예수께서 크게 소리질러 가라사대 ㄴ)엘리 엘리 라마 사박다니 하시니 이는 곧 나의 하나님, 나의 하나님, 어찌하여 나를 버리셨나이까 하는 뜻이라 시 22:1","3시쯤 되어 예수께서 큰소리로 ㄱ) \"엘리 엘리 라마 사박다니!\" 하고 부르짖으셨다. 이 말씀은 \"나의 하나님, 나의 하나님, 어찌하여 나를 버리셨나이까!\"라는 뜻이다. (ㄱ. 시22:1)","And about three o’clock Jesus cried out in a loud voice, “Eli, Eli, lema sabachthani?” which means, “My God, my God, why have you forsaken me?”","And about the ninth hour Jesus cried with a loud voice, saying, Eli, Eli, lama sabachthani? that is to say, My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?","About the ninth hour Jesus cried out in a loud voice, \"Eloi, Eloi, lama sabachthani?\"--which means, \"My God, my God, why have you forsaken me?\"","Et circa horam nonam clamavit Iesus voce magna dicens:  “Eli, Eli, lema sabacthani? “, hoc est:  “Deus meus, Deus meus, ut quid dereliquisti me? “.",null],["47","27","47","그곳에 서 있던 자들 가운데 몇이 이 말씀을 듣고, “이자가 엘리야를 부르네.” 하고 말하였다.","거기에 서 있던 몇 사람이 이 말을 듣고 \"저 사람이 엘리야를 부르고 있다.\" 하고 말하였다.","거기 섰던 자 중 어떤 이들이 듣고 이르되 이 사람이 엘리야를 부른다 하고","거기 섰던 자 중 어떤이들이 듣고 가로되 이 사람이 엘리야를 부른다 하고","거기 서 있던 사람들은 이 말씀을 잘못 알아듣고 엘리야를 부르고 있다고 생각하였다.","Some of the bystanders who heard it said, “This one is calling for Elijah.”","Some of them that stood there, when they heard that, said, This man calleth for Elias.","When some of those standing there heard this, they said, \"He's calling Elijah.\"","Quidam autem ex illic stantibus audientes dicebant:  “Eliam vocat iste “.",null],["47","27","48","그러자 그들 가운데 한 사람이 곧 달려가서 해면을 가져와 신 포도주에 듬뿍 적신 다음, 갈대에 꽂아 그분께 마시게 하였다.","그리고 그 중의 한 사람은 곧 달려가 해면을 6)신 포도주에 적시어 갈대 끝에 꽂아 예수께 목을 축이라고 주었다. 시편 69:21.","그 중의 한 사람이 곧 달려가서 해면을 가져다가 신 포도주에 적시어 갈대에 꿰어 마시게 하거늘","그 중에 한 사람이 곧 달려가서 해융을 가지고 신 포도주를 머금게 하여 갈대에 꿰어 마시우거늘","그들 중의 한사람이 달려가서 신 포도주에 적신 ㄴ) 해면을 갈대 끝에 꿰어 목을 축이라고 예수께 주었다. (ㄴ. 시69:21)","Immediately one of them ran to get a sponge; he soaked it in wine, and putting it on a reed, gave it to him to drink.","And straightway one of them ran, and took a spunge, and filled it with vinegar, and put it on a reed, and gave him to drink.","Immediately one of them ran and got a sponge. He filled it with wine vinegar, put it on a stick, and offered it to Jesus to drink.","Et continuo currens unus ex eis acceptam spongiam implevit aceto et imposuit arundini et dabat ei bibere.",null],["47","27","49","그러나 다른 사람들은 “가만, 엘리야가 와서 그를 구해 주나 봅시다.” 하고 말하였다.","그러나 다른 사람들은 \"그만두시오. 엘리야가 와서 그를 구해 주나 봅시다.\" 하고 말하였다.","그 남은 사람들이 이르되 가만 두라 엘리야가 와서 그를 구원하나 보자 하더라","그 남은 사람들이 가로되 가만 두어라 엘리야가 와서 저를 구원하나 보자 하더라2) 어떤 사본에, 49절 끝에 요 19:34과 같은 말이 있음","그러나 다른 사람들은 \"그냥 내버려 두시오. 엘리야가 와서 구해 주나 봅시다\" 하고 말하였다.","But the rest said, “Wait, let us see if Elijah comes to save him.”","The rest said, Let be, let us see whether Elias will come to save him.","The rest said, \"Now leave him alone. Let's see if Elijah comes to save him.\"","Ceteri vero dicebant:  “Sine, videamus an veniat Elias liberans eum “.",null],["47","27","50","예수님께서는 다시 큰 소리로 외치시고 나서 숨을 거두셨다.","예수께서 다시 한 번 큰소리를 지르시고 숨을 거두셨다.","예수께서 다시 크게 소리 지르시고 영혼이 떠나시니라","예수께서 다시 크게 소리지르시고 영혼이 떠나시다","예수께서는 다시 한 번 큰소리를 지르고 숨을 거두셨다.","But Jesus cried out again in a loud voice, and gave up his spirit.","Jesus, when he had cried again with a loud voice, yielded up the ghost.","And when Jesus had cried out again in a loud voice, he gave up his spirit.","Iesus autem iterum clamans voce magna emisit spiritum.",null],["47","27","51","그러자 성전 휘장이 위에서 아래까지 두 갈래로 찢어졌다. 땅이 흔들리고 바위들이 갈라졌다.","바로 그 때에 성전 휘장이 위에서 아래까지 두 폭으로 찢어지고 땅이 흔들리며 바위가 갈라지고","이에 성소 휘장이 위로부터 아래까지 찢어져 둘이 되고 땅이 진동하며 바위가 터지고","이에 성소 휘장이 위로부터 아래까지 찢어져 둘이 되고 땅이 진동하며 바위가 터지고","바로 그때 성전 휘장이 위에서 아래까지 두 폭으로 찢어지고 땅이 흔들리며 바위가 갈라졌다.","And behold, the veil of the sanctuary was torn in two from top to bottom. The earth quaked, rocks were split,","And, behold, the veil of the temple was rent in twain from the top to the bottom; and the earth did quake, and the rocks rent;","At that moment the curtain of the temple was torn in two from top to bottom. The earth shook and the rocks split.","Et ecce velum templi scissum est a summo usque deorsum in duas partes, et terra mota est, et petrae scissae sunt;",null],["47","27","52","무덤이 열리고 잠자던 많은 성도들의 몸이 되살아났다.","무덤이 열리면서 잠들었던 많은 옛 성인들이 다시 살아났다.","무덤들이 열리며 자던 성도의 몸이 많이 일어나되","무덤들이 열리며 자던 성도의 몸이 많이 일어나되","그리고 무덤이 열리면서 잠들었던 많은 옛 성도들이 다시 살아났다.","tombs were opened, and the bodies of many saints who had fallen asleep were raised.","And the graves were opened; and many bodies of the saints which slept arose,","The tombs broke open and the bodies of many holy people who had died were raised to life.","et monumenta aperta sunt, et multa corpora sanctorum, qui dormierant, surrexerunt",null],["47","27","53","예수님께서 다시 살아나신 다음, 그들은 무덤에서 나와 거룩한 도성에 들어가 많은 이들에게 나타났다.","그들은 무덤에서 나와 예수께서 부활하신 뒤에 거룩한 도시에 들어가서 많은 사람에게 나타났다.","예수의 부활 후에 그들이 무덤에서 나와서 거룩한 성에 들어가 많은 사람에게 보이니라","예수의 부활 후에 저희가 무덤에서 나와서 거룩한 성에 들어가 많은 사람에게 보이니라","그들은 예수께서 부활하신 후에 무덤을 떠나 예루살렘으로 들어가서 많은 사람에게 나타났다.","And coming forth from their tombs after his resurrection, they entered the holy city and appeared to many.","And came out of the graves after his resurrection, and went into the holy city, and appeared unto many.","They came out of the tombs, and after Jesus' resurrection they went into the holy city and appeared to many people.","et exeuntes de monumentis post resurrectionem eius venerunt in sanctam civitatem et apparuerunt multis.",null],["47","27","54","백인대장과 또 그와 함께 예수님을 지키던 이들이 지진과 다른 여러 가지 일들을 보고 몹시 두려워하며, “참으로 이분은 하느님의 아드님이셨다.” 하고 말하였다.","백인대장과 또 그와 함께 예수를 지키고 있던 사람들이 지진을 비롯하여 여러 가지 일들이 일어나는 것을 보고 \"이 사람이야말로 정말 하느님의 아들이었구나!\" 하며 몹시 두려워하였다.","백부장과 및 함께 예수를 지키던 자들이 지진과 그 일어난 일들을 보고 심히 두려워하여 이르되 이는 진실로 하나님의 아들이었도다 하더라","백부장과 및 함께 예수를 지키던 자들이 지진과 그 되는 일들을 보고 심히 두려워하여 가로되 이는 진실로 하나님의 아들이었도다 하더라","예수를 십자가에 못박은 병사들과 그들의 백부장이 지진과 일어난 모든 일을 보고 몹시 두려워하며 \"이 사람이 참으로 하나님의 아들이었구나\" 하고 말하였다.","The centurion and the men with him who were keeping watch over Jesus feared greatly when they saw the earthquake and all that was happening, and they said, “Truly, this was the Son of God!”","Now when the centurion, and they that were with him, watching Jesus, saw the earthquake, and those things that were done, they feared greatly, saying, Truly this was the Son of God.","When the centurion and those with him who were guarding Jesus saw the earthquake and all that had happened, they were terrified, and exclaimed, \"Surely he was the Son of God!\"","Centurio autem et, qui cum eo erant custodientes Iesum, viso terrae motu et his, quae fiebant, timuerunt valde dicentes:  “Vere Dei Filius erat iste! “.",null],["47","27","55","거기에는 많은 여자들이 멀리서 지켜보고 있었는데, 그들은 갈릴래아에서부터 예수님을 따르며 시중들던 이들이다.","또 거기에는 멀리서 이 광경을 바라보고 있던 여자들도 많았는데 그들은 갈릴래아에서부터 예수께 시중들며 따라온 여자들이었다.","예수를 섬기며 갈릴리에서부터 따라온 많은 여자가 거기 있어 멀리서 바라보고 있으니","예수를 섬기며 갈릴리에서 부터 좇아온 많은 여자가 거기 있어 멀리서 바라보고 있으니","예수의 시중을 들며 갈릴리에서부터 따라 온 많은 여자들도 먼데서 이 광경을 지켜보고 있었다.","There were many women there, looking on from a distance, who had followed Jesus from Galilee, ministering to him.","And many women were there beholding afar off, which followed Jesus from Galilee, ministering unto him:","Many women were there, watching from a distance. They had followed Jesus from Galilee to care for his needs.","Erant autem ibi mulieres multae a longe aspicientes, quae secutae erant Iesum a Galilaea ministrantes ei;",null],["47","27","56","그들 가운데에는 마리아 막달레나, 야고보와 요셉의 어머니 마리아, 제베대오 아들들의 어머니도 있었다.","그 중에는 막달라 여자 마리아가 있었고 야고보와 요셉의 어머니 마리아와 제베대오의 아들들의 어머니도 있었다.","그 중에는 막달라 마리아와 또 야고보와 요셉의 어머니 마리아와 또 세베대의 아들들의 어머니도 있더라","그 중에 막달라 마리아와 또 야고보와 요셉의 어머니 마리아와 또 세베대의 아들들의 어머니도 있더라","그 중에는 막달라 마리아와, 야고보와 요셉의 어머니 마리아와, 세베대의 아들들인 야고보와 요한의 어머니가 있었다.","Among them were Mary Magdalene and Mary the mother of James and Joseph, and the mother of the sons of Zebedee.","Among which was Mary Magdalene, and Mary the mother of James and Joses, and the mother of Zebedees children.","Among them were Mary Magdalene, Mary the mother of James and Joses, and the mother of Zebedee's sons.","inter quas erat Maria Magdalene et Maria Iacobi et Ioseph mater et mater filiorum Zebedaei.",null],["47","27","57","저녁때가 되자 아리마태아 출신의 부유한 사람으로서 요셉이라는 이가 왔는데, 그도 예수님의 제자였다.","날이 저물었을 때에 아리마태아 사람인 부자 요셉이라는 사람이 왔는데 그도 역시 예수의 제자였다.","저물었을 때에 아리마대의 부자 요셉이라 하는 사람이 왔으니 그도 예수의 제자라","저물었을 때에 아리마대 부자 요셉이라 하는 사람이 왔으니 그도 예수의 제자라","날이 저물자 아리마대 사람인 한 부자가 찾아왔다. 그는 예수를 따르던 요셉이었다.","When it was evening, there came a rich man from Arimathea named Joseph, who was himself a disciple of Jesus.","When the even was come, there came a rich man of Arimathaea, named Joseph, who also himself was Jesus' disciple:","As evening approached, there came a rich man from Arimathea, named Joseph, who had himself become a disciple of Jesus.","Cum sero autem factum esset, venit homo dives ab Arimathaea nomine Ioseph, qui et ipse discipulus erat Iesu.",null],["47","27","58","이 사람이 빌라도에게 가서 예수님의 시신을 내 달라고 청하자, 빌라도가 내주라고 명령하였다.","이 사람이 빌라도에게 가서 예수의 시체를 내어달라고 청하자 빌라도는 쾌히 승낙하여 내어주라고 명령했다.","빌라도에게 가서 예수의 시체를 달라 하니 이에 빌라도가 내주라 명령하거늘","빌라도에게 가서 예수의 시체를 달라 하니 이에 빌라도가 내어주라 분부하거늘","그가 빌라도에게 가서 예수의 시신을 내달라고 청하자 빌라도는 내주라고 명령하였다.","He went to Pilate and asked for the body of Jesus; then Pilate ordered it to be handed over.","He went to Pilate, and begged the body of Jesus. Then Pilate commanded the body to be delivered.","Going to Pilate, he asked for Jesus' body, and Pilate ordered that it be given to him.","Hic accessit ad Pilatum et petiit corpus Iesu. Tunc Pilatus iussit reddi.",null],["47","27","59","요셉은 시신을 받아 깨끗한 아마포로 감싼 다음,","그래서 요셉은 예수의 시체를 가져다가 깨끗한 고운 베로 싸서","요셉이 시체를 가져다가 깨끗한 세마포로 싸서","요셉이 시체를 가져다가 정한 세마포로 싸서","요셉은 예수의 시신을 가져다 깨끗하고 고운 베로 싼후","Taking the body, Joseph wrapped it [in] clean linen","And when Joseph had taken the body, he wrapped it in a clean linen cloth,","Joseph took the body, wrapped it in a clean linen cloth,","Et accepto corpore, Ioseph involvit illud in sindone munda",null],["47","27","60","바위를 깎아 만든 자기의 새 무덤에 모시고 나서, 무덤 입구에 큰 돌을 굴려 막아 놓고 갔다.","바위를 파서 만든 자기의 새 무덤에 모신 다음 큰 돌을 굴려 무덤 입구를 막아놓고 갔다.","바위 속에 판 자기 새 무덤에 넣어 두고 큰 돌을 굴려 무덤 문에 놓고 가니","바위 속에 판 자기 새무덤에 넣어 두고 큰 돌을 굴려 무덤 문에 놓고 가니","바위를 파서 만든 자기의 새 무덤에 모시고 큰 돌을 굴려다가 무덤 입구를 막아 놓고 갔다.","and laid it in his new tomb that he had hewn in the rock. Then he rolled a huge stone across the entrance to the tomb and departed.","And laid it in his own new tomb, which he had hewn out in the rock: and he rolled a great stone to the door of the sepulchre, and departed.","and placed it in his own new tomb that he had cut out of the rock. He rolled a big stone in front of the entrance to the tomb and went away.","et posuit illud in monumento suo novo, quod exciderat in petra, et advolvit saxum magnum ad ostium monumenti et abiit.",null],["47","27","61","거기 무덤 맞은쪽에는 마리아 막달레나와 다른 마리아가 앉아 있었다.","그 때에 무덤 맞은편에는 막달라 여자 마리아와 다른 마리아가 앉아 있었다.","거기 막달라 마리아와 다른 마리아가 무덤을 향하여 앉았더라","거기 막달라 마리아와 다른 마리아가 무덤을 향하여 앉았더라","그때에 무덤 맞은편에는 막달라 마리아와 다른 마리아가 앉아서 지켜 보고 있었다.","But Mary Magdalene and the other Mary remained sitting there, facing the tomb.","And there was Mary Magdalene, and the other Mary, sitting over against the sepulchre.","Mary Magdalene and the other Mary were sitting there opposite the tomb.","Erat autem ibi Maria Magdalene et altera Maria sedentes contra sepulcrum.",null],["47","27","62","이튿날 곧 준비일 다음 날에 수석 사제들과 바리사이들이 함께 빌라도에게 가서","그 날은 명절을 준비하는 날이었다. 그 다음날 대사제들과 바리사이파 사람들은 빌라도에게 몰려와서","그 이튿날은 준비일 다음 날이라 대제사장들과 바리새인들이 함께 빌라도에게 모여 이르되","그 이튿날은 예비일 다음 날이라 대제사장들과 바리새인들이 함께 빌라도에게 모여 가로되","이튿날, 곧 예비일 다음날 대제사장들과 바리새파 사람들이 빌라도에게 몰려가서 말하였다.","The next day, the one following the day of preparation, the chief priests and the Pharisees gathered before Pilate","Now the next day, that followed the day of the preparation, the chief priests and Pharisees came together unto Pilate,","The next day, the one after Preparation Day, the chief priests and the Pharisees went to Pilate.","Altera autem die, quae est post Parascevem, convenerunt principes sacerdotum et pharisaei ad Pilatum",null],["47","27","63","말하였다. “나리, 저 사기꾼이 살아 있을 때, ‘나는 사흘 만에 되살아날 것이다.’ 하고 말한 것을 저희는 기억합니다.","이렇게 말하였다. \"각하, 그 거짓말쟁이가 살아 있을 때에 사흘 만에 자기는 다시 살아난다고 말한 것을 저희가 기억하고 있습니다.","주여 저 속이던 자가 살아 있을 때에 말하되 내가 사흘 후에 다시 살아나리라 한 것을 우리가 기억하노니","주여 저 유혹하던 자가 살았을 때에 말하되 내가 사흘후에 다시 살아나리라 한 것을 우리가 기억하노니","\"각하, 저 거짓말쟁이가 살아 있을 때 \"나는 사흘 만에 다시 살아날 것이다\" 하고 말한 적이 있습니다.","and said, “Sir, we remember that this impostor while still alive said, ‘After three days I will be raised up.’","Saying, Sir, we remember that that deceiver said, while he was yet alive, After three days I will rise again.","\"Sir,\" they said, \"we remember that while he was still alive that deceiver said, 'After three days I will rise again.'","dicentes:  “Domine, recordati sumus quia seductor ille dixit adhuc vivens:  “Post tres dies resurgam “.",null],["47","27","64","그러니 셋째 날까지 무덤을 지키도록 명령하십시오. 그의 제자들이 와서 시체를 훔쳐 내고서는, ‘그분은 죽은 이들 가운데에서 되살아나셨다.’ 하고 말할지도 모릅니다. 그러면 이 마지막 기만이 처음 것보다 더 해로울 것입니다.”","그러니 사흘이 되는 날까지는 그 무덤을 단단히 지키라고 명령하십시오. 혹시 그의 제자들이 와서 시체를 훔쳐다 감추어놓고 백성들에게는 그가 죽었다가 다시 살아났다고 떠들지도 모릅니다. 이렇게 되면 이번 속임수는 처음 것보다 더 심한 혼란을 일으킬 것입니다.\"","그러므로 명령하여 그 무덤을 사흘까지 굳게 지키게 하소서 그의 제자들이 와서 시체를 도둑질하여 가고 백성에게 말하되 그가 죽은 자 가운데서 살아났다 하면 후의 속임이 전보다 더 클까 하나이다 하니","그러므로 분부하여 그 무덤을 사흘까지 굳게 지키게 하소서 그의 제자들이 와서 시체를 도적질하여 가고 백성에게 말하되 그가 죽은 자 가운데서 살아났다 하면 후의 유혹이 전보다 더 될까 하나이다 하니","그러니 각하께서 사흘 동안은 무덤을 단단히 지키도록 명령을 내려 주시기를 청합니다. 혹시 그의 제자들이 시체를 훔쳐가 놓고 백성에게는 다시 살아났다고 떠들어댈지도 모르기 때문입니다. 만일 그렇게 되면 처음보다 더 심한 혼란이 생길 것입니다.\"","Give orders, then, that the grave be secured until the third day, lest his disciples come and steal him and say to the people, ‘He has been raised from the dead.’ This last imposture would be worse than the first.”","Command therefore that the sepulchre be made sure until the third day, lest his disciples come by night, and steal him away, and say unto the people, He is risen from the dead: so the last error shall be worse than the first.","So give the order for the tomb to be made secure until the third day. Otherwise, his disciples may come and steal the body and tell the people that he has been raised from the dead. This last deception will be worse than the first.\"","Iube ergo custodiri sepulcrum usque in diem tertium, ne forte veniant discipuli eius et furentur eum et dicant plebi:  “Surrexit a mortuis “, et erit novissimus error peior priore “.",null],["47","27","65","그러자 빌라도가 그들에게, “당신들에게 경비병들이 있지 않소. 가서 재주껏 지키시오.” 하고 대답하였다.","빌라도는 그들에게 \"경비병을 내어줄 터이니 가서 너희 생각대로 잘 지켜보아라.\" 하고 말하였다.","빌라도가 이르되 너희에게 경비병이 있으니 가서 힘대로 굳게 지키라 하거늘","빌라도가 가로되 너희에게 파숫군이 있으니 가서 힘대로 굳게 하라 하거늘","빌라도가 그들에게 대답하였다. \"당신들의 성전 경비병을 쓰시오. 그들이 충분히 지킬 수 있을 것이오.\"","Pilate said to them, “The guard is yours; go secure it as best you can.”","Pilate said unto them, Ye have a watch: go your way, make it as sure as ye can.","\"Take a guard,\" Pilate answered. \"Go, make the tomb as secure as you know how.\"","Ait illis Pilatus:  “Habetis custodiam; ite, custodite, sicut scitis “.",null],["47","27","66","그들은 가서 그 돌을 봉인하고 경비병들을 세워 무덤을 지키게 하였다.","그들은 물러가서 그 돌을 봉인하고 경비병을 세워 무덤을 단단히 지키게 하였다.","그들이 경비병과 함께 가서 돌을 인봉하고 무덤을 굳게 지키니라","저희가 파숫군과 함께 가서 돌을 인봉하고 무덤을 굳게 하니라","그래서 그들은 가서 그 돌에다가 봉인을 하고 경비병을 세워 무덤을 단단히 지키게 하였다.","So they went and secured the tomb by fixing a seal to the stone and setting the guard.","So they went, and made the sepulchre sure, sealing the stone, and setting a watch.","So they went and made the tomb secure by putting a seal on the stone and posting the guard.","Illi autem abeuntes munierunt sepulcrum, signantes lapidem, cum custodia.",null],["47","28","1","안식일이 지나고 주간 첫날이 밝아 올 무렵, 마리아 막달레나와 다른 마리아가 무덤을 보러 갔다.","안식일이 지나고 그 이튿날 동틀 무렵에 막달라 여자 마리아와 다른 마리아가 무덤을 보러갔다.","안식일이 다 지나고 안식 후 첫날이 되려는 새벽에 막달라 마리아와 다른 마리아가 무덤을 보려고 갔더니","안식일이 다하여가고 안식 후 첫날이 되려는 미명에 막달라 마리아와 다른 마리아가 무덤을 보려고 왔더니","안식일 지나고 그 이튿날 동이 틀 무렵에 막달라 마리아와 다른 마리아가 무덤을 찾아갔다.","After the sabbath, as the first day of the week was dawning, Mary Magdalene and the other Mary came to see the tomb.","In the end of the sabbath, as it began to dawn toward the first day of the week, came Mary Magdalene and the other Mary to see the sepulchre.","After the Sabbath, at dawn on the first day of the week, Mary Magdalene and the other Mary went to look at the tomb.","Sero autem post sabbatum, cum illucesceret in primam sabbati, venit Maria Magdalene et altera Maria videre sepulcrum.","ואחרי מוצאי השבת כשהאיר לאחד בשבת באה מרים המגדלית ומרים האחרת לראות את הקבר׃"],["47","28","2","그런데 갑자기 큰 지진이 일어났다. 그리고 주님의 천사가 하늘에서 내려오더니 무덤으로 다가가 돌을 옆으로 굴리고서는 그 위에 앉는 것이었다.","그런데 갑자기 큰 지진이 일어나면서 하늘에서 주의 천사가 내려와 그 돌을 굴려내고 그 위에 앉았다.","큰 지진이 나며 주의 천사가 하늘로부터 내려와 돌을 굴려 내고 그 위에 앉았는데","큰 지진이 나며 주의 천사가 하늘로서 내려와 돌을 굴려 내고 그 위에 앉았는데","그런데 갑자기 큰 지진이 일어나더니 주님의 천사가 하늘에서 내려와 그 돌을 굴려 내고 그 위에 앉았다.","And behold, there was a great earthquake; for an angel of the Lord descended from heaven, approached, rolled back the stone, and sat upon it.","And, behold, there was a great earthquake: for the angel of the Lord descended from heaven, and came and rolled back the stone from the door, and sat upon it.","There was a violent earthquake, for an angel of the Lord came down from heaven and, going to the tomb, rolled back the stone and sat on it.","Et ecce terrae motus factus est magnus: angelus enim Domini descendit de caelo et accedens revolvit lapidem et sedebat super eum.","והנה רעש גדול היה כי מלאך יהוה ירד מן השמים ויגש ויגל את האבן מן הפתח וישב עליה׃"],["47","28","3","그의 모습은 번개 같고 옷은 눈처럼 희었다.","그 천사의 모습은 번개처럼 빛났고 옷은 눈같이 희었다.","그 형상이 번개 같고 그 옷은 눈 같이 희거늘","그 형상이 번개 같고 그 옷은 눈 같이 희거늘","천사의 얼굴은 찬란하게 빛났고 옷은 눈부시게 희었다.","His appearance was like lightning and his clothing was white as snow.","His countenance was like lightning, and his raiment white as snow:","His appearance was like lightning, and his clothes were white as snow.","Erat autem aspectus eius sicut fulgur, et vestimentum eius candidum sicut nix.","ויהי מראהו כברק ולבושו לבן כשלג׃"],["47","28","4","무덤을 경비하던 자들은 천사를 보고 두려워 떨다가 까무러쳤다.","이 광경을 본 경비병들은 겁에 질려 떨다가 까무러쳤다.","지키던 자들이 그를 무서워하여 떨며 죽은 사람과 같이 되었더라","수직하던 자들이 저를 무서워하여 떨며 죽은 사람과 같이 되었더라","이것을 본 경비병들은 겁에 질려서 죽은 사람처럼 땅바닥에 엎어졌다.","The guards were shaken with fear of him and became like dead men.","And for fear of him the keepers did shake, and became as dead men.","The guards were so afraid of him that they shook and became like dead men.","Prae timore autem eius exterriti sunt custodes et facti sunt velut mortui.","ומפחדו נבהלו השמרים ויהיו כמתים׃"],["47","28","5","그때에 천사가 여자들에게 말하였다. “두려워하지 마라. 너희가 십자가에 못 박히신 예수님을 찾는 줄을 나는 안다.","그 때 천사가 여자들에게 이렇게 말하였다. \"무서워하지 마라. 너희는 십자가에 달리셨던 예수를 찾고 있으나","천사가 여자들에게 말하여 이르되 너희는 무서워하지 말라 십자가에 못 박히신 예수를 너희가 찾는 줄을 내가 아노라","천사가 여자들에게 일러 가로되 너희는 무서워 말라 십자가에 못 박히신 예수를 너희가 찾는 줄을 내가 아노라","그때 천사가 그 여자들에게 이렇게 말하였다. \"무서워하지 말라. 너희가 십자가에 달리셨던 예수를 찾고 있는 줄을 내가 안다.","Then the angel said to the women in reply, “Do not be afraid! I know that you are seeking Jesus the crucified.","And the angel answered and said unto the women, Fear not ye: for I know that ye seek Jesus, which was crucified.","The angel said to the women, \"Do not be afraid, for I know that you are looking for Jesus, who was crucified.","Respondens autem angelus dixit mulieribus:  “Nolite timere vos! Scio enim quod Iesum, qui crucifixus est, quaeritis.","ויען המלאך ויאמר אל הנשים אתן אל תיראן הן ידעתי כי את ישוע הנצלב אתן מבקשות׃"],["47","28","6","그분께서는 여기에 계시지 않는다. 말씀하신 대로 그분께서는 되살아나셨다. 와서 그분께서 누워 계셨던 곳을 보아라.","그분은 여기 계시지 않다. 전에 말씀하신 대로 다시 살아나셨다. 그분이 누우셨던 곳을 와서 보아라.","그가 여기 계시지 않고 그가 말씀 하시던 대로 살아나셨느니라 와서 그가 누우셨던 곳을 보라","그가 여기 계시지 않고 그의 말씀하시던대로 살아나셨느니라 와서 그의 누우셨던 곳을 보라","그러나 그분은 여기 계시지 않는다. 그분은 전에 너희에게 말씀하신 대로 다시 살아나셨다. 그분이 누우셨던 곳을 와서 보라.","He is not here, for he has been raised just as he said. Come and see the place where he lay.","He is not here: for he is risen, as he said. Come, see the place where the Lord lay.","He is not here; he has risen, just as he said. Come and see the place where he lay.","Non est hic: surrexit enim, sicut dixit. Venite, videte locum, ubi positus erat.","איננו פה כי קם כאשר אמר באנה ראינה את המקום אשר שכב שם האדון׃"],["47","28","7","그러니 서둘러 그분의 제자들에게 가서 이렇게 일러라. ‘그분께서는 죽은 이들 가운데에서 되살아나셨습니다. 이제 여러분보다 먼저 갈릴래아로 가실 터이니, 여러분은 그분을 거기에서 뵙게 될 것입니다.’ 이것이 내가 너희에게 알리는 말이다.”","그리고 빨리 제자들에게 가서 '예수께서는 죽었다가 다시 살아나셨고 당신들보다 먼저 갈릴래아로 가실 터이니 거기에서 그분을 뵙게 될 것이오.' 하고 알려라. 나는 이 말을 전하러 왔다.\"","또 빨리 가서 그의 제자들에게 이르되 그가 죽은 자 가운데서 살아나셨고 너희보다 먼저 갈릴리로 가시나니 거기서 너희가 뵈오리라 하라 보라 내가 너희에게 일렀느니라 하거늘","또 빨리 가서 그의 제자들에게 이르되 그가 죽은 자 가운데서 살아나셨고 너희보다 먼저 갈릴리로 가시나니 거기서 너희가 뵈오리라 하라 보라 내가 너희에게 일렀느니라 하거늘","그리고 빨리 그분의 제자들에게 가서 \"예수께서는 죽은 자들 가운데서 다시 살아나 너희보다 먼저 갈릴리로 가실 것이니 거기서 그분을 뵐 것이오\" 하고 전하라. 나는 이 말을 전하러 왔다.\"","Then go quickly and tell his disciples, ‘He has been raised from the dead, and he is going before you to Galilee; there you will see him.’ Behold, I have told you.”","And go quickly, and tell his disciples that he is risen from the dead; and, behold, he goeth before you into Galilee; there shall ye see him: lo, I have told you.","Then go quickly and tell his disciples: 'He has risen from the dead and is going ahead of you into Galilee. There you will see him.' Now I have told you.\"","Et cito euntes dicite discipulis eius:  “Surrexit a mortuis et ecce praecedit vos in Galilaeam; ibi eum videbitis “. Ecce dixi vobis “.","ומהרתן ללכת ואמרתן אל תלמידיו כי קם מן המתים והנה הוא הולך לפניכם הגלילה ושם תראהו הנה אמרתי לכן׃"],["47","28","8","그 여자들은 두려워하면서도 크게 기뻐하며 서둘러 무덤을 떠나, 제자들에게 소식을 전하러 달려갔다.","여자들은 무서우면서도 기쁨에 넘쳐서 제자들에게 이 소식을 전하려고 무덤을 떠나 급히 달려갔다.","그 여자들이 무서움과 큰 기쁨으로 빨리 무덤을 떠나 제자들에게 알리려고 달음질할새","그 여자들이 무서움과 큰 기쁨으로 무덤을 빨리 떠나 제자들에게 알게 하려고 달음질할쌔","여자들은 겁에 질렸으나 한편 기쁨에 가득 차서 무덤에서 뛰어나와 천사가 말해 준 소식을 제자들에게 전하려고 단숨에 달려갔다.","Then they went away quickly from the tomb, fearful yet overjoyed, and ran to announce this to his disciples.","And they departed quickly from the sepulchre with fear and great joy; and did run to bring his disciples word.","So the women hurried away from the tomb, afraid yet filled with joy, and ran to tell his disciples.","Et exeuntes cito de monumento cum timore et magno gaudio cucurrerunt nuntiare discipulis eius.","ותמהרנה לצאת מן הקבר ביראה ובשמחה גדולה ותרצנה להגיד לתלמידיו׃"],["47","28","9","그런데 갑자기 예수님께서 마주 오시면서 그 여자들에게 “평안하냐?” 하고 말씀하셨다. 그들은 다가가 엎드려 그분의 발을 붙잡고 절하였다.","그런데 뜻밖에도 예수께서 그 여자들을 향하여 걸어오셔서 \"평안하냐?\" 하고 말씀하셨다. 여자들은 가까이 가서 그의 두 발을 붙잡고 엎드려 절하였다.","예수께서 그들을 만나 이르시되 평안하냐 하시거늘 여자들이 나아가 그 발을 붙잡고 경배하니","예수께서 저희를 만나 가라사대 평안하뇨 하시거늘 여자들이 나아가 그 발을 붙잡고 경배하니","그런데 갑자기 예수께서 그 여자들 앞으로 걸어오시며 \"평안하냐?\" 하고 말씀하셨다. 여자들은 땅에 엎드려 예수의 발을 붙잡고 경배를 드렸다.","And behold, Jesus met them on their way and greeted them. They approached, embraced his feet, and did him homage.","And as they went to tell his disciples, behold, Jesus met them, saying, All hail. And they came and held him by the feet, and worshipped him.","Suddenly Jesus met them. \"Greetings,\" he said. They came to him, clasped his feet and worshiped him.","Et ecce Iesus occurrit illis dicens:  “Avete “. Illae autem accesserunt et tenuerunt pedes eius et adoraverunt eum.","הנה הלכות להגיד לתלמידיו והנה ישוע נקרה אליהן ויאמר שלום לכן ותגשנה ותאחזנה ברגליו ותשתחוין לו׃"],["47","28","10","그때에 예수님께서 그들에게 말씀하셨다. “두려워하지 마라. 가서 내 형제들에게 갈릴래아로 가라고 전하여라. 그들은 거기에서 나를 보게 될 것이다.”","그러자 예수께서는 그 여자들에게 \"두려워하지 마라. 가서 내 형제들에게 갈릴래아로 가라고 전하여라. 그들은 거기서 나를 만나게 될 것이다.\" 하고 말씀하셨다.","이에 예수께서 이르시되 무서워하지 말라 가서 내 형제들에게 갈릴리로 가라 하라 거기서 나를 보리라 하시니라","이에 예수께서 가라사대 무서워 말라 가서 내 형제들에게 갈릴리로 가라 하라 거기서 나를 보리라 하시니라","그러자 예수께서 말씀하셨다. \"두려워하지 말라. 가서 내 형제들에게 곧 갈릴리로 가라고 전하라. 거기서 나를 만나게 될 것이다.\"","Then Jesus said to them, “Do not be afraid. Go tell my brothers to go to Galilee, and there they will see me.”","Then said Jesus unto them, Be not afraid: go tell my brethren that they go into Galilee, and there shall they see me.","Then Jesus said to them, \"Do not be afraid. Go and tell my brothers to go to Galilee; there they will see me.\"","Tunc ait illis Iesus:  “Nolite timere; ite, nuntiate fratribus meis, ut eant in Galilaeam et ibi me videbunt “.","ויאמר אליהן ישוע אל תיראן לכנה והגדן לאחי וילכו הגלילה ושם יראוני׃"],["47","28","11","여자들이 돌아가는 동안에 경비병 몇 사람이 도성 안으로 가서, 일어난 일을 모두 수석 사제들에게 알렸다.","여자들이 떠나간 뒤에 경비병 중 몇 사람이 성안으로 들어가 그 동안에 일어난 일들을 대사제들에게 낱낱이 보고하였다.","여자들이 갈 때 경비병 중 몇이 성에 들어가 모든 된 일을 대제사장들에게 알리니","여자들이 갈제 파숫군 중 몇이 성에 들어가 모든 된 일을 대제사장들에게 고하니","여자들이 떠난 뒤 무덤을 지키던 경비병 몇 사람이 성안으로 들어가 대제사장들에게 그동안에 일어난 일들을 다 보고하였다.","While they were going, some of the guard went into the city and told the chief priests all that had happened.","Now when they were going, behold, some of the watch came into the city, and shewed unto the chief priests all the things that were done.","While the women were on their way, some of the guards went into the city and reported to the chief priests everything that had happened.","Quae cum abiissent, ecce quidam de custodia venerunt in civitatem et nuntiaverunt principibus sacerdotum omnia, quae facta fuerant.","ויהי בלכתן והנה אנשים מן המשמר באו העירה ויגידו לראשי הכהנים את כל הנעשה׃"],["47","28","12","수석 사제들은 원로들과 함께 모여 의논한 끝에 군사들에게 많은 돈을 주면서","대사제들은 원로들과 만나 의논한 끝에 병사들에게 많은 돈을 집어주며","그들이 장로들과 함께 모여 의논하고 군인들에게 돈을 많이 주며","그들이 장로들과 함께 모여 의논하고 군병들에게 돈을 많이 주며","대제사장들은 온 유대 지도자들과 의회를 열고 의논한 끝에 경비병들에게 뇌물을 주면서","They assembled with the elders and took counsel; then they gave a large sum of money to the soldiers,","And when they were assembled with the elders, and had taken counsel, they gave large money unto the soldiers,","When the chief priests had met with the elders and devised a plan, they gave the soldiers a large sum of money,","Et congregati cum senioribus, consilio accepto, pecuniam copiosam dederunt militibus","ויקהלו עם הזקנים ויתיעצו ויתנו כסף לרב אל אנשי הצבא לאמר׃"],["47","28","13","말하였다. “‘예수의 제자들이 밤중에 와서 우리가 잠든 사이에 시체를 훔쳐 갔다.’ 하여라.","\"너희가 잠든 사이에 예수의 제자들이 밤중에 와서 시체를 훔쳐 갔다고 말하여라.","이르되 너희는 말하기를 그의 제자들이 밤에 와서 우리가 잘 때에 그를 도둑질하여 갔다 하라","가로되 너희는 말하기를 그의 제자들이 밤에 와서 우리가 잘 때에 그를 도적질하여 갔다 하라","예수의 제자들이 밤중에 와서 그들이 잠든 사이에 시체를 훔쳐 갔다고 말하라고 하였다.","telling them, “You are to say, ‘His disciples came by night and stole him while we were asleep.’","Saying, Say ye, His disciples came by night, and stole him away while we slept.","telling them, \"You are to say, 'His disciples came during the night and stole him away while we were asleep.'","dicentes:  “Dicite:  “Discipuli eius nocte venerunt et furati sunt eum, nobis dormientibus “.","אמרו כי באו תלמידיו לילה ויגנבו אותו בהיותנו ישנים׃"],["47","28","14","이 소식이 총독의 귀에 들어가더라도, 우리가 그를 설득하여 너희가 걱정할 필요가 없게 해 주겠다.”","이 소문이 총독의 귀에 들어가게 되더라도 우리가 잘 말해서 너희에게는 아무런 해가 없도록 하여주겠다.\" 하고 말하였다.","만일 이 말이 총독에게 들리면 우리가 권하여 너희로 근심하지 않게 하리라 하니","만일 이 말이 총독에게 들리면 우리가 권하여 너희로 근심되지 않게 하리라 하니","또한 그들은 경비병들에게 이렇게 약속하였다. \"만일 총독이 이 소문을 듣게 되더라도 우리가 너희들에게는 아무 해가 없도록 책임을 지겠다.\"","And if this gets to the ears of the governor, we will satisfy [him] and keep you out of trouble.”","And if this come to the governor's ears, we will persuade him, and secure you.","If this report gets to the governor, we will satisfy him and keep you out of trouble.\"","Et si hoc auditum fuerit a praeside, nos suadebimus ei et securos vos faciemus “.","ואם ישמע הדבר לפני ההגמון אנחנו נפיסהו והייתם בלי פחד׃"],["47","28","15","경비병들은 돈을 받고 시킨 대로 하였다. 그리하여 이 말이 오늘날까지도 유다인들 사이에 퍼져 있다.","경비병들은 돈을 받고 시키는 대로 하였다. 이 이야기는 오늘날까지 유다인들 사이에 널리 퍼져 있다.","군인들이 돈을 받고 가르친 대로 하였으니 이 말이 오늘날까지 유대인 가운데 두루 퍼지니라","군병들이 돈을 받고 가르친대로 하였으니 이 말이 오늘날까지 유대인 가운데 두루 퍼지니라","경비병들은 뇌물을 받고 그들이 시키는 대로 하였다. 이 이야기는 오늘날까지 유대 사람들 사이에 널리 퍼져 있다.","The soldiers took the money and did as they were instructed. And this story has circulated among the Jews to the present [day].","So they took the money, and did as they were taught: and this saying is commonly reported among the Jews until this day.","So the soldiers took the money and did as they were instructed. And this story has been widely circulated among the Jews to this very day.","At illi, accepta pecunia, fecerunt, sicut erant docti. Et divulgatum est verbum istud apud Iudaeos usque in hodiernum diem.","ויקחו את הכסף ויעשו כאשר למדו ותצא השמועה הזאת בין היהודים עד היום הזה׃"],["47","28","16","열한 제자는 갈릴래아로 떠나 예수님께서 분부하신 산으로 갔다.","열한 제자는 예수께서 일러주신 대로 갈릴래아에 있는 산으로 갔다.","열한 제자가 갈릴리에 가서 예수께서 지시하신 산에 이르러","열 한 제자가 갈릴리에 가서 예수의 명하시던 산에 이르러","열한 제자는 예수께서 만나게 될 것이라고 일러주신 갈릴리에 있는 산으로 갔다.","The eleven disciples went to Galilee, to the mountain to which Jesus had ordered them.","Then the eleven disciples went away into Galilee, into a mountain where Jesus had appointed them.","Then the eleven disciples went to Galilee, to the mountain where Jesus had told them to go.","Undecim autem discipuli abierunt in Galilaeam, in montem ubi constituerat illis Iesus,","ועשתי עשר התלמידים הלכו הגלילה אל ההר אשר צום ישוע׃"],["47","28","17","그들은 예수님을 뵙고 엎드려 경배하였다. 그러나 더러는 의심하였다.","그들은 거기에서 예수를 뵙고 엎드려 절하였다. 그러나 의심하는 사람들도 있었다.","예수를 뵈옵고 경배하나 아직도 의심하는 사람들이 있더라","예수를 뵈옵고 경배하나 오히려 의심하는 자도 있더라","거기서 그들은 예수를 뵙고 경배를 드렸다. 그러나 그들 가운데는 그가 정말 예수일까 하고 의심하는 사람도 있었다.","When they saw him, they worshiped, but they doubted.","And when they saw him, they worshipped him: but some doubted.","When they saw him, they worshiped him; but some doubted.","et videntes eum adoraverunt; quidam autem dubitaverunt.","ויהי כראותם אתו וישתחוו לו ומקצתם נחלקו בלבם׃"],["47","28","18","예수님께서는 그들에게 다가가 이르셨다. “나는 하늘과 땅의 모든 권한을 받았다.","예수께서는 그들에게 가까이 오셔서 이렇게 말씀하셨다. \"나는 하늘과 땅의 모든 권한을 받았다.","예수께서 나아와 말씀하여 이르시되 하늘과 땅의 모든 권세를 내게 주셨으니","예수께서 나아와 일러 가라사대 하늘과 땅의 모든 권세를 내게 주셨으니","예수께서 제자들에게 가까이 오셔서 말씀하셨다. \"나는 하늘과 땅의 모든 권한을 받았다.","Then Jesus approached and said to them, “All power in heaven and on earth has been given to me.","And Jesus came and spake unto them, saying, All power is given unto me in heaven and in earth.","Then Jesus came to them and said, \"All authority in heaven and on earth has been given to me.","Et accedens Iesus locutus est eis dicens:  “Data est mihi omnis potestas in caelo et in terra.","ויגש ישוע וידבר אליהם לאמר נתן לי כל שלטן בשמים ובארץ׃"],["47","28","19","그러므로 너희는 가서 모든 민족들을 제자로 삼아, 아버지와 아들과 성령의 이름으로 세례를 주고,","그러므로 너희는 가서 이 세상 모든 사람들을 내 제자로 삼아 아버지와 아들과 성령의 이름으로 그들에게 세례를 베풀고","그러므로 너희는 가서 모든 민족을 제자로 삼아 아버지와 아들과 성령의 이름으로 세례를 베풀고","그러므로 너희는 가서 모든 족속으로 제자를 삼아 아버지와 아들과 성령의 이름으로 세례를 주고","그러므로 너희는 가서 모들 민족을 제자로 삼아 아버지와 아들과 성령의 이름으로 침례를 베풀고","Go, therefore, and make disciples of all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Spirit,","Go ye therefore, and teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost:","Therefore go and make disciples of all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit,","Euntes ergo docete omnes gentes, baptizantes eos in nomine Patris et Filii et Spiritus Sancti,","לכו ועשו לתלמידים את כל הגוים וטבלתם אתם לשם האב והבן ורוח הקדש׃"],["47","28","20","내가 너희에게 명령한 모든 것을 가르쳐 지키게 하여라. 보라, 내가 세상 끝 날까지 언제나 너희와 함께 있겠다.”","내가 너희에게 명한 모든 것을 지키도록 가르쳐라. 내가 세상 끝날까지 항상 너희와 함께 있겠다.\"","내가 너희에게 분부한 모든 것을 가르쳐 지키게 하라 볼지어다 내가 세상 끝날까지 너희와 항상 함께 있으리라 하시니라","내가 너희에게 분부한 모든 것을 가르쳐 지키게 하라 볼찌어다 내가 세상 끝날까지 너희와 항상 함께 있으리라 하시니라","내가 너희에게 명한 모든 것을 가르쳐 지키게 하라. 내가 세상 끝 날까지 항상 너희와 함께 있겠다.\"","teaching them to observe all that I have commanded you. And behold, I am with you always, until the end of the age.”","Teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you: and, lo, I am with you alway, even unto the end of the world. Amen.","and teaching them to obey everything I have commanded you. And surely I am with you always, to the very end of the age.\"","docentes eos servare omnia, quaecumque mandavi vobis. Et ecce ego vobiscum sum omnibus diebus usque ad consummationem saeculi “.","ולמדתם אתם לשמר את כל אשר צויתי אתכם והנה אנכי אתכם כל הימים עד קץ העולם אמן׃"],["48","1","1","하느님의 아드님 예수 그리스도의 복음의 시작.","하느님의 아들 예수 그리스도에 관한 복음의 시작.","하나님의 아들 예수 그리스도의 복음의 시작이라","1)하나님의 아들 예수 그리스도 복음의 시작이라 어떤 사본에는, [하나님의 아들]이 없음","하나님의 아들 예수 그리스도의 복음의 시작은 이러하다.","The beginning of the gospel of Jesus Christ [the Son of God].","The beginning of the gospel of Jesus Christ, the Son of God;","The beginning of the gospel about Jesus Christ, the Son of God.","Initium evangelii Iesu Christi Filii Dei.","ראשית בשורת ישוע המשיח בן האלהים׃"],["48","1","2","이사야 예언자의 글에 “보라, 내가 네 앞에 내 사자를 보내니 그가 너의 길을 닦아 놓으리라.”","예언자 이사야의 글에, \"1)이제 내가 일꾼을 너보다 먼저 보내니 그가 네 갈 길을 미리 닦아놓으리라.\" 하였고, 말라 3:1(칠십인역 이사 40:3).","선지자 이사야의 글에 ㄱ)보라 내가 내 사자를 네 앞에 보내노니 그가 네 길을 준비하리라","선지자 이사야의 글에 ㄱ)보라 내가 내 사자를 네 앞에 보내노니 저가 네 길을 예비하리라 말 3:1","예언자 이사야의 글에 ㄱ) \"보라! 내가 이제 내 심부름꾼을 보내어, 내 길을 준비하도록 하겠다\"라는 말씀이 있다. (ㄱ. 말3:1)","As it is written in Isaiah the prophet: “Behold, I am sending my messenger ahead of you; he will prepare your way.","As it is written in the prophets, Behold, I send my messenger before thy face, which shall prepare thy way before thee.","It is written in Isaiah the prophet: \"I will send my messenger ahead of you, who will prepare your way\"--","Sicut scriptum est in Isaia propheta: “Ecce mitto angelum meum ante faciem tuam, qui praeparabit viam tuam;","ככתוב בנביאים הנני שלח מלאכי לפניך ופנה דרכך לפניך׃"],["48","1","3","“광야에서 외치는 이의 소리. ‘너희는 주님의 길을 마련하여라. 그분의 길을 곧게 내어라.’” 하고 기록된 대로,","또 \"광야에서 외치는 이의 소리가 들린다. '너희는 주의 길을 닦고 그의 길을 고르게 하여라.'\" 하였는데, 기록되어 있는 대로","ㄴ)광야에 외치는 자의 소리가 있어 이르되 너희는 주의 길을 준비하라 그의 오실 길을 곧게 하라 기록된 것과 같이","ㄴ)광야에 외치는 자의 소리가 있어 가로되 너희는 주의 길을 예비하라 그의 첩경을 평탄케 하라 기록된 것과 같이 사 40:3","또 ㄴ) \"너희는 여호와께서 예루살렘의 성전으로 가실 길을 광야에 뚫어 놓아라. 거친 사막을 평평하게 다듬어서 우리 하나님이 통과하실 큰길을 닦아 놓아라!\"라는 말씀도 있다. (ㄴ. 사40:3)","A voice of one crying out in the desert: ‘Prepare the way of the Lord, make straight his paths.’”","The voice of one crying in the wilderness, Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make his paths straight.","\"a voice of one calling in the desert, 'Prepare the way for the Lord, make straight paths for him.'\"","vox clamantis in deserto: “Parate viam Domini, rectas facite semitas eius “ “,","קול קורא במדבר פנו דרך יהוה ישרו מסלותיו׃"],["48","1","4","세례자 요한이 광야에 나타나 죄의 용서를 위한 회개의 세례를 선포하였다.","세례자 요한이 광야에 나타나 \"회개하고 세례를 받아라. 그러면 죄를 용서받을 것이다.\" 하고 선포하였다.","세례 요한이 광야에 이르러 죄 사함을 받게 하는 회개의 세례를 전파하니","세례 요한이 이르러 광야에서 죄 사함을 받게 하는 회개의 세례를 전파하니","이 하나님의 사자가 바로 침례 요한이다. 그는 광야에서 살며 사람들에게 \"회개하고 침례를 받으라. 그러면 하나님께서 죄를 용서하여 주실 것이다\"라고 가르쳤다.","John [the] Baptist appeared in the desert proclaiming a baptism of repentance for the forgiveness of sins.","John did baptize in the wilderness, and preach the baptism of repentance for the remission of sins.","And so John came, baptizing in the desert region and preaching a baptism of repentance for the forgiveness of sins.","fuit Ioannes Baptista in deserto praedicans baptismum paenitentiae in remissionem peccatorum.","ויהי יוחנן טבל במדבר וקורא טבילת התשובה לסליחת החטאים׃"],["48","1","5","그리하여 온 유다 지방 사람들과 예루살렘 주민들이 모두 그에게 나아가, 자기 죄를 고백하며 요르단 강에서 그에게 세례를 받았다.","그 때 온 유다 지방과 예루살렘에 사는 모든 사람이 그에게 와서 죄를 고백하며 요르단 강에서 세례를 받았다.","온 유대 지방과 예루살렘 사람이 다 나아가 자기 죄를 자복하고 요단 강에서 그에게 세례를 받더라","온 유대 지방과 예루살렘 사람이 다 나아가 자기 죄를 자복하고 요단강에서 그에게 세례를 받더라","그때 예루살렘과 온 유대 지방 사람들이 요한에게 몰려와 자기들의 죄를 고백하고 요단강에서 침례를 받았다.","People of the whole Judean countryside and all the inhabitants of Jerusalem were going out to him and were being baptized by him in the Jordan River as they acknowledged their sins.","And there went out unto him all the land of Judaea, and they of Jerusalem, and were all baptized of him in the river of Jordan, confessing their sins.","The whole Judean countryside and all the people of Jerusalem went out to him. Confessing their sins, they were baptized by him in the Jordan River.","Et egrediebatur ad illum omnis Iudaeae regio et Hierosolymitae universi et baptizabantur ab illo in Iordane flumine confitentes peccata sua.","ותצא אליו כל ארץ יהודה ובני ירושלים ויטבלו כלם על ידו בנהר הירדן מתודים את חטאתם׃"],["48","1","6","요한은 낙타 털 옷을 입고 허리에 가죽 띠를 둘렀으며, 메뚜기와 들꿀을 먹고 살았다.","요한은 낙타털 옷을 입고 허리에 가죽띠를 두르고 메뚜기와 들꿀을 먹으며 살았다.","요한은 낙타털 옷을 입고 허리에 가죽 띠를 띠고 메뚜기와 석청을 먹더라","요한은 약대털을 입고 허리에 가죽띠를 띠고 메뚜기와 석청을 먹더라","요한은 몸에 낙타털을 걸치고 허리에는 가죽띠를 둘렀으며 메뚜기와 들꿀을 양식삼아 살면서 사람들에게 이렇게 외쳤다. \"나보다 더 능력 있는 분이 내 뒤에 오십니다. 그분은 너무도 위대하여 나는 그분의 신발끈을 풀어 드릴 만한 자격도 없습니다.","John was clothed in camel’s hair, with a leather belt around his waist. He fed on locusts and wild honey.","And John was clothed with camel's hair, and with a girdle of a skin about his loins; and he did eat locusts and wild honey;","John wore clothing made of camel's hair, with a leather belt around his waist, and he ate locusts and wild honey.","Et erat Ioannes vestitus pilis cameli, et zona pellicea circa lumbos eius, et locustas et mel silvestre edebat.","ויוחנן לבוש שער גמלים ואזור עור במתניו ואכל חגבים ודבש היער׃"],["48","1","7","그리고 이렇게 선포하였다. “나보다 더 큰 능력을 지니신 분이 내 뒤에 오신다. 나는 몸을 굽혀 그분의 신발 끈을 풀어 드릴 자격조차 없다.","그는 사람들에게 이렇게 외쳤다. \"나보다 더 훌륭한 분이 내 뒤에 오신다. 나는 몸을 굽혀 그의 신발끈을 풀어드릴 만한 자격조차 없는 사람이다.","그가 전파하여 이르되 나보다 능력 많으신 이가 내 뒤에 오시나니 나는 굽혀 그의 신발끈을 풀기도 감당하지 못하겠노라","그가 전파하여 가로되 나보다 능력 많으신 이가 내 뒤에 오시나니 나는 굽혀 그의 신들메를 풀기도 감당치 못하겠노라","(6절에 포함되어 있음)","And this is what he proclaimed: “One mightier than I is coming after me. I am not worthy to stoop and loosen the thongs of his sandals.","And preached, saying, There cometh one mightier than I after me, the latchet of whose shoes I am not worthy to stoop down and unloose.","And this was his message: \"After me will come one more powerful than I, the thongs of whose sandals I am not worthy to stoop down and untie.","Et praedicabat dicens:  “Venit fortior me post me, cuius non sum dignus procumbens solvere corrigiam calceamentorum eius.","ויקרא לאמר בוא יבא אחרי החזק ממני אשר אינני כדי לכרע ולהתיר את שרוך נעליו׃"],["48","1","8","나는 너희에게 물로 세례를 주었지만, 그분께서는 너희에게 성령으로 세례를 주실 것이다.”","나는 너희에게 물로 세례를 베풀었지만 그분은 성령으로 세례를 베푸실 것이다.\"","나는 너희에게 물로 세례를 베풀었거니와 그는 너희에게 성령으로 세례를 베푸시리라","나는 너희에게 물로 세례를 주었거니와 그는 성령으로 너희에게 세례를 주시리라","나는 물로 침례를 주지만 그분은 성령으로 침례를 주실 것입니다.\"","I have baptized you with water; he will baptize you with the holy Spirit.”","I indeed have baptized you with water: but he shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost.","I baptize you with water, but he will baptize you with the Holy Spirit.\"","Ego baptizavi vos aqua; ille vero baptizabit vos in Spiritu Sancto “.","אנכי טבלתי אתכם במים והוא יטבל אתכם ברוח הקדש׃"],["48","1","9","그 무렵에 예수님께서 갈릴래아 나자렛에서 오시어, 요르단에서 요한에게 세례를 받으셨다.","그 무렵에 예수께서는 갈릴래아 나자렛에서 요르단 강으로 요한을 찾아와 세례를 받으셨다.","그 때에 예수께서 갈릴리 나사렛으로부터 와서 요단 강에서 요한에게 세례를 받으시고","그 때에 예수께서 갈릴리 나사렛으로부터 와서 요단강에서 요한에게 세례를 받으시고","그 무렵 예수께서는 갈릴리 나사렛에서 요단강으로 오셔서 요한에게 침례를 받으셨다.","It happened in those days that Jesus came from Nazareth of Galilee and was baptized in the Jordan by John.","And it came to pass in those days, that Jesus came from Nazareth of Galilee, and was baptized of John in Jordan.","At that time Jesus came from Nazareth in Galilee and was baptized by John in the Jordan.","Et factum est in diebus illis, venit Iesus a Nazareth Galilaeae et baptizatus est in Iordane ab Ioanne.","ויהי בימים ההם ויבא ישוע מנצרת אשר בגליל ויטבל על ידי יוחנן בירדן׃"],["48","1","10","그리고 물에서 올라오신 예수님께서는 곧 하늘이 갈라지며 성령께서 비둘기처럼 당신께 내려오시는 것을 보셨다.","그리고 물에서 올라오실 때 하늘이 갈라지며 성령이 비둘기 모양으로 당신에게 내려오시는 것을 보셨다.","곧 물에서 올라오실새 하늘이 갈라짐과 성령이 비둘기 같이 자기에게 내려오심을 보시더니","곧 물에서 올라 오실쌔 하늘이 갈라짐과 성령이 비둘기 같이 자기에게 내려오심을 보시더니","그런데 물에서 올라오시는 순간 하늘이 열리며 성령께서 마치 비둘기처럼 자기에게 내려오는 것을 보셨다.","On coming up out of the water he saw the heavens being torn open and the Spirit, like a dove, descending upon him.","And straightway coming up out of the water, he saw the heavens opened, and the Spirit like a dove descending upon him:","As Jesus was coming up out of the water, he saw heaven being torn open and the Spirit descending on him like a dove.","Et statim ascendens de aqua vidit apertos caelos et Spiritum tamquam columbam descendentem in ipsum;","ויהי אך עלה עלה מן המים וירא את השמים נבקעים והרוח כיונה ירדת עליו׃"],["48","1","11","이어 하늘에서 소리가 들려왔다. “너는 내가 사랑하는 아들, 내 마음에 드는 아들이다.”","그 때 하늘에서 \"2)너는 내 사랑하는 아들, 내 마음에 드는 아들이다.\" 하는 소리가 들려왔다.시편 2:7; 창세22:2; 이사 42:1.","하늘로부터 소리가 나기를 너는 내 사랑하는 아들이라 내가 너를 기뻐하노라 하시니라","하늘로서 소리가 나기를 너는 내 사랑하는 아들이라 내가 너를 기뻐하노라 하시니라","그때 하늘에서 음성이 들려 왔다. ㄷ) \"너는 내 사랑하는 아들이요, 내 마음에 드는 아들이다.\" (ㄷ. 창22:2,시2:7,사42:1)","And a voice came from the heavens, “You are my beloved Son; with you I am well pleased.”","And there came a voice from heaven, saying, Thou art my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased.","And a voice came from heaven: \"You are my Son, whom I love; with you I am well pleased.\"","et vox facta est de caelis:  “Tu es Filius meus dilectus; in te complacui “.","ויהי קול מן השמים אתה בני ידידי אשר רצתה נפשי בו׃"],["48","1","12","그 뒤에 성령께서는 곧 예수님을 광야로 내보내셨다.","그 뒤에 곧 성령이 예수를 광야로 내보내셨다.","성령이 곧 예수를 광야로 몰아내신지라","성령이 곧 예수를 광야로 몰아내신지라","그 일이 있은 직후에 성령께서는 예수를 재촉하여 광야로 가게 하셨다.","At once the Spirit drove him out into the desert,","And immediately the spirit driveth him into the wilderness.","At once the Spirit sent him out into the desert,","Et statim Spiritus expellit eum in desertum.","ואחרי כן הוציאו הרוח המדברה׃"],["48","1","13","예수님께서는 광야에서 사십 일 동안 사탄에게 유혹을 받으셨다. 또한 들짐승들과 함께 지내셨는데 천사들이 그분의 시중을 들었다.","예수께서는 사십 일 동안 그 곳에 계시면서 사탄에게 유혹을 받으셨다. 그 동안 예수께서는 들짐승들과 함께 지내셨는데 천사들이 그분의 시중을 들었다.","광야에서 사십 일을 계시면서 사탄에게 시험을 받으시며 들짐승과 함께 계시니 천사들이 수종들더라","광야에서 사십 일을 계셔서 사단에게 시험을 받으시며 들짐승과 함께 계시니 천사들이 수종들더라","예수께서는 거기서 40일 동안 들짐승과 함께 지내면서 사단에게 시험을 받으셨는데, 그동안 천사들이 그분의 시중을 들었다.","and he remained in the desert for forty days, tempted by Satan. He was among wild beasts, and the angels ministered to him.","And he was there in the wilderness forty days, tempted of Satan; and was with the wild beasts; and the angels ministered unto him.","and he was in the desert forty days, being tempted by Satan. He was with the wild animals, and angels attended him.","Et erat in deserto quadraginta diebus et tentabatur a Satana; eratque cum bestiis, et angeli ministrabant illi.","ויהי שם במדבר ארבעים יום והשטן נסהו ויהי עם החיות והמלאכים שרתוהו׃"],["48","1","14","요한이 잡힌 뒤에 예수님께서는 갈릴래아에 가시어, 하느님의 복음을 선포하시며","요한이 잡힌 뒤에 예수께서 갈릴래아에 오셔서 하느님의 복음을 전파하시며","요한이 잡힌 후 예수께서 갈릴리에 오셔서 하나님의 복음을 전파하여","요한이 잡힌 후 예수께서 갈릴리에 오셔서 하나님의 복음을 전파하여","요한이 헤롯왕에게 잡혀간 후에 예수께서는 갈릴리에 오셔서 하나님의 복음을 전파하며","After John had been arrested, Jesus came to Galilee proclaiming the gospel of God:","Now after that John was put in prison, Jesus came into Galilee, preaching the gospel of the kingdom of God,","After John was put in prison, Jesus went into Galilee, proclaiming the good news of God.","Postquam autem traditus est Ioannes, venit Iesus in Galilaeam praedicans evangelium Dei","ואחרי אשר הסגר יוחנן בא ישוע הגלילה ויקרא את בשורת מלכות האלהים לאמר׃"],["48","1","15","이렇게 말씀하셨다. “때가 차서 하느님의 나라가 가까이 왔다. 회개하고 복음을 믿어라.”","\"때가 다 되어 하느님의 나라가 다가왔다. 회개하고 이 복음을 믿어라.\" 하셨다.","이르시되 때가 찼고 하나님의 나라가 가까이 왔으니 회개하고 복음을 믿으라 하시더라","가라사대 때가 찼고 하나님 나라가 가까왔으니 회개하고 복음을 믿으라 하시더라","\"드디어 때가 왔다. 하나님의 나라가 가까이 왔다. 너희는 회개하고 이 기쁜 소식을 믿으라\"고 말씀하셨다.","“This is the time of fulfillment. The kingdom of God is at hand. Repent, and believe in the gospel.”","And saying, The time is fulfilled, and the kingdom of God is at hand: repent ye, and believe the gospel.","\"The time has come,\" he said. \"The kingdom of God is near. Repent and believe the good news!\"","et dicens:  “Impletum est tempus, et appropinquavit regnum Dei; paenitemini et credite evangelio “.","מלאה העת והגיעה מלכות האלהים שובו והאמינו בבשורה׃"],["48","1","16","예수님께서 갈릴래아 호숫가를 지나가시다가, 호수에 그물을 던지고 있는 시몬과 그의 동생 안드레아를 보셨다. 그들은 어부였다.","예수께서 갈릴래아 호숫가를 지나가시다가 호수에서 그물을 던지고 있는 어부 시몬과 그의 동생 안드레아를 보시고","갈릴리 해변으로 지나가시다가 시몬과 그 형제 안드레가 바다에 그물 던지는 것을 보시니 그들은 어부라","갈릴리 해변으로 지나가시다가 시몬과 그 형제 안드레가 바다에 그물 던지는 것을 보시니 저희는 어부라","어느 날 예수께서 갈릴리 바닷가를 지나다가 어부인 시몬과 그의 동생 안드레가 그물을 던지고 있는 것을 보셨다.","As he passed by the Sea of Galilee, he saw Simon and his brother Andrew casting their nets into the sea; they were fishermen.","Now as he walked by the sea of Galilee, he saw Simon and Andrew his brother casting a net into the sea: for they were fishers.","As Jesus walked beside the Sea of Galilee, he saw Simon and his brother Andrew casting a net into the lake, for they were fishermen.","Et praeteriens secus mare Galilaeae vidit Simonem et Andream fratrem Simonis mittentes in mare; erant enim piscatores.","ויהי בהתהלכו על יד ים הגליל וירא את שמעון ואת אנדרי אחי שמעון פרשים מצודה בים כי דיגים היו׃"],["48","1","17","예수님께서 그들에게 이르셨다. “나를 따라오너라. 내가 너희를 사람 낚는 어부가 되게 하겠다.”","\"나를 따라오너라. 내가 너희를 사람 낚는 어부가 되게 하겠다.\" 하고 말씀하셨다.","예수께서 이르시되 나를 따라오라 내가 너희로 사람을 낚는 어부가 되게 하리라 하시니","예수께서 가라사대 나를 따라 오너라 내가 너희로 사람을 낚는 어부가 되게 하리라 하시니","예수께서 그들을 불러 말씀하셨다. \"나를 따라 오너라. 내가 너희들을 사람 낚는 어부가 되게 하리라.\"","Jesus said to them, “Come after me, and I will make you fishers of men.”","And Jesus said unto them, Come ye after me, and I will make you to become fishers of men.","\"Come, follow me,\" Jesus said, \"and I will make you fishers of men.\"","Et dixit eis Iesus:  “Venite post me, et faciam vos fieri piscatores hominum “.","ויאמר אליהם ישוע לכו אחרי ואשימכם לדיגי אנשים׃"],["48","1","18","그러자 그들은 곧바로 그물을 버리고 예수님을 따랐다.","그들은 곧 그물을 버리고 예수를 따라갔다.","곧 그물을 버려 두고 따르니라","곧 그물을 버려 두고 좇으니라","그들은 그 자리에서 그물을 버리고 예수를 따라 나섰다.","Then they abandoned their nets and followed him.","And straightway they forsook their nets, and followed him.","At once they left their nets and followed him.","Et protinus, relictis retibus, secuti sunt eum.","ויעזבו מהר את מכמרתיהם וילכו אחריו׃"],["48","1","19","예수님께서 조금 더 가시다가, 배에서 그물을 손질하는 제베대오의 아들 야고보와 그의 동생 요한을 보시고,","예수께서 조금 더 가시다가 제베대오의 아들 야고보와 그의 동생 요한이 배에서 그물을 손질하고 있는 것을 보시고","조금 더 가시다가 세베대의 아들 야고보와 그 형제 요한을 보시니 그들도 배에 있어 그물을 깁는데","조금 더 가시다가 세베대의 아들  야고보와 그 형제 요한을 보시니 저희도 배에 있어 그물을 깁는데","조금 더 길을 가시다가 예수께서는 세베대의 아들 야고보와 요한이 배에서 그물 깁고 있는 것을 보셨다.","He walked along a little farther and saw James, the son of Zebedee, and his brother John. They too were in a boat mending their nets.","And when he had gone a little farther thence, he saw James the son of Zebedee, and John his brother, who also were in the ship mending their nets.","When he had gone a little farther, he saw James son of Zebedee and his brother John in a boat, preparing their nets.","Et progressus pusillum vidit Iacobum Zebedaei et Ioannem fratrem eius, et ipsos in navi componentes retia,","ויהי כעברו מעט משם וירא את יעקב בן זבדי ואת יוחנן אחיו וגם המה באניה מתקנים את המכמרות׃"],["48","1","20","곧바로 그들을 부르셨다. 그러자 그들은 아버지 제베대오를 삯꾼들과 함께 배에 버려두고 그분을 따라나섰다.","부르시자 그들은 아버지 제베대오와 삯꾼들을 배에 남겨둔 채 예수를 따라나섰다.","곧 부르시니 그 아버지 세베대를 품꾼들과 함께 배에 버려 두고 예수를 따라가니라","곧 부르시니 그 아비 세베대를 삯군들과 함께 배에 버려두고 예수를 따라가니라","예수께서 그들을 부르시자 그들도 즉시 아버지 세베대와 삯꾼들을 배에 남겨 두고 예수를 따라 나섰다.","Then he called them. So they left their father Zebedee in the boat along with the hired men and followed him.","And straightway he called them: and they left their father Zebedee in the ship with the hired servants, and went after him.","Without delay he called them, and they left their father Zebedee in the boat with the hired men and followed him.","et statim vocavit illos. Et, relicto patre suo Zebedaeo in navi cum mercennariis, abierunt post eum.","ויקרא מהרה אליהם ויעזבו את זבדי אביהם באניה עם השכירים וילכו אחריו׃"],["48","1","21","그들은 카파르나움으로 갔다. 예수님께서는 곧바로 안식일에 회당에 들어가 가르치셨는데,","예수의 일행은 가파르나움으로 갔다. 안식일에 예수께서는 회당에 들어가 가르치셨는데","그들이 가버나움에 들어가니라 예수께서 곧 안식일에 회당에 들어가 가르치시매","저희가 가버나움에 들어가니라 예수께서 곧 안식일에 회당에 들어가 가르치시매","예수와 그 일행은 가버나움에 도착하였다. 안식일 아침이 되자 예수께서는 유대 사람들의 예배 장소인 회당에 가서 설교를 하셨다.","Then they came to Capernaum, and on the sabbath he entered the synagogue and taught.","And they went into Capernaum; and straightway on the sabbath day he entered into the synagogue, and taught.","They went to Capernaum, and when the Sabbath came, Jesus went into the synagogue and began to teach.","Et ingrediuntur Capharnaum. Et statim sabbatis ingressus synagogam docebat.","ויבאו אל כפר נחום וימהר לבוא בשבת לבית הכנסת וילמד׃"],["48","1","22","사람들은 그분의 가르침에 몹시 놀랐다. 그분께서 율법 학자들과 달리 권위를 가지고 가르치셨기 때문이다.","사람들은 그 가르침을 듣고 놀랐다. 그 가르치시는 것이 율법학자들과는 달리 권위가 있었기 때문이다.","뭇 사람이 그의 교훈에 놀라니 이는 그가 가르치시는 것이 권위 있는 자와 같고 서기관들과 같지 아니함일러라","뭇사람이 그의 교훈에 놀라니 이는 그 가르치시는 것이 권세 있는 자와 같고 서기관들과 같지 아니함일러라","사람들은 예수의 설교에 경탄하였다. 그것은 예수의 설교가 율법학자들과는 달리 권위가 있었기 때문이다.","The people were astonished at his teaching, for he taught them as one having authority and not as the scribes.","And they were astonished at his doctrine: for he taught them as one that had authority, and not as the scribes.","The people were amazed at his teaching, because he taught them as one who had authority, not as the teachers of the law.","Et stupebant super doctrina eius: erat enim docens eos quasi potestatem habens et non sicut scribae.","וישתוממו על תורתו כי היה מלמדם כבעל גבורה ולא כספרים׃"],["48","1","23","마침 그 회당에 더러운 영이 들린 사람이 있었는데, 그가 소리를 지르며","그 때 더러운 악령 들린 사람 하나가 회당에 있다가 큰소리로","마침 그들의 회당에 더러운 귀신 들린 사람이 있어 소리 질러 이르되","마침 저희 회당에 더러운 귀신 들린 사람이 있어 소리질러 가로되","그런데 그 자리에 더러운 귀신 들린 사람 하나가 와 있다가 소리쳤다.","In their synagogue was a man with an unclean spirit;","And there was in their synagogue a man with an unclean spirit; and he cried out,","Just then a man in their synagogue who was possessed by an evil spirit cried out,","Et statim erat in synagoga eorum homo in spiritu immundo; et exclamavit","ואיש היה בבית כנסתם אשר רוח טמאה בו ויצעק לאמר׃"],["48","1","24","말하였다. “나자렛 사람 예수님, 당신께서 저희와 무슨 상관이 있습니까? 저희를 멸망시키러 오셨습니까? 저는 당신이 누구신지 압니다. 당신은 하느님의 거룩하신 분이십니다.”","\"나자렛 예수님, 어찌하여 우리를 간섭하시려는 것입니까? 우리를 없애려고 오셨습니까? 나는 당신이 누구신지 압니다. 당신은 하느님께서 보내신 거룩한 분이십니다.\" 하고 외쳤다.","나사렛 예수여 우리가 당신과 무슨 상관이 있나이까 우리를 멸하러 왔나이까 나는 당신이 누구인 줄 아노니 하나님의 거룩한 자니이다","나사렛 예수여 우리가 당신과 무슨 상관이 있나이까 우리를 멸하러 왔나이까 나는 당신이 누구인줄 아노니 하나님의 거룩한 자니이다","\"나사렛 예수여, 우리가 당신과 무슨 상관이 있다고 우리를 이렇듯 난처하게 만드십니까? 우리를 없애려고 오셨습니까? 나는 당신이 누구인지 압니다. 당신은 하나님의 거룩한 아들이십니다!\"","he cried out, “What have you to do with us, Jesus of Nazareth? Have you come to destroy us? I know who you are—the Holy One of God!”","Saying, Let us alone; what have we to do with thee, thou Jesus of Nazareth? art thou come to destroy us? I know thee who thou art, the Holy One of God.","\"What do you want with us, Jesus of Nazareth? Have you come to destroy us? I know who you are--the Holy One of God!\"","dicens:  “Quid nobis et tibi, Iesu Nazarene? Venisti perdere nos? Scio qui sis: Sanctus Dei “.","אהה מה לנו ולך ישוע הנצרי באת להאבידנו ידעתי מי אתה קדוש האלהים׃"],["48","1","25","예수님께서 그에게 “조용히 하여라. 그 사람에게서 나가라.” 하고 꾸짖으시니,","그래서 예수께서 \"입을 다물고 이 사람에게서 나가거라.\" 하고 꾸짖으시자","예수께서 꾸짖어 이르시되 잠잠하고 그 사람에게서 나오라 하시니","예수께서 꾸짖어 가라사대 잠잠하고 그 사람에게서 나오라 하시니","예수께서는 더러운 귀신을 꾸짖으시며 \"조용히 하고 그 사람에게서 나오라\"고 명령하셨다.","Jesus rebuked him and said, “Quiet! Come out of him!”","And Jesus rebuked him, saying, Hold thy peace, and come out of him.","\"Be quiet!\" said Jesus sternly. \"Come out of him!\"","Et comminatus est ei Iesus dicens:  “Obmutesce et exi de homine! “.","ויגער בו ישוע לאמר האלם וצא ממנו׃"],["48","1","26","더러운 영은 그 사람에게 경련을 일으켜 놓고 큰 소리를 지르며 나갔다.","더러운 악령은 그 사람에게 발작을 일으켜놓고 큰소리를 지르며 떠나갔다.","더러운 귀신이 그 사람에게 경련을 일으키고 큰 소리를 지르며 나오는지라","더러운 귀신이 그 사람으로 경련을 일으키게 하고 큰 소리를 지르며 나오는지라","더러운 귀신은 소리를 지르며 그 사람에게 발작을 일으켜 놓고 떠나갔다.","The unclean spirit convulsed him and with a loud cry came out of him.","And when the unclean spirit had torn him, and cried with a loud voice, he came out of him.","The evil spirit shook the man violently and came out of him with a shriek.","Et discerpens eum spiritus immundus et exclamans voce magna exivit ab eo.","ויסחבהו רוח הטמאה ויצעק בקול גדול ויצא ממנו׃"],["48","1","27","그러자 사람들이 모두 놀라, “이게 어찌 된 일이냐? 새롭고 권위 있는 가르침이다. 저이가 더러운 영들에게 명령하니 그것들도 복종하는구나.” 하며 서로 물어보았다.","이것을 보고 모두들 놀라 \"이게 어찌 된 일이냐? 이것은 권위 있는 새 교훈이다. 그의 명령에는 더러운 악령들도 굴복하는구나!\" 하며 서로 수군거렸다.","다 놀라 서로 물어 이르되 이는 어찜이냐 권위 있는 새 교훈이로다 더러운 귀신들에게 명한즉 순종하는도다 하더라","다 놀라 서로 물어 가로되 이는 어찜이뇨 권세 있는 새 교훈이로다 더러운 귀신들을 명한즉 순종하는도다 하더라","놀란 사람들은 흥분한 목소리로 거기서 일어난 일을 서로 이야기하였다. \"이게 도대체 어떻게 될 일인가? 이렇게까지 권위 있는 가르침은 들어 본 적이 없다. 더러운 귀신까지도 그분의 명령에 복종하다니!\"","All were amazed and asked one another, “What is this? A new teaching with authority. He commands even the unclean spirits and they obey him.”","And they were all amazed, insomuch that they questioned among themselves, saying, What thing is this? what new doctrine is this? for with authority commandeth he even the unclean spirits, and they do obey him.","The people were all so amazed that they asked each other, \"What is this? A new teaching--and with authority! He even gives orders to evil spirits and they obey him.\"","Et mirati sunt omnes, ita ut conquirerent inter se dicentes:  “Quidnam est hoc? Doctrina nova cum potestate; et spiritibus immundis imperat, et oboediunt ei “.","ויבהלו כלם וישאלו איש את רעהו לאמר מה זאת מה היא התורה החדשה אשר אף לרוחות הטמאה בגבורה הוא מצוה והנה שמעות לו׃"],["48","1","28","그리하여 그분의 소문이 곧바로 갈릴래아 주변 모든 지방에 두루 퍼져 나갔다.","예수의 소문은 삽시간에 온 갈릴래아와 그 근방에 두루 퍼졌다.","예수의 소문이 곧 온 갈릴리 사방에 퍼지더라","예수의 소문이 곧 온 갈릴리 사방에 퍼지더라","예수의 소문은 금방 갈릴리 온 지역으로 퍼져 나갔다.","His fame spread everywhere throughout the whole region of Galilee.","And immediately his fame spread abroad throughout all the region round about Galilee.","News about him spread quickly over the whole region of Galilee.","Et processit rumor eius statim ubique in omnem regionem Galilaeae.","ויצא שמעו מהר בכל מקמות ארץ הגליל׃"],["48","1","29","그들은 회당에서 나와, 야고보와 요한과 함께 곧바로 시몬과 안드레아의 집으로 갔다.","얼마 뒤에 예수께서 회당에서 나와 야고보와 요한과 함께 시몬과 안드레아의 집에 들어가셨다.","회당에서 나와 곧 야고보와 요한과 함께 시몬과 안드레의 집에 들어가시니","회당에서 나와 곧 야고보와 요한과 함께 시몬과 안드레의 집에 들어가시니","예수께서는 회당에서 나와 야고보와 요한과 함께 시몬과 안드레의 집으로 가셨다.","On leaving the synagogue he entered the house of Simon and Andrew with James and John.","And forthwith, when they were come out of the synagogue, they entered into the house of Simon and Andrew, with James and John.","As soon as they left the synagogue, they went with James and John to the home of Simon and Andrew.","Et protinus egredientes de synagoga venerunt in domum Simonis et Andreae cum Iacobo et Ioanne.","ויהי אחרי צאתם מבית הכנסת ויבאו ביתה שמעון ואנדרי המה ויעקב ויוחנן עמם׃"],["48","1","30","그때에 시몬의 장모가 열병으로 누워 있어서, 사람들이 곧바로 예수님께 그 부인의 사정을 이야기하였다.","때마침 시몬의 장모가 열병으로 누워 있었는데 사람들이 그 사정을 예수께 알렸다.","시몬의 장모가 열병으로 누워 있는지라 사람들이 곧 그 여자에 대하여 예수께 여짜온대","시몬의 장모가 열병으로 누웠는지라 사람들이 곧 그의 일로 예수께 여짜온대","그 집에는 마침 시몬의 장모가 열병으로 앓아 누워 있었다. 그 사정을 예수께 알려드리자","Simon’s mother-in-law lay sick with a fever. They immediately told him about her.","But Simon's wife's mother lay sick of a fever, and anon they tell him of her.","Simon's mother-in-law was in bed with a fever, and they told Jesus about her.","Socrus autem Simonis decumbebat febricitans; et statim dicunt ei de illa.","וחמות שמעון שכבה אחוזת הקדחת וימהרו לדבר אליו עליה׃"],["48","1","31","예수님께서 그 부인에게 다가가시어 손을 잡아 일으키시니 열이 가셨다. 그러자 부인은 그들의 시중을 들었다.","예수께서 그 부인 곁으로 가서 손을 잡아 일으키시자 열이 내리고 부인은 그들의 시중을 들었다.","나아가사 그 손을 잡아 일으키시니 열병이 떠나고 여자가 그들에게 수종드니라","나아가사 그 손을 잡아 일으키시니 열병이 떠나고 여자가 저희에게 수종드니라","예수께서는 그 여자 곁으로 다가가 손을 잡아 일으키셨다. 그러자 순식간에 열이 내려서 그 여자는 자리에서 일어나 그들의 저녁을 준비하였다.","He approached, grasped her hand, and helped her up. Then the fever left her and she waited on them.","And he came and took her by the hand, and lifted her up; and immediately the fever left her, and she ministered unto them.","So he went to her, took her hand and helped her up. The fever left her and she began to wait on them.","Et accedens elevavit eam apprehensa manu; et dimisit eam febris, et ministrabat eis.","ויגש ויאחז בידה ויקימה ותרף ממנה הקדחת פתאם ותשרת אותם׃"],["48","1","32","저녁이 되고 해가 지자, 사람들이 병든 이들과 마귀 들린 이들을 모두 예수님께 데려왔다.","해가 지고 날이 저물었을 때에 사람들이 병자와 마귀 들린 사람들을 모두 예수께 데려왔으며","저물어 해 질 때에 모든 병자와 귀신 들린 자를 예수께 데려오니","저물어 해 질 때에 모든 병자와 귀신들린 자를 예수께 데려오니","해질 무렵쯤에는 예수께 병을 고쳐 달라고 데려온 병자와 귀신 들린 사람들이 그 집안에 가득 찼다.","When it was evening, after sunset, they brought to him all who were ill or possessed by demons.","And at even, when the sun did set, they brought unto him all that were diseased, and them that were possessed with devils.","That evening after sunset the people brought to Jesus all the sick and demon-possessed.","Vespere autem facto, cum occidisset sol, afferebant ad eum omnes male habentes et daemonia habentes;","ויהי בערב כבוא השמש ויביאו אליו את כל החולים ואת אחוזי השדים׃"],["48","1","33","온 고을 사람들이 문 앞에 모여들었다.","온 동네 사람들이 문 앞에 모여들었다.","온 동네가 그 문 앞에 모였더라","온 동네가 문 앞에 모였더라","그리고 문밖에는 가버나움 시내에서 그것을 보려고 수많은 사람들이 모여들었다.","The whole town was gathered at the door.","And all the city was gathered together at the door.","The whole town gathered at the door,","et erat omnis civitas congregata ad ianuam.","וכל העיר נאספו יחדו פתח הבית׃"],["48","1","34","예수님께서는 갖가지 질병을 앓는 많은 사람을 고쳐 주시고 많은 마귀를 쫓아내셨다. 그러면서 마귀들이 말하는 것을 허락하지 않으셨다. 그들이 당신을 알고 있었기 때문이다.","예수께서는 온갖 병자들을 고쳐주시고 많은 마귀를 쫓아내시며 자기 일을 입 밖에 내지 말라고 당부하셨다. 마귀들은 예수가 누구신지를 알고 있었기 때문이다.","예수께서 각종 병이 든 많은 사람을 고치시며 많은 귀신을 내쫓으시되 귀신이 자기를 알므로 그 말하는 것을 허락하지 아니하시니라","예수께서 각색 병든 많은 사람을 고치시며 많은 귀신을 내어 쫓으시되 귀신이 자기를 알므로 그 말하는 것을 허락지 아니하시니라","예수께서는 그날 저녁에 온갖 병자들을 고치고 많은 귀신을 쫓아내셨다. 그러나 자신이 누구인지를 귀신들이 잘 알고 있기 때문에 그들이 말하고 것을 허락하시지 않았다.","He cured many who were sick with various diseases, and he drove out many demons, not permitting them to speak because they knew him.","And he healed many that were sick of divers diseases, and cast out many devils; and suffered not the devils to speak, because they knew him.","and Jesus healed many who had various diseases. He also drove out many demons, but he would not let the demons speak because they knew who he was.","Et curavit multos, qui vexabantur variis languoribus, et daemonia multa eiecit et non sinebat loqui daemonia, quoniam sciebant eum.","וירפא רבים אשר היו חולים חליים שונים ויגרש שדים הרבה ולא נתן את השדים לדבר כי ידעהו׃"],["48","1","35","다음 날 새벽 아직 캄캄할 때, 예수님께서는 일어나 외딴곳으로 나가시어 그곳에서 기도하셨다.","다음날 새벽 예수께서는 먼동이 트기 전에 일어나 외딴 곳으로 가시어 기도하고 계셨다.","새벽 아직도 밝기 전에 예수께서 일어나 나가 한적한 곳으로 가사 거기서 기도하시더니","새벽 오히려 미명에 예수께서 일어나 나가 한적한 곳으로 가사 거기서 기도하시더니","다음날 이른 새벽 아직 날이 밝기도 전에 예수께서는 한적한 곳으로 나가 기도하고 계셨다.","Rising very early before dawn, he left and went off to a deserted place, where he prayed.","And in the morning, rising up a great while before day, he went out, and departed into a solitary place, and there prayed.","Very early in the morning, while it was still dark, Jesus got up, left the house and went off to a solitary place, where he prayed.","Et diluculo valde mane surgens egressus est et abiit in desertum locum ibique orabat.","וישכם ממחרת בעוד לילה ויצא וילך אל מקום חרבה ויתפלל שם׃"],["48","1","36","시몬과 그 일행이 예수님을 찾아 나섰다가","그 때 시몬의 일행이 예수를 찾아다니다가","시몬과 및 그와 함께 있는 자들이 예수의 뒤를 따라가","시몬과 및 그와 함께 있는 자들이 예수의 뒤를 따라가","그때 시몬과 일행 몇 명이 예수를 찾아 나와서","Simon and those who were with him pursued him","And Simon and they that were with him followed after him.","Simon and his companions went to look for him,","Et persecutus est eum Simon et qui cum illo erant;","וירדפו אחריו שמעון והאנשים אשר אתו׃"],["48","1","37","그분을 만나자, “모두 스승님을 찾고 있습니다.” 하고 말하였다.","만나서 \"모두들 선생님을 찾고 있습니다.\" 하고 말하였다.","만나서 이르되 모든 사람이 주를 찾나이다","만나서 가로되 모든 사람이 주를 찾나이다","예수를 만나자 이렇게 말하였다. \"모두가 선생님을 찾고 있습니다.\"","and on finding him said, “Everyone is looking for you.”","And when they had found him, they said unto him, All men seek for thee.","and when they found him, they exclaimed: \"Everyone is looking for you!\"","et cum invenissent eum, dixerunt ei:  “Omnes quaerunt te! “.","וימצאהו ויאמרו אליו הנה כלם מבקשים אותך׃"],["48","1","38","예수님께서 그들에게 말씀하셨다. “다른 이웃 고을들을 찾아가자. 그곳에도 내가 복음을 선포해야 한다. 사실 나는 그 일을 하려고 떠나온 것이다.”","예수께서는 그들에게 \"이 근방 다음 동네에도 가자. 거기에서도 전도해야 한다. 나는 이 일을 하러 왔다.\" 하고 말씀하셨다.","이르시되 우리가 다른 가까운 마을들로 가자 거기서도 전도하리니 내가 이를 위하여 왔노라 하시고","이르시되 우리가 다른 가까운 마을들로 가자 거기서도 전도하리니 내가 이를 위하여 왔노라 하시고","그러자 예수께서는 \"우리는 다른 이웃 마을에 가서 그들에게도 복음을 전해야 한다. 나는 이 일을 하러 왔다\" 하고 말씀하셨다.","He told them, “Let us go on to the nearby villages that I may preach there also. For this purpose have I come.”","And he said unto them, Let us go into the next towns, that I may preach there also: for therefore came I forth.","Jesus replied, \"Let us go somewhere else--to the nearby villages--so I can preach there also. That is why I have come.\"","Et ait illis:  “Eamus alibi in proximos vicos, ut et ibi praedicem: ad hoc enim veni “.","ויאמר אליהם נעברה מזה אל ערי הפרזות הקרבות ואקרא גם שם כי בעבור זאת יצאתי׃"],["48","1","39","그러고 나서 예수님께서는 온 갈릴래아를 다니시며, 회당에서 복음을 선포하시고 마귀들을 쫓아내셨다.","이렇게 갈릴래아 지방을 두루 찾아 여러 회당에서 전도하시며 마귀를 쫓아내셨다.","이에 온 갈릴리에 다니시며 그들의 여러 회당에서 전도하시고 또 귀신들을 내쫓으시더라","이에 온 갈릴리에 다니시며 저희 여러 회당에서 전도하시고 또 귀신들을 내어 쫓으시더라","예수께서는 갈릴리 온 지방을 두루 다니며 여러 회당에서 설교하고 귀신 들린 사람들을 고쳐 주셨다.","So he went into their synagogues, preaching and driving out demons throughout the whole of Galilee.","And he preached in their synagogues throughout all Galilee, and cast out devils.","So he traveled throughout Galilee, preaching in their synagogues and driving out demons.","Et venit praedicans in synagogis eorum per omnem Galilaeam et daemonia eiciens.","ויהי קרא בבתי כנסיותיהם בכל הגליל ויגרש את השדים׃"],["48","1","40","어떤 나병 환자가 예수님께 와서 도움을 청하였다. 그가 무릎을 꿇고 이렇게 말하였다. “스승님께서는 하고자 하시면 저를 깨끗하게 하실 수 있습니다.”","나병환자 하나가 예수께 와서 무릎을 꿇고 애원하며 \"선생님은 하고자만 하시면 저를 깨끗이 고쳐주실 수 있습니다.\" 하고 말씀 드렸다.","한 나병환자가 예수께 와서 꿇어 엎드려 간구하여 이르되 원하시면 저를 깨끗하게 하실 수 있나이다","한 문둥병자가 예수께 와서 꿇어 엎드리어 간구하여 가로되 원하시면 저를 깨끗케 하실 수 있나이다","한번은 나병환자 한 사람이 예수 앞에 나아와 무릎을 꿇고 간청하였다. \"선생님께서는 하시고자 하면 저를 깨끗게 하실 수 있습니다.\"","A leper came to him [and kneeling down] begged him and said, “If you wish, you can make me clean.”","And there came a leper to him, beseeching him, and kneeling down to him, and saying unto him, If thou wilt, thou canst make me clean.","A man with leprosy came to him and begged him on his knees, \"If you are willing, you can make me clean.\"","Et venit ad eum leprosus deprecans eum et genu flectens et dicens ei:  “Si vis, potes me mundare “.","ויבוא אליו איש מצרע ויתחנן אליו ויכרע על ברכיו ויאמר לו אם תרצה תוכל לטהרני׃"],["48","1","41","예수님께서 가엾은 마음이 드셔서 손을 내밀어 그에게 대시며 말씀하셨다. “내가 하고자 하니 깨끗하게 되어라.”","예수께서 측은한 마음이 드시어 그에게 손을 갖다 대시며 \"그렇게 해주겠다. 깨끗하게 되어라.\" 하시자","예수께서 불쌍히 여기사 손을 내밀어 그에게 대시며 이르시되 내가 원하노니 깨끗함을 받으라 하시니","예수께서 민망히 여기사 손을 내밀어 저에게 대시며 가라사대 내가 원하노니 깨끗함을 받으라 하신대","그를 불쌍히 여긴 예수께서는 그에게 따뜻한 손길을 내밀며 말씀하셨다. \"내가 원하니 깨끗게 되어라.\"","Moved with pity, he stretched out his hand, touched him, and said to him, “I do will it. Be made clean.”","And Jesus, moved with compassion, put forth his hand, and touched him, and saith unto him, I will; be thou clean.","Filled with compassion, Jesus reached out his hand and touched the man. \"I am willing,\" he said. \"Be clean!\"","Et misertus extendens manum suam tetigit eum et ait illi:  “Volo, mundare! “;","וירחם עליו וישלח את ידו ויגע בו ויאמר רצה אנכי טהר׃"],["48","1","42","그러자 바로 나병이 가시고 그가 깨끗하게 되었다.","그는 곧 나병 증세가 사라지면서 깨끗이 나았다.","곧 나병이 그 사람에게서 떠나가고 깨끗하여진지라","곧 문둥병이 그 사람에게서 떠나가고 깨끗하여진지라","그 순간 나병이 그 사람에게서 떠나서 그는 깨끗해졌다.","The leprosy left him immediately, and he was made clean.","And as soon as he had spoken, immediately the leprosy departed from him, and he was cleansed.","Immediately the leprosy left him and he was cured.","et statim discessit ab eo lepra, et mundatus est.","עודנו מדבר והצרעת סרה ממנו ויטהר׃"],["48","1","43","예수님께서는 그를 곧 돌려보내시며 단단히 이르셨다.","예수께서 곧 그를 보내시면서","곧 보내시며 엄히 경고하사","엄히 경계하사 곧 보내시며","그러자 예수께서는 그에게 엄하게 당부하셨다.","Then, warning him sternly, he dismissed him at once.","And he straitly charged him, and forthwith sent him away;","Jesus sent him away at once with a strong warning:","Et infremuit in eum statimque eiecit illum","ויגער בו וימהר להוציאו החוצה׃"],["48","1","44","그에게 이렇게 말씀하셨다. “누구에게든 아무 말도 하지 않도록 조심하여라. 다만 사제에게 가서 네 몸을 보이고, 네가 깨끗해진 것과 관련하여 모세가 명령한 예물을 바쳐, 그들에게 증거가 되게 하여라.”","\"아무에게도 말하지 말고 다만 사제에게 가서 네 몸을 보이고 모세가 명한 대로 예물을 드려 네가 깨끗해진 것을 그들에게 증명하여라.\" 하고 엄하게 이르셨다.","이르시되 삼가 아무에게 아무 말도 하지 말고 가서 네 몸을 제사장에게 보이고 네가 깨끗하게 되었으니 ㄷ)모세가 명한 것을 드려 그들에게 입증하라 하셨더라","가라사대 삼가 아무에게 아무 말도 하지 말고 가서 네 몸을 제사장에게 보이고 네 깨끗케 됨을 인하여 ㄷ)모세의 명한 것을 드려 저희에게 증거하라 하셨더니 레 14:2 이하","\"도중에 아무에게도 자랑하지 말고 곧장 제사장에게 달려가 검사를 받으라. 그리고 모세의 규정대로 ㄱ) 나병환자의 몸이 깨끗해졌을 때 드리는 예물을 드려 깨끗해졌다는 증거를 삼으라.\" (ㄱ. 레14:2-32)","Then he said to him, “See that you tell no one anything, but go, show yourself to the priest and offer for your cleansing what Moses prescribed; that will be proof for them.”","And saith unto him, See thou say nothing to any man: but go thy way, shew thyself to the priest, and offer for thy cleansing those things which Moses commanded, for a testimony unto them.","\"See that you don't tell this to anyone. But go, show yourself to the priest and offer the sacrifices that Moses commanded for your cleansing, as a testimony to them.\"","et dicit ei: “Vide, nemini quidquam dixeris; sed vade, ostende te sacerdoti et offer pro emundatione tua, quae praecepit Moyses, in testimonium illis “.","ויאמר אליו ראה אל תספר דבר לאיש כי אם לך הראה אל הכהן והקרב על טהרתך את אשר צוה משה לעדות להם׃"],["48","1","45","그러나 그는 떠나가서 이 이야기를 널리 알리고 퍼뜨리기 시작하였다. 그리하여 예수님께서는 더 이상 드러나게 고을로 들어가지 못하시고, 바깥 외딴곳에 머무르셨다. 그래도 사람들은 사방에서 그분께 모여들었다.","그러나 그는 물러가서 이 일을 널리 선전하며 퍼뜨렸기 때문에 그 때부터 예수께서는 드러나게 동네로 들어가지 못하시고 동네에서 떨어진 외딴 곳에 머물러 계셨다. 그래도 사람들은 사방에서 예수께 모여들었다.","그러나 그 사람이 나가서 이 일을 많이 전파하여 널리 퍼지게 하니 그러므로 예수께서 다시는 드러나게 동네에 들어가지 못하시고 오직 바깥 한적한 곳에 계셨으나 사방에서 사람들이 그에게로 나아오더라","그러나 그 사람이 나가서 이 일을 많이 전파하여 널리 퍼지게 하니 그러므로 예수께서 다시는 드러나게 동네에 들어가지 못하시고 오직 바깥 한적한 곳에 계셨으나 사방에서 그에게로 나아오더라","그러나 그 사람은 너무도 기쁜 나머지 제사장 앞에 이르기도 전에 예수께서 병을 고쳐 주신 사실을 사방에 퍼뜨렸다. 결국 소문을 들은 많은 사람이 몰려들어 예수께서는 마을로 다시 들어가지 못하고 외딴 곳에 머물러 계셨다. 그래도 사람들은 예수를 찾아 사방에서 모여들었다.","The man went away and began to publicize the whole matter. He spread the report abroad so that it was impossible for Jesus to enter a town openly. He remained outside in deserted places, and people kept coming to him from everywhere.","But he went out, and began to publish it much, and to blaze abroad the matter, insomuch that Jesus could no more openly enter into the city, but was without in desert places: and they came to him from every quarter.","Instead he went out and began to talk freely, spreading the news. As a result, Jesus could no longer enter a town openly but stayed outside in lonely places. Yet the people still came to him from everywhere.","At ille egressus coepit praedicare multum et diffamare sermonem, ita ut iam non posset manifesto in civitatem introire, sed foris in desertis locis erat; et conveniebant ad eum undique.","אך הוא בצאתו החל לקרא הרבה ולהשמיע הדבר עד אשר לא יכל לבוא עוד אל עיר בגלוי כי אם היה ישב מחוץ לעיר במקמות חרבה ויבאו אליו מכל עבריו׃"],["48","2","1","며칠 뒤에 예수님께서는 다시 카파르나움으로 들어가셨다. 그분께서 집에 계시다는 소문이 퍼지자,","며칠 뒤에 예수께서는 다시 가파르나움으로 가셨다. 예수께서 집에 계시다는 말이 퍼지자","수 일 후에 예수께서 다시 가버나움에 들어가시니 집에 계시다는 소문이 들린지라","수일 후에 예수께서 다시 가버나움에 들어가시니 집에 계신 소문이 들린지라","며칠 후에 예수께서는 다시 가버나움으로 들어가셨다. 예수께서 돌아오셨다는 소문이 온 시내에 퍼지자","When Jesus returned to Capernaum after some days, it became known that he was at home.","And again he entered into Capernaum after some days; and it was noised that he was in the house.","A few days later, when Jesus again entered Capernaum, the people heard that he had come home.","Et iterum intravit Capharnaum post dies, et auditum est quod in domo esset.","ויהי מקץ ימים בשובו אל כפר נחום וישמעו כי הוא בבית׃"],["48","2","2","문 앞까지 빈자리가 없을 만큼 많은 사람이 모여들었다. 예수님께서는 그들에게 복음 말씀을 전하셨다.","많은 사람이 모여들어 마침내 문 앞에까지 빈틈없이 들어섰다. 그리고 예수께서는 그들에게 하느님의 말씀을 전하고 계셨다.","많은 사람이 모여서 문 앞까지도 들어설 자리가 없게 되었는데 예수께서 그들에게 도를 말씀하시더니","많은 사람이 모여서 문 앞에라도 용신할 수 없게 되었는데 예수께서 저희에게 도를 말씀하시더니","그가 묵고 계신 집앞은 어느새 사람들로 가득 차 발 디딜 틈조차 없었다. 예수께서 그들에게 설교하고 계시는데","Many gathered together so that there was no longer room for them, not even around the door, and he preached the word to them.","And straightway many were gathered together, insomuch that there was no room to receive them, no, not so much as about the door: and he preached the word unto them.","So many gathered that there was no room left, not even outside the door, and he preached the word to them.","Et convenerunt multi, ita ut non amplius caperentur neque ad ianuam, et loquebatur eis verbum.","ויאספו רבים מהרה עד אפס מקום לעמד אף מחוץ לפתח וידבר אליהם את הדבר׃"],["48","2","3","그때에 사람들이 어떤 중풍 병자를 그분께 데리고 왔다. 그 병자는 네 사람이 들것에 들고 있었는데,","그 때 어떤 중풍병자를 네 사람이 들고 왔다.","사람들이 한 중풍병자를 네 사람에게 메워 가지고 예수께로 올새","사람들이 한 중풍병자를 네 사람에게 메워 가지고 예수께로 올쌔","네 사람이 중풍병자 한 사람을 들것에 실어 데려왔다.","They came bringing to him a paralytic carried by four men.","And they come unto him, bringing one sick of the palsy, which was borne of four.","Some men came, bringing to him a paralytic, carried by four of them.","Et veniunt ferentes ad eum paralyticum, qui a quattuor portabatur.","ויבאו אליו אנשים נשאים איש נכה אברים וישאהו בארבעה׃"],["48","2","4","군중 때문에 그분께 가까이 데려갈 수가 없었다. 그래서 그분께서 계신 자리의 지붕을 벗기고 구멍을 내어, 중풍 병자가 누워 있는 들것을 달아 내려 보냈다.","그러나 사람들이 너무 많아 예수께 가까이 데려갈 수가 없었다. 그래서 예수가 계신 바로 위의 지붕을 벗겨 구멍을 내고 중풍병자를 요에 눕힌 채 예수 앞에 달아 내려보냈다.","무리들 때문에 예수께 데려갈 수 없으므로 그 계신 곳의 지붕을 뜯어 구멍을 내고 중풍병자가 누운 상을 달아 내리니","무리를 인하여 예수께 데려갈 수 없으므로 그 계신 곳의 지붕을 뜯어 구멍을 내고 중풍병자의 누운 상을 달아내리니","그러나 사람들이 너무 많아 예수께 가까이 데려갈 수가 없자 지붕을 뜯어 구멍을 내고 중풍병자가 누워 있는 들것을 예수 앞으로 달아 내렸다.","Unable to get near Jesus because of the crowd, they opened up the roof above him. After they had broken through, they let down the mat on which the paralytic was lying.","And when they could not come nigh unto him for the press, they uncovered the roof where he was: and when they had broken it up, they let down the bed wherein the sick of the palsy lay.","Since they could not get him to Jesus because of the crowd, they made an opening in the roof above Jesus and, after digging through it, lowered the mat the paralyzed man was lying on.","Et cum non possent offerre eum illi prae turba, nudaverunt tectum, ubi erat, et perfodientes summittunt grabatum, in quo paralyticus iacebat.","ולא יכלו לגשת אליו מפני העם ויסירו את הגג במקום אשר היה שם ויחתרו חתירה ויורידו את המשכב אשר שכב עליה נכה האברים׃"],["48","2","5","예수님께서 그들의 믿음을 보시고 중풍 병자에게 말씀하셨다. “얘야, 너는 죄를 용서받았다.”","예수께서는 그들의 믿음을 보시고 중풍병자에게 \"너는 죄를 용서받았다.\" 하고 말씀하셨다.","예수께서 그들의 믿음을 보시고 중풍병자에게 이르시되 작은 자야 네 죄 사함을 받았느니라 하시니","예수께서 저희의 믿음을 보시고 중풍병자에게 이르시되 소자야 네 죄 사함을 받았느니라 하시니","예수께서 그들의 믿음을 보고 중풍병자에게 말씀하셨다. \"아들아, 네 죄는 용서받았다\"","When Jesus saw their faith, he said to the paralytic, “Child, your sins are forgiven.”","When Jesus saw their faith, he said unto the sick of the palsy, Son, thy sins be forgiven thee.","When Jesus saw their faith, he said to the paralytic, \"Son, your sins are forgiven.\"","Cum vidisset autem Iesus fidem illorum, ait paralytico:  “Fili, dimittuntur peccata tua “.","ויהי כראות ישוע את אמונתם ויאמר אל נכה האברים בני נסלחו לך חטאתיך׃"],["48","2","6","율법 학자 몇 사람이 거기에 앉아 있다가 마음속으로 의아하게 생각하였다.","거기 앉아 있던 율법학자 몇 사람이 속으로","어떤 서기관들이 거기 앉아서 마음에 생각하기를","어떤 서기관들이 거기 앉아서 마음에 의논하기를","율법학자 몇 사람이 거기 앉아 있다가 속으로 생각하였다.","Now some of the scribes were sitting there asking themselves,","But there was certain of the scribes sitting there, and reasoning in their hearts,","Now some teachers of the law were sitting there, thinking to themselves,","Erant autem illic quidam de scribis sedentes et cogitantes in cordibus suis:","ויהיו מן הסופרים ישבים שם וחשבים בלבם לאמר׃"],["48","2","7","‘이자가 어떻게 저런 말을 할 수 있단 말인가? 하느님을 모독하는군. 하느님 한 분 외에 누가 죄를 용서할 수 있단 말인가?’","\"이 사람이 어떻게 감히 이런 말을 하여 하느님을 모독하는가? 하느님말고 누가 죄를 용서할 수 있단 말인가?\" 하며 중얼거렸다.","이 사람이 어찌 이렇게 말하는가 신성모독이로다 오직 하나님 한 분 외에는 누가 능히 죄를 사하겠느냐","이 사람이 어찌 이렇게 말하는가 참람하도다 오직 하나님 한 분 외에는 누가 능히 죄를 사하겠느냐","\"무엇이라고? 죄를 용서한다고? 이 사람이 어찌하여 감히 이런 말을 하는가? 이것은 하나님을 모독하는 말이다. 하나님만이 죄를 용서하실 수 있지 않은가! 그렇다면 저자는 자기를 하나님으로 아는 게 아닌가?\"","“Why does this man speak that way? He is blaspheming. Who but God alone can forgive sins?”","Why doth this man thus speak blasphemies? who can forgive sins but God only?","\"Why does this fellow talk like that? He's blaspheming! Who can forgive sins but God alone?\"","Quid hic sic loquitur? Blasphemat! Quis potest dimittere peccata nisi solus Deus?.","מה ידבר זה גדופים כאלה מי יוכל לסלח חטאים בלתי האלהים לבדו׃"],["48","2","8","예수님께서는 곧바로 그들이 속으로 의아하게 생각하는 것을 당신 영으로 아시고 말씀하셨다. “너희는 어찌하여 마음속으로 의아하게 생각하느냐?","예수께서 그들의 생각을 알아채시고 이렇게 말씀하셨다. \"어찌하여 너희는 그런 생각을 품고 있느냐?","그들이 속으로 이렇게 생각하는 줄을 예수께서 곧 중심에 아시고 이르시되 어찌하여 이것을 마음에 생각하느냐","저희가 속으로 이렇게 의논하는 줄을 예수께서 곧 1)중심에 아시고 이르시되 어찌하여 이것을 마음에 의논하느냐 혹 심령으로","그러나 예수께서는 그들의 생각을 알아차리고 꾸지람하시기를 \"왜 너희는 그런 생각을 품고 있느냐?","Jesus immediately knew in his mind what they were thinking to themselves, so he said, “Why are you thinking such things in your hearts?","And immediately when Jesus perceived in his spirit that they so reasoned within themselves, he said unto them, Why reason ye these things in your hearts?","Immediately Jesus knew in his spirit that this was what they were thinking in their hearts, and he said to them, \"Why are you thinking these things?","Quo statim cognito Iesus spiritu suo quia sic cogitarent intra se, dicit illis:  “Quid ista cogitatis in cordibus vestris?","וידע ישוע ברוחו כי ככה חשבו בלבבם ויאמר אליהם מדוע תחשבו כאלה בלבבכם׃"],["48","2","9","중풍 병자에게 ‘너는 죄를 용서받았다.’ 하고 말하는 것과 ‘일어나 네 들것을 가지고 걸어가라.’ 하고 말하는 것 가운데에서 어느 쪽이 더 쉬우냐?","중풍병자에게 '너는 죄를 용서받았다.' 하는 것과 '일어나 네 요를 걷어가지고 걸어가거라.' 하는 것과 어느 편이 더 쉽겠느냐?","중풍병자에게 네 죄 사함을 받았느니라 하는 말과 일어나 네 상을 가지고 걸어가라 하는 말 중에서 어느 것이 쉽겠느냐","중풍병자에게 네 죄 사함을 받았느니라 하는 말과 일어나 네 상을 가지고 걸어가라 하는 말이 어느 것이 쉽겠느냐","\"이 중풍병자에게 네 죄는 용서받았다고 말하는 것이 쉬우냐, 그 자리에서 들것을 가지고 일어나라고 말하는 것이 더 쉬우냐? 인자는 땅에서 죄를 용서하는 권세를 가지고 있다. 내가 이 사람을 고쳐서 그 증거를 너희에게 보여주겠다\" 하며 중풍병자에게 돌아서서 말씀하셨다. \"들것을 가지고 집으로 가라. 네 병이 나았다.\"","Which is easier, to say to the paralytic, ‘Your sins are forgiven,’ or to say, ‘Rise, pick up your mat and walk’?","Whether is it easier to say to the sick of the palsy, Thy sins be forgiven thee; or to say, Arise, and take up thy bed, and walk?","Which is easier: to say to the paralytic, 'Your sins are forgiven,' or to say, 'Get up, take your mat and walk'?","Quid est facilius, dicere paralytico: “Dimittuntur peccata tua “, an dicere: “Surge et tolle grabatum tuum et ambula “?","מה הנקל האמר אל נכה האברים נסלחו לך חטאתיך אם אמור קום שא את משכבך והתהלך׃"],["48","2","10","이제 사람의 아들이 땅에서 죄를 용서하는 권한을 가지고 있음을 너희가 알게 해 주겠다.” 그러고 나서 중풍 병자에게 말씀하셨다.","이제 땅에서 죄를 용서하는 권한이 사람의 아들에게 있다는 것을 보여주겠다.\" 그리고 나서 중풍병자에게","그러나 인자가 땅에서 죄를 사하는 권세가 있는 줄을 너희로 알게 하려 하노라 하시고 중풍병자에게 말씀하시되","그러나 인자가 땅에서 죄를 사하는 권세가 있는 줄을 너희로 알게 하려하노라 하시고 중풍병자에게 말씀하시되","(9절에 포함되어 있음)","But that you may know that the Son of Man has authority to forgive sins on earth”—","But that ye may know that the Son of man hath power on earth to forgive sins, (he saith to the sick of the palsy,)","But that you may know that the Son of Man has authority on earth to forgive sins....\" He said to the paralytic,","Ut autem sciatis quia potestatem habet Filius hominis interra dimittendi peccata ? ait paralytico - :","אך למען תדעון כי לבן האדם יש השלטן לסלח חטאים בארץ ויאמר אל נכה האברים׃"],["48","2","11","“내가 너에게 말한다. 일어나 들것을 들고 집으로 돌아가거라.”","\"내가 말하는 대로 하여라. 일어나 요를 걷어가지고 집으로 가거라.\" 하고 말씀하셨다.","내가 네게 이르노니 일어나 네 상을 가지고 집으로 가라 하시니","내가 네게 이르노니 일어나 네 상을 가지고 집으로 가라 하시니","(9절에 포함되어 있음)","he said to the paralytic, “I say to you, rise, pick up your mat, and go home.”","I say unto thee, Arise, and take up thy bed, and go thy way into thine house.","\"I tell you, get up, take your mat and go home.\"","Tibi dico: Surge, tolle grabatum tuum et vade in domum tuam “.","לך אני אמר קום שא את משכבך ולך אל ביתך׃"],["48","2","12","그러자 그는 일어나 곧바로 들것을 가지고, 모든 사람이 보는 앞에서 밖으로 걸어 나갔다. 이에 모든 사람이 크게 놀라 하느님을 찬양하며 말하였다. “이런 일은 일찍이 본 적이 없다.”","중풍병자는 사람들이 보는 앞에서 벌떡 일어나 곧 요를 걷어가지고 나갔다. 그러자 모두들 몹시 놀라서 \"이런 일은 정말 처음 보는 일이다.\" 하며 하느님을 찬양하였다.","그가 일어나 곧 상을 가지고 모든 사람 앞에서 나가거늘 그들이 다 놀라 하나님께 영광을 돌리며 이르되 우리가 이런 일을 도무지 보지 못하였다 하더라","그가 일어나 곧 상을 가지고 모든 사람 앞에서 나가거늘 저희가 다 놀라 영광을 하나님께 돌리며 가로되 우리가 이런 일을 도무지 보지 못하였다 하더라","그 사람이 벌떡 일어나더니 들것을 가지고 걸어 나갔다. 사람들은 모두 다 깜짝 놀라며 하나님을 찬양하였다. 그들은 \"일찍이 이런 일을 본 적이 한 번도 없다\"고 서로 말하였다.","He rose, picked up his mat at once, and went away in the sight of everyone. They were all astounded and glorified God, saying, “We have never seen anything like this.”","And immediately he arose, took up the bed, and went forth before them all; insomuch that they were all amazed, and glorified God, saying, We never saw it on this fashion.","He got up, took his mat and walked out in full view of them all. This amazed everyone and they praised God, saying, \"We have never seen anything like this!\"","Et surrexit et protinus sublato grabato abiit coram omnibus, ita ut admirarentur omnes et glorificarent Deum dicentes:  “Numquam sic vidimus! “.","ויקם פתאם וישא את משכבו ויצא לעיני כלם עד כי השתממו כלם וישבחו את האלהים לאמר מעולם לא ראינו כזאת׃"],["48","2","13","예수님께서 다시 호숫가로 나가셨다. 군중이 모두 모여 오자 예수님께서 그들을 가르치셨다.","예수께서 다시 호숫가로 나가셨다. 군중도 모두 따라왔으므로 예수께서는 그들을 가르치셨다.","예수께서 다시 바닷가에 나가시매 큰 무리가 나왔거늘 예수께서 그들을 가르치시니라","예수께서 다시 바닷가에 나가시매 무리가 다 나아왔거늘 예수께서 저희를 가르치시니라","예수께서 다시 바닷가로 나가서 모여든 군중들에게 설교하셨다.","Once again he went out along the sea. All the crowd came to him and he taught them.","And he went forth again by the sea side; and all the multitude resorted unto him, and he taught them.","Once again Jesus went out beside the lake. A large crowd came to him, and he began to teach them.","Et egressus est rursus ad mare; omnisque turba veniebat ad eum, et docebat eos.","וישב לצאת אל יד הים ויבאו אליו כל העם וילמדם׃"],["48","2","14","그 뒤에 길을 지나가시다가 세관에 앉아 있는 알패오의 아들 레위를 보시고 말씀하셨다. “나를 따라라.” 그러자 레위는 일어나 그분을 따랐다.","그리고 그 후에 길을 가시다가 알패오의 아들 레위가 세관에 앉아 있는 것을 보시고 \"나를 따라오너라.\" 하고 부르셨다. 그러자 레위는 일어나서 예수를 따라나섰다.","또 지나가시다가 알패오의 아들 레위가 세관에 앉아 있는 것을 보시고 그에게 이르시되 나를 따르라 하시니 일어나 따르니라","또 지나가시다가 알패오의 아들 레위가 세관에 앉아 있는 것을 보시고 저에게 이르시되 나를 좇으라 하시니 일어나 좇으니라","그리고 얼마 후 길을 가다가 알패오의 아들 레위가 세관에 앉아 있는 것을 보시고 말씀하셨다. \"나를 따르라.\" 그러자 레위는 벌떡 일어나 예수를 따라 나섰다.","As he passed by, he saw Levi, son of Alphaeus, sitting at the customs post. He said to him, “Follow me.” And he got up and followed him.","And as he passed by, he saw Levi the son of Alphaeus sitting at the receipt of custom, and said unto him, Follow me. And he arose and followed him.","As he walked along, he saw Levi son of Alphaeus sitting at the tax collector's booth. \"Follow me,\" Jesus told him, and Levi got up and followed him.","Et cum praeteriret, vidit Levin Alphaei sedentem ad teloneum et ait illi:  “Sequere me “. Et surgens secutus est eum.","ויהי בעברו וירא את לוי בן חלפי ישב בבית המכס ויאמר אליו לכה אחרי ויקם וילך אחריו׃"],["48","2","15","예수님께서 그의 집에서 음식을 잡수시게 되었는데, 많은 세리와 죄인도 예수님과 그분의 제자들과 자리를 함께하였다. 이런 이들이 예수님을 많이 따르고 있었기 때문이다.","어느 날 예수께서는 레위의 집에서 음식을 잡수시게 되었다. 예수를 따르던 사람들 중에는 세리와 죄인들도 많았는데 그 중 여럿이 예수와 그의 제자들과 함께 그 자리에 앉아 있었다.","그의 집에 앉아 잡수실 때에 많은 세리와 죄인들이 예수와 그의 제자들과 함께 앉았으니 이는 그러한 사람들이 많이 있어서 예수를 따름이러라","그의 집에 2)앉아 잡수실 때에 많은 세리와 죄인들이 예수와 그 제자들과 함께 3)앉았으니 이는 저희가 많이 있어서 예수를 좇음이러라 헬, 기대어 누워 (유대인의 음식 먹을 때에 가지는 자세)헬, 기대어 누웠으니","어느 날 예수께서는 레위의 집에서 식사를 하게 되었다. 그런데 그 자리에는 제자들뿐만 아니라 세상에서 멸시받는 세리와 죄인들도 함께 하고 있었는데, 이는 이런 부류의 많은 사람들이 예수를 따르고 있었기 때문이다.","While he was at table in his house, many tax collectors and sinners sat with Jesus and his disciples; for there were many who followed him.","And it came to pass, that, as Jesus sat at meat in his house, many publicans and sinners sat also together with Jesus and his disciples: for there were many, and they followed him.","While Jesus was having dinner at Levi's house, many tax collectors and \"sinners\" were eating with him and his disciples, for there were many who followed him.","Et factum est, cum accumberet in domo illius, et multi publicani et peccatores simul discumbebant cum Iesu et discipulis eius; erant enim multi et sequebantur eum.","ויהי כאשר הסב בביתו ויסבו מוכסים וחטאים רבים עם ישוע ועם תלמידיו כי רבים היו ההלכים אחריו׃"],["48","2","16","바리사이파 율법 학자들은, 예수님께서 죄인과 세리들과 함께 음식을 잡수시는 것을 보고 그분의 제자들에게 말하였다. “저 사람은 어째서 세리와 죄인들과 함께 음식을 먹는 것이오?”","바리사이파의 율법학자들은 예수께서 죄인과 세리들과 한 자리에서 음식을 나누시는 것을 보고 예수의 제자들에게 \"저 사람이 세리와 죄인들과 어울려 같이 음식을 나누고 있으니 어찌 된 노릇이오?\" 하고 물었다.","바리새인의 서기관들이 예수께서 죄인 및 세리들과 함께 잡수시는 것을 보고 그의 제자들에게 이르되 어찌하여 세리 및 죄인들과 함께 먹는가","바리새인의 서기관들이 예수께서 죄인과 세리들과 함께 잡수시는 것을 보고 그 제자들에게 이르되 어찌하여 세리와 죄인들과 함께 먹는가","그때 바리새파의 율법학자들이 예수께서 평판 나쁜 사람들과 같이 식사하시는 것을 보고서 제자들에게 말하였다. \"어떻게 당신네 선생은 저런 인간들과 같이 식사를 하는 거요?\"","Some scribes who were Pharisees saw that he was eating with sinners and tax collectors and said to his disciples, “Why does he eat with tax collectors and sinners?”","And when the scribes and Pharisees saw him eat with publicans and sinners, they said unto his disciples, How is it that he eateth and drinketh with publicans and sinners?","When the teachers of the law who were Pharisees saw him eating with the \"sinners\" and tax collectors, they asked his disciples: \"Why does he eat with tax collectors and 'sinners'?\"","Et scribae pharisaeorum, videntes quia manducaret cum peccatoribus et publicanis, dicebant discipulis eius:  “Quare cum publicanis et peccatoribus manducat? “.","והסופרים והפרושים ראו אתו אכל עם המוכסים והחטאים ויאמרו אל תלמידיו למה זה עם החטאים והמוכסים אכל רבכם׃"],["48","2","17","예수님께서 이 말을 들으시고 그들에게 말씀하셨다. “건강한 이들에게는 의사가 필요하지 않으나 병든 이들에게는 필요하다. 나는 의인이 아니라 죄인을 부르러 왔다.”","예수께서 이 말을 들으시고 \"성한 사람에게는 의사가 필요하지 않으나 병자에게는 필요하다. 나는 의인을 부르러 온 것이 아니라 죄인을 부르러 왔다.\" 하고 대답하셨다.","예수께서 들으시고 그들에게 이르시되 건강한 자에게는 의사가 쓸 데 없고 병든 자에게라야 쓸 데 있느니라 나는 의인을 부르러 온 것이 아니요 죄인을 부르러 왔노라 하시니라","예수께서 들으시고 저희에게 이르시되 건강한 자에게는 의원이 쓸데 없고 병든 자에게라야 쓸데 있느니라 내가 의인을 부르러 온것이 아니요 죄인을 부르러 왔노라 하시니라","예수께서 이 말을 전해 듣고 말씀하셨다. \"건강한 사람에게는 의사가 필요 없으나 병든 사람에게는 의사가 필요하다. 나는 의인을 부르러 온 것이 아니라 죄인을 부르러 왔다.\"","Jesus heard this and said to them [that], “Those who are well do not need a physician, but the sick do. I did not come to call the righteous but sinners.”","When Jesus heard it, he saith unto them, They that are whole have no need of the physician, but they that are sick: I came not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance.","On hearing this, Jesus said to them, \"It is not the healthy who need a doctor, but the sick. I have not come to call the righteous, but sinners.\"","Et Iesus hoc audito ait illis:  “Non necesse habent sani medicum, sed qui male habent; non veni vocare iustos sed peccatores “.","וישמע ישוע ויאמר החזקים אינם צריכים לרפא כי אם החלים לא באתי לקרא הצדיקים כי אם החטאים לתשובה׃"],["48","2","18","요한의 제자들과 바리사이들이 단식하고 있었다. 사람들이 예수님께 와서, “요한의 제자들과 바리사이의 제자들은 단식하는데, 선생님의 제자들은 어찌하여 단식하지 않습니까?” 하고 물었다.","요한의 제자들과 바리사이파 사람들이 단식을 하고 있던 어느 날, 사람들이 예수께 와서 \"요한의 제자들과 바리사이파 사람의 제자들은 단식을 하는데 선생님의 제자들은 왜 단식을 하지 않습니까?\" 하고 물었다.","요한의 제자들과 바리새인들이 금식하고 있는지라 사람들이 예수께 와서 말하되 요한의 제자들과 바리새인의 제자들은 금식하는데 어찌하여 당신의 제자들은 금식하지 아니하나이까","요한의 제자들과 바리새인들이 금식하고 있는지라 혹이 예수께 와서 말하되 요한의 제자들과 바리새인의 제자들은 금식하는데 어찌하여 당신의 제자들은 금식하지 아니하나이까","요한의 제자들과 바리새파 사람들은 때때로 금식을 하는 일이 있었다. 하루는 어떤 사람들이 예수께 와서 \"요한의 제자들과 바리새파 사람들은 금식을 하는데, 왜 선생님의 제자들은 금식을 하지 않습니까?\" 하고 물었다.","The disciples of John and of the Pharisees were accustomed to fast. People came to him and objected, “Why do the disciples of John and the disciples of the Pharisees fast, but your disciples do not fast?”","And the disciples of John and of the Pharisees used to fast: and they come and say unto him, Why do the disciples of John and of the Pharisees fast, but thy disciples fast not?","Now John's disciples and the Pharisees were fasting. Some people came and asked Jesus, \"How is it that John's disciples and the disciples of the Pharisees are fasting, but yours are not?\"","Et erant discipuli Ioannis et pharisaei ieiunantes. Et veniunt et dicunt illi:  “Cur discipuli Ioannis et discipuli pharisaeorum ieiunant, tui autem discipuli non ieiunant? “.","ותלמידי יוחנן והפרושים היו צמים ויבאו ויאמרו אליו מדוע תלמידי יוחנן ותלמידי הפרושים צמים ותלמידיך אינם צמים׃"],["48","2","19","예수님께서 그들에게 이르셨다. “혼인 잔치 손님들이 신랑과 함께 있는 동안에 단식할 수야 없지 않으냐? 신랑이 함께 있는 동안에는 단식할 수 없다.","예수께서는 이렇게 대답하셨다. \"잔칫집에 온 신랑 친구들이 신랑이 함께 있는 동안에야 어떻게 단식을 할 수 있겠느냐? 신랑이 함께 있는 동안에는 그럴 수 없다.","예수께서 그들에게 이르시되 혼인 집 손님들이 신랑과 함께 있을 때에 금식할 수 있느냐 신랑과 함께 있을 동안에는 금식할 수 없느니라","예수께서 저희에게 이르시되 혼인집 손님들이 신랑과 함께 있을 때에 금식할 수 있느냐 신랑과 함께 있을 동안에는 금식할 수 없나니","예수께서 대답하셨다. \"결혼 잔치때 신랑의 친구들이 신랑과 같이 있으면서 금식할 수 있느냐? 그들이 신랑과 같이 있으면서 굳이 음식을 거절해야 할 까닭이 없지 않느냐?","Jesus answered them, “Can the wedding guests fast while the bridegroom is with them? As long as they have the bridegroom with them they cannot fast.","And Jesus said unto them, Can the children of the bridechamber fast, while the bridegroom is with them? as long as they have the bridegroom with them, they cannot fast.","Jesus answered, \"How can the guests of the bridegroom fast while he is with them? They cannot, so long as they have him with them.","Et ait illis Iesus:  “Numquid possunt convivae nuptiarum, quamdiu sponsus cum illis est, ieiunare? Quanto tempore habent secum sponsum, non possunt ieiunare;","ויאמר אליהם ישוע איך יוכלו בני החפה לצום בעוד החתן עמהם כל ימי היות החתן עמהם לא יוכלו לצום׃"],["48","2","20","그러나 그들이 신랑을 빼앗길 날이 올 것이다. 그때에는 그들도 단식할 것이다.","그러나 이제 신랑을 빼앗길 날이 온다. 그 때에 가서는 그들도 단식을 하게 될 것이다.\"","그러나 신랑을 빼앗길 날이 이르리니 그 날에는 금식할 것이니라","그러나 신랑을 빼앗길 날이 이르리니 그 날에는 금식할 것이니라","그러나 이제 신랑을 빼앗길 날이 올 터인데, 그날에는 그들도 슬퍼하며 금식할 것이다.","But the days will come when the bridegroom is taken away from them, and then they will fast on that day.","But the days will come, when the bridegroom shall be taken away from them, and then shall they fast in those days.","But the time will come when the bridegroom will be taken from them, and on that day they will fast.","venient autem dies, cum auferetur ab eis sponsus, et tunc ieiunabunt in illa die.","הנה ימים באים ולקח מאתם החתן ואז יצומו בימים ההם׃"],["48","2","21","아무도 새 천 조각을 헌 옷에 대고 깁지 않는다. 그렇게 하면 헌 옷에 기워 댄 새 헝겊에 그 옷이 땅겨 더 심하게 찢어진다.","\"낡은 옷에 새 천조각을 대고 깁는 사람은 없다. 그렇게 하면 낡은 옷이 새 천조각에 켕겨 더 찢어지게 된다.","생베 조각을 낡은 옷에 붙이는 자가 없나니 만일 그렇게 하면 기운 새 것이 낡은 그것을 당기어 해어짐이 더하게 되느니라","생베 조각을 낡은 옷에 붙이는 자가 없나니 만일 그렇게 하면 기운 새것이 낡은 그것을 당기어 해어짐이 더하게 되느니라","낡은 옷에 새 천조각을 대고 깁는 사람을 보았느냐? 그렇게 하면 새 천조각이 낡은 옷을 잡아당겨 전보다 더 크게 찢어지지 않겠느냐?","No one sews a piece of unshrunken cloth on an old cloak. If he does, its fullness pulls away, the new from the old, and the tear gets worse.","No man also seweth a piece of new cloth on an old garment: else the new piece that filled it up taketh away from the old, and the rent is made worse.","\"No one sews a patch of unshrunk cloth on an old garment. If he does, the new piece will pull away from the old, making the tear worse.","Nemo assumentum panni rudis assuit vestimento veteri; alioquin supplementum aufert aliquid ab eo, novum a veteri, et peior scissura fit.","אין תפר מטלית בגד חדש על שמלה בלה כי אז ינתק מלויו החדש מן הבלה ותרע הקריעה׃"],["48","2","22","또한 아무도 새 포도주를 헌 가죽 부대에 담지 않는다. 그렇게 하면 포도주가 부대를 터뜨려 포도주도 부대도 버리게 된다. 새 포도주는 새 부대에 담아야 한다.”","또 낡은 가죽 부대에 새 포도주를 넣는 사람도 없다. 그렇게 하면 새 포도주가 부대를 터뜨려 포도주도 부대도 다 버리게 된다. 새 포도주는 새 부대에 담아야 한다.\"","새 포도주를 낡은 가죽 부대에 넣는 자가 없나니 만일 그렇게 하면 새 포도주가 부대를 터뜨려 포도주와 부대를 버리게 되리라 오직 새 포도주는 새 부대에 넣느니라 하시니라","새 포도주를 낡은 가죽 부대에 넣는 자가 없나니 만일 그렇게 하면 새 포도주가 부대를 터뜨려 포도주와 부대를 버리게 되리라 오직 새 포도주는 새 부대에 넣느니라 하시니라","또 새 포도주는 낡은 가죽부대에 넣지 않는다는 것을 알고 있지 않느냐? 그렇게 하면 새 포도주가 낡은 부대를 터뜨려 둘 다 버리게 되기 때문이다. 그러므로 새 포도주는 새 부대에 넣어야 한다.\"","Likewise, no one pours new wine into old wineskins. Otherwise, the wine will burst the skins, and both the wine and the skins are ruined. Rather, new wine is poured into fresh wineskins.”","And no man putteth new wine into old bottles: else the new wine doth burst the bottles, and the wine is spilled, and the bottles will be marred: but new wine must be put into new bottles.","And no one pours new wine into old wineskins. If he does, the wine will burst the skins, and both the wine and the wineskins will be ruined. No, he pours new wine into new wineskins.\"","Et nemo mittit vinum novellum in utres veteres, alioquin dirumpet vinum utres et vinum perit et utres; sed vinum novum in utres novos “.","ואין נתן יין חדש בנאדות בלים כי אז יבקע היין את הנאדות והיין ישפך והנאדות יאבדו אבל בנאדות חדשים ינתן היין החדש׃"],["48","2","23","예수님께서 안식일에 밀밭 사이를 질러가시게 되었다. 그런데 그분의 제자들이 길을 내고 가면서 밀 이삭을 뜯기 시작하였다.","어느 안식일에 예수께서 밀밭 사이를 지나가시게 되었다. 그 때 함께 가던 제자들이 밀 이삭을 자르기 시작하자","안식일에 예수께서 밀밭 사이로 지나가실새 그의 제자들이 길을 열며 이삭을 자르니","안식일에 예수께서 밀밭 사이로 지나가실쌔 그 제자들이 길을 4)열며 이삭을 자르니 혹 가며","안식일에 예수께서 제자들과 함께 밀밭 사이를 지나가시게 되었다. 제자들이 가면서 밀이삭을 잘라 먹자","As he was passing through a field of grain on the sabbath, his disciples began to make a path while picking the heads of grain.","And it came to pass, that he went through the corn fields on the sabbath day; and his disciples began, as they went, to pluck the ears of corn.","One Sabbath Jesus was going through the grainfields, and as his disciples walked along, they began to pick some heads of grain.","Et factum est, cum ipse sabbatis ambularet per sata, discipuli eius coeperunt praegredi vellentes spicas.","ויהי כעברו בשבת בין הקמה ויחלו תלמידיו לקטף מלילת בלכתם׃"],["48","2","24","바리사이들이 예수님께 말하였다. “보십시오, 저들은 어째서 안식일에 해서는 안 되는 일을 합니까?”","바리사이파 사람들이 예수께 \"보십시오, 왜 저 사람들이 안식일에 해서는 안 될 일을 하고 있습니까?\" 하고 물었다.","바리새인들이 예수께 말하되 보시오 저들이 어찌하여 안식일에 하지 못할 일을 하나이까","바리새인들이 예수께 말하되 보시오 저희가 어찌하여 안식일에 하지 못할 일을 하나이까","바리새인 몇 사람이 예수께 말하였다. \"왜 저 사람들이 안식일에 해서는 안될 일을 하고 있습니까?\"","At this the Pharisees said to him, “Look, why are they doing what is unlawful on the sabbath?”","And the Pharisees said unto him, Behold, why do they on the sabbath day that which is not lawful?","The Pharisees said to him, \"Look, why are they doing what is unlawful on the Sabbath?\"","Pharisaei autem dicebant ei:  “Ecce, quid faciunt sabbatis, quod non licet? “.","ויאמרו אליו הפרושים ראה מה המה עשים בשבת דבר אשר לא יעשה׃"],["48","2","25","그러자 예수님께서 그들에게 말씀하셨다. “다윗과 그 일행이 먹을 것이 없어 배가 고팠을 때, 다윗이 어떻게 하였는지 너희는 읽어 본 적이 없느냐?","예수께서는 이렇게 반문하셨다. \"너희는 다윗의 일행이 먹을 것이 없어서 굶주렸을 때에 다윗이 한 일을 읽어본 적이 없느냐?","예수께서 이르시되 ㄱ)다윗이 자기와 및 함께 한 자들이 먹을 것이 없어 시장할 때에 한 일을 읽지 못하였느냐","예수께서 가라사대 ㄱ)다윗이 자기와 및 함께한 자들이 핍절되어 시장할 때에 한 일을 읽지 못하였느냐 삼상 21:6","그러자 예수께서 말씀하셨다. \"ㄱ) 너희는 다윗왕과 그 일행이 굶주렸을 때 어떻게 했는지 읽어보지도 못했느냐? (ㄱ. 삼상21:3-6)","He said to them, “Have you never read what David did when he was in need and he and his companions were hungry?","And he said unto them, Have ye never read what David did, when he had need, and was an hungred, he, and they that were with him?","He answered, \"Have you never read what David did when he and his companions were hungry and in need?","Et ait illis:  “Numquam legistis quid fecerit David, quando necessitatem habuit et esuriit ipse et qui cum eo erant?","ויאמר אליהם הכי לא קראתם את אשר עשה דוד בהיתו חסר ורעב הוא ואשר היו אתו׃"],["48","2","26","에브야타르 대사제 때에 그가 하느님의 집에 들어가, 사제가 아니면 먹어서는 안 되는 제사 빵을 먹고 함께 있는 이들에게도 주지 않았느냐?”","에비아달 대사제 때에 다윗은 하느님의 집에 들어가서 제단에 차려놓은 빵을 먹고 함께 있던 사람들에게도 주었다. 그 빵은 사제들 밖에는 아무도 먹을 수 없는 빵이 아니었더냐?\"","그가 아비아달 대제사장 때에 하나님의 전에 들어가서 제사장 외에는 먹어서는 안 되는 진설병을 먹고 함께 한 자들에게도 주지 아니하였느냐","그가 아비아달 대제사장 때에 하나님의 전에 들어가서 제사장 외에는 먹지 못하는 진설병을 먹고 함께한 자들에게도 주지 아니하였느냐","아비아달이 대제사장으로 있을 때 다윗은 하나님의 전에 들어가서 제사장 외에는 아무도 떡을 수 없는 진설병을 먹었다. 그것도 율법을 어긴 것이 아니냐?","How he went into the house of God when Abiathar was high priest and ate the bread of offering that only the priests could lawfully eat, and shared it with his companions?”","How he went into the house of God in the days of Abiathar the high priest, and did eat the shewbread, which is not lawful to eat but for the priests, and gave also to them which were with him?","In the days of Abiathar the high priest, he entered the house of God and ate the consecrated bread, which is lawful only for priests to eat. And he also gave some to his companions.\"","Quomodo introivit in domum Dei sub Abiathar principe sacerdotum et panes propositionis manducavit, quos non licet manducare nisi sacerdotibus, et dedit etiam eis, qui cum eo erant? “.","כי בא אל בית אלהים בימי אביתר הכהן הגדול ויאכל את לחם הפנים אשר לא נכון לאכלה כי אם לכהנים ויתן גם לאנשים אשר אתו׃"],["48","2","27","이어서 그들에게 말씀하셨다. “안식일이 사람을 위하여 생긴 것이지, 사람이 안식일을 위하여 생긴 것은 아니다.","예수께서는 이어서 이렇게 말씀하셨다. \"안식일이 사람을 위하여 있는 것이지, 사람이 안식일을 위하여 있는 것은 아니다.","또 이르시되 안식일이 사람을 위하여 있는 것이요 사람이 안식일을 위하여 있는 것이 아니니","또 가라사대 안식일은 사람을 위하여 있는 것이요 사람이 안식일을 위하여 있는 것이 아니니","안식일이 사람을 위해 있는 것이지 사람이 안식일을 위해 있는 것이 아니다.","Then he said to them, “The sabbath was made for man, not man for the sabbath.","And he said unto them, The sabbath was made for man, and not man for the sabbath:","Then he said to them, \"The Sabbath was made for man, not man for the Sabbath.","Et dicebat eis:  “Sabbatum propter hominem factum est, et non homo propter sabbatum;","ויאמר אליהם השבת נעשה בעבור האדם ולא האדם בעבור השבת׃"],["48","2","28","그러므로 사람의 아들은 또한 안식일의 주인이다.”","따라서 사람의 아들은 또한 안식일의 주인이다.\"","이러므로 인자는 안식일에도 주인이니라","이러므로 인자는 안식일에도 주인이니라","그러므로 인자가 곧 안식일의 주인이다.\"","That is why the Son of Man is lord even of the sabbath.”","Therefore the Son of man is Lord also of the sabbath.","So the Son of Man is Lord even of the Sabbath.\"","itaque dominus est Filius hominis etiam sabbati “.","לכן בן האדם אדון הוא גם לשבת׃"],["48","3","1","예수님께서 다시 회당에 들어가셨는데, 그곳에 한쪽 손이 오그라든 사람이 있었다.","안식일이 되어 예수께서 다시 회당에 들어가셨는데 마침 거기에 한쪽 손이 오그라든 사람이 있었다.","예수께서 다시 회당에 들어가시니 한쪽 손 마른 사람이 거기 있는지라","예수께서 다시 회당에 들어가시니 한편 손 마른 사람이 거기 있는지라","예수께서 다시 회당에 들어가셨다. 그곳에는 마침 한쪽 손이 오그라든 사람이 와 있었다.","Again he entered the synagogue. There was a man there who had a withered hand.","And he entered again into the synagogue; and there was a man there which had a withered hand.","Another time he went into the synagogue, and a man with a shriveled hand was there.","Et introivit iterum in synago gam. Et erat ibi homo habens manum aridam;","וישב ויבאו אל בית הכנסת ושם איש אשר ידו יבשה׃"],["48","3","2","사람들은 예수님을 고발하려고, 그분께서 안식일에 그 사람을 고쳐 주시는지 지켜보고 있었다.","그리고 예수께서 안식일에 그 사람을 고쳐주시기만 하면 고발하려고 지켜보고 있는 사람들도 있었다.","사람들이 예수를 고발하려 하여 안식일에 그 사람을 고치시는가 주시하고 있거늘","사람들이 예수를 송사하려 하여 안식일에 그 사람을 고치시는가 엿보거늘","그날이 안식일이었으므로 예수를 미워하는 사람들은 예수께서 그 사람을 어떻게 하실 것인가를 눈여겨 지켜 보고 있었다. 만일 그 사람을 고쳐 주신다면 예수를 고소할 속셈이었다.","They watched him closely to see if he would cure him on the sabbath so that they might accuse him.","And they watched him, whether he would heal him on the sabbath day; that they might accuse him.","Some of them were looking for a reason to accuse Jesus, so they watched him closely to see if he would heal him on the Sabbath.","et observabant eum, si sabbatis curaret illum, ut accusarent eum.","ויתבוננו בו אם ירפאהו בשבת למען ימצאו עליו שטנה׃"],["48","3","3","예수님께서 손이 오그라든 사람에게 “일어나 가운데로 나와라.” 하시고,","예수께서 손이 오그라든 사람에게는 \"일어나서 이 앞으로 나오너라.\" 하시고","예수께서 손 마른 사람에게 이르시되 한 가운데에 일어서라 하시고","예수께서 손 마른 사람에게 이르시되 한 가운데 일어서라 하시고","예수께서는 그 사람에게 \"일어나 이 앞으로 나오너라\" 하고 말씀하신 뒤","He said to the man with the withered hand, “Come up here before us.”","And he saith unto the man which had the withered hand, Stand forth.","Jesus said to the man with the shriveled hand, \"Stand up in front of everyone.\"","Et ait homini habenti manum aridam:  “Surge in medium “.","ויאמר אל האיש אשר יבשה ידו קום עמד בתוך׃"],["48","3","4","그들에게 말씀하셨다. “안식일에 좋은 일을 하는 것이 합당하냐? 남을 해치는 일을 하는 것이 합당하냐? 목숨을 구하는 것이 합당하냐? 죽이는 것이 합당하냐?” 그러나 그들은 입을 열지 않았다.","사람들을 향하여는 \"안식일에 착한 일을 하는 것이 옳으냐? 악한 일을 하는 것이 옳으냐? 사람을 살리는 것이 옳으냐? 죽이는 것이 옳으냐?\" 하고 물으셨다. 그들은 말문이 막혔다.","그들에게 이르시되 안식일에 선을 행하는 것과 악을 행하는 것, 생명을 구하는 것과 죽이는 것, 어느 것이 옳으냐 하시니 그들이 잠잠하거늘","저희에게 이르시되 안식일에 선을 행하는 것과 악을 행하는 것, 생명을 구하는 것과 죽이는 것, 어느 것이 옳으냐 하시니 저희가 잠잠하거늘","사람들을 향해 \"안식일에 착한 일을 하는 것이 옳으냐, 남을 해치는 일을 하는 것이 옳으냐? 안식일에 사람을 살리는 것이 옳으냐, 죽이는 것이 옳으냐?\" 하고 물으셨다. 그러나 아무도 대답하는 사람이 없었다.","Then he said to them, “Is it lawful to do good on the sabbath rather than to do evil, to save life rather than to destroy it?” But they remained silent.","And he saith unto them, Is it lawful to do good on the sabbath days, or to do evil? to save life, or to kill? But they held their peace.","Then Jesus asked them, \"Which is lawful on the Sabbath: to do good or to do evil, to save life or to kill?\" But they remained silent.","Et dicit eis:  “Licet sabbatis bene facere an male? Animam salvam facere an perdere? “. At illi tacebant.","ויאמר אליהם הנכון בשבת להיטיב או להרע להציל נפש או לאבדה ויחרישו׃"],["48","3","5","그분께서는 노기를 띠시고 그들을 둘러보셨다. 그리고 그들의 마음이 완고한 것을 몹시 슬퍼하시면서 그 사람에게, “손을 뻗어라.” 하고 말씀하셨다. 그가 손을 뻗자 그 손이 다시 성하여졌다.","예수께서는 그들의 마음이 완고한 것을 탄식하시며 노기 띤 얼굴로 그들을 둘러보시고 나서 손이 오그라든 사람에게 \"손을 펴라.\" 하고 말씀하셨다. 그가 손을 펴자 그 손은 이전처럼 성하게 되었다.","그들의 마음이 완악함을 탄식하사 노하심으로 그들을 둘러 보시고 그 사람에게 이르시되 네 손을 내밀라 하시니 내밀매 그 손이 회복되었더라","저희 마음의 완악함을 근심하사 노하심으로 저희를 둘러 보시고 그 사람에게 이르시되 네 손을 내밀라 하시니 그가 내밀매 그 손이 회복되었더라","예수께서는 그들의 마음이 굳어져 있는 것을 탄식하시며 그 주위를 둘러보신 다음 그 사람에게 \"네 손을 펴라\" 하고 말씀하셨다. 그 사람이 손을 펴자 그의 손은 전처럼 완전히 회복되었다.","Looking around at them with anger and grieved at their hardness of heart, he said to the man, “Stretch out your hand.” He stretched it out and his hand was restored.","And when he had looked round about on them with anger, being grieved for the hardness of their hearts, he saith unto the man, Stretch forth thine hand. And he stretched it out: and his hand was restored whole as the other.","He looked around at them in anger and, deeply distressed at their stubborn hearts, said to the man, \"Stretch out your hand.\" He stretched it out, and his hand was completely restored.","Et circumspiciens eos cum ira, contristatus super caecitate cordis eorum, dicit homini:  “Extende manum “. Et extendit, et restituta est manus eius.","ויבט אליהם סביב בחמה ויתעצב על טמטום לבבם ויאמר אל האיש פשט את ידך ויפשט ידו ותרפא ותשב כאחרת׃"],["48","3","6","바리사이들은 나가서 곧바로 헤로데 당원들과 더불어 예수님을 어떻게 없앨까 모의를 하였다.","그러나 바리사이파 사람들은 나가서 즉시 헤로데 당원들과 만나 예수를 없애버릴 방도를 모의하였다.","바리새인들이 나가서 곧 헤롯당과 함께 어떻게 하여 예수를 죽일까 의논하니라","바리새인들이 나가서 곧 헤롯당과 함께 어떻게 하여 예수를 죽일꼬 의논하니라","바리새파 사람들은 회당에서 나가 헤롯 당원들과 함께 어떻게 예수를 죽일까 그 방도를 모의하기 시작하였다.","The Pharisees went out and immediately took counsel with the Herodians against him to put him to death.","And the Pharisees went forth, and straightway took counsel with the Herodians against him, how they might destroy him.","Then the Pharisees went out and began to plot with the Herodians how they might kill Jesus.","Et exeuntes pharisaei statim cum herodianis consilium faciebant adversus eum quomodo eum perderent.","והפרושים יצאו מהרה ויתיעצו עליו עם ההורדוסיים לאבדו׃"],["48","3","7","예수님께서 제자들과 함께 호숫가로 물러가셨다. 그러자 갈릴래아에서 큰 무리가 따라왔다. 또 유다와","예수께서 제자들과 함께 호숫가로 물러가셨을 때에 갈릴래아에서 많은 사람들이 따라왔다. 또 유다와","예수께서 제자들과 함께 바다로 물러가시니 갈릴리에서 큰 무리가 따르며","예수께서 제자들과 함께 바다로 물러가시니 갈릴리에서 큰 무리가 좇으며","예수께서 제자들과 함께 바닷가로 나가셨을 때 갈릴리 온 지역에서 모인 큰 무리가 따라왔다.","Jesus withdrew toward the sea with his disciples. A large number of people [followed] from Galilee and from Judea.","But Jesus withdrew himself with his disciples to the sea: and a great multitude from Galilee followed him, and from Judaea,","Jesus withdrew with his disciples to the lake, and a large crowd from Galilee followed.","Et Iesus cum discipulis suis secessit ad mare. Et multa turba a Galilaea secuta est et a Iudaea","וישוע סר משם עם תלמידיו אל יד הים וילכו אחריו המון עם רב מן הגליל ומיהודה׃"],["48","3","8","예루살렘, 이두매아와 요르단 건너편, 그리고 티로와 시돈 근처에서도 그분께서 하시는 일을 전해 듣고 큰 무리가 그분께 몰려왔다.","예루살렘과 에돔과 요르단 강 건너편에 사는 사람들이며 띠로와 시돈 근방에 사는 사람들까지도 예수께서 하시는 일을 전해 듣고 많이 몰려왔다.","유대와 예루살렘과 이두매와 요단 강 건너편과 또 두로와 시돈 근처에서 많은 무리가 그가 하신 큰 일을 듣고 나아오는지라","유대와 예루살렘과 이두매와 요단강 건너편과 또 두로와 시돈 근처에서 허다한 무리가 그의 하신 큰 일을 듣고 나아오는지라","유대와 예루살렘과 이두매와 요단강 건너편, 그리고 두로와 시돈 부근에서도 큰 무리가 모여 들었다. 예수께서 이적을 행하신다는 소문이 사방에 퍼져 나갔기 때문에 그것을 보려고 온 것이었다.","Hearing what he was doing, a large number of people came to him also from Jerusalem, from Idumea, from beyond the Jordan, and from the neighborhood of Tyre and Sidon.","And from Jerusalem, and from Idumaea, and from beyond Jordan; and they about Tyre and Sidon, a great multitude, when they had heard what great things he did, came unto him.","When they heard all he was doing, many people came to him from Judea, Jerusalem, Idumea, and the regions across the Jordan and around Tyre and Sidon.","et ab Hierosolymis et ab Idumaea; et, qui trans Iordanem et circa Tyrum et Sidonem, multitudo magna, audientes, quae faciebat, venerunt ad eum.","ומירושלים ומאדום ומעבר הירדן ומסביבות צור וצידון המון רב אשר שמעו את כל אשר עשה ויבאו אליו׃"],["48","3","9","예수님께서는 군중이 당신을 밀쳐 대는 일이 일어나지 않게 하시려고, 당신께서 타실 거룻배 한 척을 마련하라고 제자들에게 이르셨다.","예수께서는 밀어닥치는 군중을 피하시려고 제자들에게 거룻배 한 척을 준비하라고 이르셨다.","예수께서 무리가 에워싸 미는 것을 피하기 위하여 작은 배를 대기하도록 제자들에게 명하셨으니","예수께서 무리의 에워싸 미는 것을 면키 위하여 작은 배를 등대하도록 제자들에게 명하셨으니","예수께서는 밀어닥치는 군중을 피하려고 제자들에게 거룻배 한 척을 준비해 두라고 이르셨다.","He told his disciples to have a boat ready for him because of the crowd, so that they would not crush him.","And he spake to his disciples, that a small ship should wait on him because of the multitude, lest they should throng him.","Because of the crowd he told his disciples to have a small boat ready for him, to keep the people from crowding him.","Et dixit discipulis suis, ut navicula sibi praesto esset propter turbam, ne comprimerent eum.","ויאמר אל תלמידיו כי יכינו לו אניה קטנה מפני העם למען לא ילחצוהו׃"],["48","3","10","그분께서 많은 사람의 병을 고쳐 주셨으므로, 병고에 시달리는 이들은 누구나 그분에게 손을 대려고 밀려들었기 때문이다.","예수께서 많은 사람을 고쳐주셨으므로 병으로 고생하는 사람들이 앞을 다투어 예수를 만지려고 밀려들었던 것이다.","이는 많은 사람을 고치셨으므로 병으로 고생하는 자들이 예수를 만지고자 하여 몰려왔음이더라","이는 많은 사람을 고치셨으므로 병에 고생하는 자들이 예수를 만지고자 하여 핍근히 함이더라","이는 예수께서 많은 사람을 고쳐 주셨으므로 병으로 고생하는 사람들이 앞을 다투어 예수를 만지려고 밀려들었기 때문이다.","He had cured many and, as a result, those who had diseases were pressing upon him to touch him.","For he had healed many; insomuch that they pressed upon him for to touch him, as many as had plagues.","For he had healed many, so that those with diseases were pushing forward to touch him.","Multos enim sanavit, ita ut irruerent in eum, ut illum tangerent, quotquot habebant plagas.","כי רפא לרבים עד כי התנפלו עליו כל המנגעים לנגע בו׃"],["48","3","11","또 더러운 영들은 그분을 보기만 하면 그 앞에 엎드려, “당신은 하느님의 아드님이십니다!” 하고 소리 질렀다.","또 더러운 악령들은 예수를 보기만 하면 그 앞에 엎드려 \"당신은 하느님의 아들이십니다!\" 하고 소리질렀다.","더러운 귀신들도 어느 때든지 예수를 보면 그 앞에 엎드려 부르짖어 이르되 당신은 하나님의 아들이니이다 하니","더러운 귀신들도 어느 때든지 예수를 보면 그 앞에 엎드려 부르짖어 가로되 당신은 하나님의 아들이니이다 하니","또한 더러운 귀신 들린 사람들도 예수를 보기만 하면 그 앞에 엎드려 \"당신은 하나님의 아들이십니다!\" 하고 소리를 질러 댔다.","And whenever unclean spirits saw him they would fall down before him and shout, “You are the Son of God.”","And unclean spirits, when they saw him, fell down before him, and cried, saying, Thou art the Son of God.","Whenever the evil spirits saw him, they fell down before him and cried out, \"You are the Son of God.\"","Et spiritus immundi, cum illum videbant, procidebant ei et clamabant dicentes:  “Tu es Filius Dei! “.","והרוחות הטמאות כראותן אתו נפלו לפניו ותצעקנה לאמר אתה הוא בן אלהים׃"],["48","3","12","그러나 예수님께서는 그들에게 당신을 사람들에게 알리지 말라고 엄하게 이르곤 하셨다.","그러나 예수께서는 그들에게 당신을 남에게 알리지 말라고 엄하게 명령하셨다.","예수께서 자기를 나타내지 말라고 많이 경고하시니라","예수께서 자기를 나타내지 말라고 많이 경계하시니라","그러나 예수께서는 그들에게 자신이 누구라는 것을 세상에 알리지 말라고 엄하게 명령하셨다.","He warned them sternly not to make him known.","And he straitly charged them that they should not make him known.","But he gave them strict orders not to tell who he was.","Et vehementer comminabatur eis, ne manifestarent illum.","ויגער בהן מאד אשר לא תגלינה אותו׃"],["48","3","13","예수님께서 산에 올라가신 다음, 당신께서 원하시는 이들을 가까이 부르시니 그들이 그분께 나아왔다.","예수께서 산에 올라가 마음에 두셨던 사람들을 부르셨다. 그들이 예수께 가까이 왔을 때에","또 산에 오르사 자기가 원하는 자들을 부르시니 나아온지라","또 산에 오르사 자기의 원하는 자들을 부르시니 나아온지라","예수께서 산으로 올라가 평소에 마음에 두였던 사람들을 부르셨다. 그리고 그들이 가까이 오자","He went up the mountain and summoned those whom he wanted and they came to him.","And he goeth up into a mountain, and calleth unto him whom he would: and they came unto him.","Jesus went up on a mountainside and called to him those he wanted, and they came to him.","Et ascendit in montem et vocat ad se, quos voluit ipse, et venerunt ad eum.","ויעל אל ההר ויקרא אל אשר הוא חפץ בם ויבאו אליו׃"],["48","3","14","그분께서는 열둘을 세우시고 그들을 사도라 이름하셨다. 그들을 당신과 함께 지내게 하시고, 그들을 파견하시어 복음을 선포하게 하시며,","예수께서는 열둘을 뽑아 사도로 삼으시고 당신 곁에 있게 하셨다. 이것은 그들을 보내어 말씀을 전하게 하시고,","이에 열둘을 세우셨으니 이는 자기와 함께 있게 하시고 또 보내사 전도도 하며","이에 열 둘을 세우셨으니 이는 자기와 함께 있게 하시고 또 보내사 전도도 하며","열두 사람을 뽑아 자신과 함께 있게 하셨다. 이는 그들을 세상에 내보내 말씀을 전파하게 하고 귀신 쫓는 권세도 주시려 함이었다.","He appointed twelve [whom he also named apostles] that they might be with him and he might send them forth to preach","And he ordained twelve, that they should be with him, and that he might send them forth to preach,","He appointed twelve--designating them apostles--that they might be with him and that he might send them out to preach","Et fecit Duodecim, ut essent cum illo, et ut mitteret eos praedicare","וישם שנים עשר איש למען יהיו אתו ולמען ישלחם לקרא׃"],["48","3","15","마귀들을 쫓아내는 권한을 가지게 하시려는 것이었다.","마귀를 쫓아내는 권한을 주시려는 것이었다.","귀신을 내쫓는 권능도 가지게 하려 하심이러라","귀신을 내어쫓는 권세도 있게 하려 하심이러라","(14절에 포함되어 있음)","and to have authority to drive out demons:","And to have power to heal sicknesses, and to cast out devils:","and to have authority to drive out demons.","habentes potestatem eiciendi daemonia:","והיה להם השלטן לרפא את התחלאים ולגרש את השדים׃"],["48","3","16","이렇게 예수님께서 열둘을 세우셨는데, 그들은 베드로라는 이름을 붙여 주신 시몬,","이렇게 뽑으신 열두 사도는 베드로라는 이름을 붙여주신 시몬과","이 열둘을 세우셨으니 시몬에게는 베드로란 이름을 더하셨고","이 열 둘을 세우셨으니 시몬에게는 베드로란 이름을 더하셨고","이때에 예수께서 택하신 열두 사람은 다음과 같다. 예수께서 베드로라는 이름을 붙여 주신 시몬, \"우레의 아들들\"이라고 부르셨던 세베대의 아들 야고보와 요한, 안드레, 빌립, 바돌로매, 마태, 도마, 알패오의 아들 야고보, 다대오, 로마 정부를 혁명으로 뒤엎으려던 가나안 사람 시몬, 나중에 예수를 배신한 가룟 유다 등이다.","[he appointed the twelve:] Simon, whom he named Peter;","And Simon he surnamed Peter;","These are the twelve he appointed: Simon (to whom he gave the name Peter);","et imposuit Simoni nomen Petrum;","ויכנה את שמעון בשם פטרוס׃"],["48","3","17","‘천둥의 아들들’이라는 뜻으로 보아네르게스라는 이름을 붙여 주신 제베대오의 아들 야고보와 그의 동생 요한,","천둥의 아들이라는 뜻으로 둘 다 보아네르게스라고 이름을 붙여주신 제베대오의 아들 야고보와 그의 동생 요한,","또 세베대의 아들 야고보와 야고보의 형제 요한이니 이 둘에게는 보아너게 곧 우레의 아들이란 이름을 더하셨으며","또 세베대의 아들 야고보와 야고보의 형제 요한이니 이 둘에게는 보아너게 곧 우뢰의 아들이란 이름을 더하셨으며","(16절에 포함되어 있음)","James, son of Zebedee, and John the brother of James, whom he named Boanerges, that is, sons of thunder;","And James the son of Zebedee, and John the brother of James; and he surnamed them Boanerges, which is, The sons of thunder:","James son of Zebedee and his brother John (to them he gave the name Boanerges, which means Sons of Thunder);","et Iacobum Zebedaei et Ioannem fratrem Iacobi, et imposuit eis nomina Boanerges, quod est Filii tonitrui;","ואת יעקב בן זבדי ואת יוחנן אחי יעקב ויכנה אתם בשם בני רגוש הוא בני רעם׃"],["48","3","18","그리고 안드레아, 필립보, 바르톨로메오, 마태오, 토마스, 알패오의 아들 야고보, 타대오, 열혈당원 시몬,","그리고 안드레아, 필립보, 바르톨로메오, 마태오, 토마, 알패오의 아들 야고보, 타대오, 혁명당원 시몬,","또 안드레와 빌립과 바돌로매와 마태와 도마와 알패오의 아들 야고보와 및 다대오와 가나나인 시몬이며","또 안드레와 빌립과 바돌로매와 마태와 도마와 알패오의 아들 야고보와 및 다대오와 1)가나안인 시몬이며 혹 열심당원","(16절에 포함되어 있음)","Andrew, Philip, Bartholomew, Matthew, Thomas, James the son of Alphaeus; Thaddeus, Simon the Cananean,","And Andrew, and Philip, and Bartholomew, and Matthew, and Thomas, and James the son of Alphaeus, and Thaddaeus, and Simon the Canaanite,","Andrew, Philip, Bartholomew, Matthew, Thomas, James son of Alphaeus, Thaddaeus, Simon the Zealot","et Andream et Philippum et Bartholomaeum et Matthaeum et Thomam et Iacobum Alphaei et Thaddaeum et Simonem Chananaeum","ואת אנדרי ואת פילפוס ואת בר תלמי ואת מתי ואת תומא ואת יעקב בן חלפי ואת תדי ואת שמעון הקני׃"],["48","3","19","또 예수님을 팔아넘긴 유다 이스카리옷이다.","그리고 예수를 팔아 넘긴 가리옷 사람 유다이다.","또 가룟 유다니 이는 예수를 판 자더라","또 가룟 유다니 이는 예수를 판 자러라","(16절에 포함되어 있음)","and Judas Iscariot who betrayed him.","And Judas Iscariot, which also betrayed him: and they went into an house.","and Judas Iscariot, who betrayed him.","et Iudam Iscarioth, qui et tradidit illum.","ואת יהודה איש קריות אשר גם מסרו׃"],["48","3","20","예수님께서 집으로 가셨다. 그러자 군중이 다시 모여들어 예수님의 일행은 음식을 들 수조차 없었다.","예수께서 집에 돌아오시자 군중이 다시 모여들어서 예수의 일행은 음식을 먹을 겨를도 없었다.","집에 들어가시니 무리가 다시 모이므로 식사할 겨를도 없는지라","집에 들어가시니 무리가 다시 모이므로 식사할 겨를도 없는지라","예수께서 묵고 있는 집으로 돌아오시자 그 집은 다시 모여들기 시작한 군중으로 가득 차 버렸다. 그래서 예수와 그의 일행은 식사할 겨를조차 없었다.","He came home. Again [the] crowd gathered, making it impossible for them even to eat.","And the multitude cometh together again, so that they could not so much as eat bread.","Then Jesus entered a house, and again a crowd gathered, so that he and his disciples were not even able to eat.","Et venit ad domum; et convenit iterum turba, ita ut non possent neque panem manducare.","ויבאו הביתה וישב המון העם להתאסף עד כי לא יכלו אף לאכל לחם׃"],["48","3","21","그런데 예수님의 친척들이 소문을 듣고 그분을 붙잡으러 나섰다. 그들은 예수님께서 미쳤다고 생각하였던 것이다.","이 소식을 들은 예수의 친척들은 예수를 붙들러 나섰다. 예수가 미쳤다는 소문이 돌고 있었기 때문이다.","예수의 친족들이 듣고 그를 붙들러 나오니 이는 그가 미쳤다 함일러라","예수의 친속들이 듣고 붙들러 나오니 이는 그가 미쳤다 함일러라","예수의 친척들은 예수가 정신이 이상해졌다는 소문을 듣고 붙들어 집으로 데려가려고 하였다.","When his relatives heard of this they set out to seize him, for they said, “He is out of his mind.”","And when his friends heard of it, they went out to lay hold on him: for they said, He is beside himself.","When his family heard about this, they went to take charge of him, for they said, \"He is out of his mind.\"","Et cum audissent sui, exierunt tenere eum; dicebant enim:  “In furorem versus est “.","וישמעו קרוביו ויצאו להחזיק בו כי אמרו יצא מדעתו׃"],["48","3","22","한편 예루살렘에서 내려온 율법 학자들이, “그는 베엘제불이 들렸다.”고도 하고, “그는 마귀 우두머리의 힘을 빌려 마귀들을 쫓아낸다.”고도 하였다.","예루살렘에서 내려온 율법학자들도 예수가 베엘제불에게 사로잡혔다느니 또는 마귀 두목의 힘을 빌려 마귀를 쫓아낸다느니 하고 떠들었다.","예루살렘에서 내려온 서기관들은 그가 바알세불이 지폈다 하며 또 귀신의 왕을 힘입어 귀신을 쫓아낸다 하니","예루살렘에서 내려온 서기관들은 저가 바알세불을 지폈다 하며 또 귀신의 왕을 힘입어 귀신을 쫓아낸다 하니","예루살렘에서 내려온 율법학자들은 \"그는 귀신이 들린거야. 그것도 귀신의 두목인 바알세불의 힘을 갖고 있는 게 틀림없어. 그러니까 귀신들이 그에게 복종하겠지\" 하고 떠들어댔다.","The scribes who had come from Jerusalem said, “He is possessed by Beelzebul,” and “By the prince of demons he drives out demons.”","And the scribes which came down from Jerusalem said, He hath Beelzebub, and by the prince of the devils casteth he out devils.","And the teachers of the law who came down from Jerusalem said, \"He is possessed by Beelzebub! By the prince of demons he is driving out demons.\"","Et scribae, qui ab Hierosolymis descenderant, dicebant:  “Beelzebul habet “ et:  “In principe daemonum eicit daemonia “.","והסופרים אשר ירדו מירושלים אמרו כי בעל זבוב נכנס בו ועל ידי שר השדים הוא מגרש את השדים׃"],["48","3","23","그래서 예수님께서는 그들을 부르셔서 비유를 들어 말씀하셨다. “어떻게 사탄이 사탄을 쫓아낼 수 있느냐?","그래서 예수께서는 그들을 불러다 놓고 비유로 말씀하셨다. \"사탄이 어떻게 사탄을 쫓아낼 수 있겠느냐?","예수께서 그들을 불러다가 비유로 말씀하시되 사탄이 어찌 사탄을 쫓아낼 수 있느냐","예수께서 저희를 불러다가 비유로 말씀하시되 사단이 어찌 사단을 쫓아낼 수 있느냐","예수께서는 그들을 불러서 알아듣기 쉽게 비유로 말씀하셨다. \"사단이 어떻게 사단을 쫓아낼 수 있느냐?","Summoning them, he began to speak to them in parables, “How can Satan drive out Satan?","And he called them unto him, and said unto them in parables, How can Satan cast out Satan?","So Jesus called them and spoke to them in parables: \"How can Satan drive out Satan?","Et convocatis eis, in parabolis dicebat illis:  “Quomodo potest Satanas Satanam eicere?","ויקרא אותם אליו וידבר להם במשלים לאמר איך יוכל השטן לגרש השטן׃"],["48","3","24","한 나라가 갈라서면 그 나라는 버티어 내지 못한다.","한 나라가 갈라져 서로 싸우면 그 나라는 제대로 설 수 없다.","또 만일 나라가 스스로 분쟁하면 그 나라가 설 수 없고","또 만일 나라가 스스로 분쟁하면 그 나라가 설 수 없고","한 나라가 갈라져 서로 싸우면 그 나라는 무너져 버린다.","If a kingdom is divided against itself, that kingdom cannot stand.","And if a kingdom be divided against itself, that kingdom cannot stand.","If a kingdom is divided against itself, that kingdom cannot stand.","Et si regnum in se dividatur, non potest stare regnum illud;","ואם נחלקה ממלכה על עצמה לא תוכל לעמד הממלכה ההיא׃"],["48","3","25","한 집안이 갈라서면 그 집안은 버티어 내지 못할 것이다.","또 한 가정이 갈라져 서로 싸우면 그 가정도 버티어 나갈 수 없다.","만일 집이 스스로 분쟁하면 그 집이 설 수 없고","만일 집이 스스로 분쟁하면 그 집이 설 수 없고","한 가정이 불화하여 갈라지면 그 가정은 망하고 만다.","And if a house is divided against itself, that house will not be able to stand.","And if a house be divided against itself, that house cannot stand.","If a house is divided against itself, that house cannot stand.","et si domus in semetipsam dispertiatur, non poterit domus illa stare.","ובית אם נחלק על עצמו לא יוכל לעמד הבית ההוא׃"],["48","3","26","사탄도 자신을 거슬러 일어나 갈라서면 버티어 내지 못하고 끝장이 난다.","만일 사탄의 나라가 내분으로 갈라진다면 그 나라는 지탱하지 못하고 망하게 될 것이다.","만일 사탄이 자기를 거슬러 일어나 분쟁하면 설 수 없고 망하느니라","만일 사단이 자기를 거스려 일어나 분쟁하면 설 수 없고 이에 망하느니라","만일 사단이 사단과 싸운다면 어떤 결과가 일어나겠는가? 사단의 나라는 서지 못하고 망해 버리지 않겠느냐?","And if Satan has risen up against himself and is divided, he cannot stand; that is the end of him.","And if Satan rise up against himself, and be divided, he cannot stand, but hath an end.","And if Satan opposes himself and is divided, he cannot stand; his end has come.","Et si Satanas consurrexit in semetipsum et dispertitus est, non potest stare, sed finem habet.","ואם השטן יתקומם אל עצמו ונחלק לא יוכל לעמד כי בא קצו׃"],["48","3","27","먼저 힘센 자를 묶어 놓지 않고서는, 아무도 그 힘센 자의 집에 들어가 재물을 털 수 없다. 묶어 놓은 뒤에야 그 집을 털 수 있다.","또 누가 힘센 사람의 집에 들어가서 그 세간을 털어가려면 그는 먼저 그 힘센 사람을 묶어놓아야 하지 않겠느냐? 그래야 그 집을 털 수 있을 것이다.","사람이 먼저 강한 자를 결박하지 않고는 그 강한 자의 집에 들어가 세간을 강탈하지 못하리니 결박한 후에야 그 집을 강탈하리라","사람이 먼저 강한 자를 결박지 않고는 그 강한 자의 집에 들어가 세간을 늑탈치 못하리니 결박한 후에야 그 집을 늑탈하리라","그리고 누구든 힘센 사람의 집에 들어가 그 세간을 털어 가려면 우선 그 힘센 사람을 묶어 놓아야 그 재산을 털어 갈 수 있지 않겠느냐?","But no one can enter a strong man’s house to plunder his property unless he first ties up the strong man. Then he can plunder his house.","No man can enter into a strong man's house, and spoil his goods, except he will first bind the strong man; and then he will spoil his house.","In fact, no one can enter a strong man's house and carry off his possessions unless he first ties up the strong man. Then he can rob his house.","Nemo autem potest in domum fortis ingressus vasa eius diripere, nisi prius fortem alliget; et tunc domum eius diripiet.","אין איש אשר יכל לבוא לבית הגבור ולגזל את כליו אם לא יאסר בראשונה את הגבור ואחר ישסה את ביתו׃"],["48","3","28","내가 진실로 너희에게 말한다. 사람들이 짓는 모든 죄와 그들이 신성을 모독하는 어떠한 말도 용서받을 것이다.","나는 분명히 말한다. 사람들이 어떤 죄를 짓든 입으로 어떤 욕설을 하든 그것은 다 용서받을 수 있으나","내가 진실로 너희에게 이르노니 사람의 모든 죄와 모든 모독하는 일은 사하심을 얻되","내가 진실로 너희에게 이르노니 2)사람의 모든 죄와 무릇 훼방하는 훼방은 사하심을 얻되 헬, 인자들의","나는 분명히 말한다. 사람들이 어떤 죄를 짓든, 또 입을 함부로 놀려 어떤 욕설을 퍼붓든간에 다 용서받을 수 있다.","Amen, I say to you, all sins and all blasphemies that people utter will be forgiven them.","Verily I say unto you, All sins shall be forgiven unto the sons of men, and blasphemies wherewith soever they shall blaspheme:","I tell you the truth, all the sins and blasphemies of men will be forgiven them.","Amen dico vobis: Omnia dimittentur filiis hominum peccata et blasphemiae, quibus blasphemaverint;","אמן אמר אני לכם כי כל החטאים יסלחו לבני אדם וכל הגדופים אשר יגדפו׃"],["48","3","29","그러나 성령을 모독하는 자는 영원히 용서를 받지 못하고 영원한 죄에 매이게 된다.”","성령을 모독하는 사람은 영원히 용서받지 못할 것이며 그 죄는 영원히 벗어날 길이 없을 것이다.\"","누구든지 성령을 모독하는 자는 영원히 사하심을 얻지 못하고 영원한 죄가 되느니라 하시니","누구든지 성령을 훼방하는 자는 사하심을 영원히 얻지 못하고 영원한 죄에 처하느니라 하시니","그러나 성령을 모독하는 죄는 결코 용서받지 못할 것이다. 그것은 영원히 씻을 수 없는 죄가 되는 것이다.\"","But whoever blasphemes against the holy Spirit will never have forgiveness, but is guilty of an everlasting sin.”","But he that shall blaspheme against the Holy Ghost hath never forgiveness, but is in danger of eternal damnation.","But whoever blasphemes against the Holy Spirit will never be forgiven; he is guilty of an eternal sin.\"","qui autem blasphemaverit in Spiritum Sanctum, non habet remissionem in aeternum, sed reus est aeterni delicti “.","אך המגדף את רוח הקדש אין לו סליחה לעולם כי יאשם בעונו לנצח׃"],["48","3","30","이 말씀을 하신 것은 사람들이 “그는 더러운 영이 들렸다.”고 말하였기 때문이다.","이 말씀을 하신 것은 사람들이 예수를 더러운 악령에 사로잡혔다고 비방했기 때문이다.","이는 그들이 말하기를 더러운 귀신이 들렸다 함이러라","이는 저희가 말하기를 더러운 귀신이 들렸다 함이러라","예수께서 이 말씀을 하신 것은 사람들이 자기를 \"더러운 귀신이 들렸다\"고 말했기 때문이다.","For they had said, “He has an unclean spirit.”","Because they said, He hath an unclean spirit.","He said this because they were saying, \"He has an evil spirit.\"","Quoniam dicebant:  “Spiritum immundum habet “.","כי המה אמרו רוח טמאה בו׃"],["48","3","31","그때에 예수님의 어머니와 형제들이 왔다. 그들은 밖에 서서 사람을 보내어 예수님을 불렀다.","그 때 예수의 어머니와 형제들이 밖에 와 서서 예수를 불러달라고 사람을 들여보냈다.","그 때에 예수의 어머니와 동생들이 와서 밖에 서서 사람을 보내어 예수를 부르니","때에 예수의 모친과 3)동생들이 와서 밖에 서서 사람을 보내어 예수를 부르니 혹 형제들","예수의 어머니와 형제들이 찾아와서 예수를 불러 달라고 사람을 들여보냈다. 그때 집안에는 사람들로 가득차 있었고 예수께서는 모인 사람들을 가르치고 계셨다.","His mother and his brothers arrived. Standing outside they sent word to him and called him.","There came then his brethren and his mother, and, standing without, sent unto him, calling him.","Then Jesus' mother and brothers arrived. Standing outside, they sent someone in to call him.","Et venit mater eius et fratres eius, et foris stantes miserunt ad eum vocantes eum.","ויבאו אמו ואחיו ויעמדו מחוץ לבית וישלחו אליו לקרא לו׃"],["48","3","32","그분 둘레에는 군중이 앉아 있었는데, 사람들이 예수님께 “보십시오, 스승님의 어머님과 형제들과 누이들이 밖에서 스승님을 찾고 계십니다.” 하고 말하였다.","둘러앉았던 군중이 예수께 \"선생님, 선생님의 어머님과 형제분들이 밖에서 찾으십니다.\" 하고 말하였다.","무리가 예수를 둘러 앉았다가 여짜오되 보소서 당신의 어머니와 동생들과 누이들이 밖에서 찾나이다","무리가 예수를 둘러 앉았다가 여짜오되 보소서 당신의 모친과 3)동생들과 누이들이 밖에서 찾나이다 혹 형제들","사람들이 예수께 말하였다. \"선생님의 어머니와 형제들이 밖에서 선생님을 찾고 계십니다.\"","A crowd seated around him told him, “Your mother and your brothers [and your sisters] are outside asking for you.”","And the multitude sat about him, and they said unto him, Behold, thy mother and thy brethren without seek for thee.","A crowd was sitting around him, and they told him, \"Your mother and brothers are outside looking for you.\"","Et sedebat circa eum turba, et dicunt ei:  “Ecce mater tua et fratres tui et sorores tuae foris quaerunt te “.","והמון העם ישבו סביביו ויאמרו אליו הנה אמך ואחיך בחוץ מבקשים אותך׃"],["48","3","33","그러자 예수님께서 그들에게, “누가 내 어머니고 내 형제들이냐?” 하고 반문하셨다.","예수께서는 \"누가 내 어머니이고 내 형제들이냐?\" 하고 반문하시고","대답하시되 누가 내 어머니이며 동생들이냐 하시고","대답하시되 누가 내 모친이며 3)동생들이냐 하시고 혹 형제들","예수께서는 \"누가 내 어머니이며 내 형제들이냐?\" 하고 반문하신 뒤","But he said to them in reply, “Who are my mother and [my] brothers?”","And he answered them, saying, Who is my mother, or my brethren?","\"Who are my mother and my brothers?\" he asked.","Et respondens eis ait:  “Quae est mater mea et fratres mei? “.","ויען ויאמר אליהם מי הם אמי ואחי׃"],["48","3","34","그리고 당신 주위에 앉은 사람들을 둘러보시며 이르셨다. “이들이 내 어머니고 내 형제들이다.","둘러앉은 사람들을 돌아보시며 말씀하셨다. \"바로 이 사람들이 내 어머니이고 내 형제들이다.","둘러 앉은 자들을 보시며 이르시되 내 어머니와 내 동생들을 보라","둘러 앉은 자들을 둘러 보시며 가라사대 내 모친과 내 3)동생들을 보라 혹 형제들","둘러 앉은 사람들을 돌아보시며 다시 말씀하셨다. \"바로 이 사람들이 내 어머니요, 내 형제들이다.","And looking around at those seated in the circle he said, “Here are my mother and my brothers.","And he looked round about on them which sat about him, and said, Behold my mother and my brethren!","Then he looked at those seated in a circle around him and said, \"Here are my mother and my brothers!","Et circumspiciens eos, qui in circuitu eius sedebant, ait:  “Ecce mater mea et fratres mei.","ויבט סביב אל הישבים סביביו ויאמר הנה אמי ואחי׃"],["48","3","35","하느님의 뜻을 실행하는 사람이 바로 내 형제요 누이요 어머니다.”","하느님의 뜻을 행하는 사람이 곧 내 형제요, 자매요, 어머니이다.\"","누구든지 하나님의 뜻대로 행하는 자가 내 형제요 자매요 어머니이니라","누구든지 하나님의 뜻대로 하는 자는 내 형제요 자매요 모친이니라","누구든지 하나님의 뜻을 따르는 사람이 네 형제요, 자매요, 어머니이다.\"","[For] whoever does the will of God is my brother and sister and mother.”","For whosoever shall do the will of God, the same is my brother, and my sister, and mother.","Whoever does God's will is my brother and sister and mother.\"","Qui enim fecerit voluntatem Dei, hic frater meus et soror mea et mater est “.","כי כל אשר יעשה רצון האלהים הוא אחי ואחותי ואמי׃"],["48","4","1","예수님께서 다시 호숫가에서 가르치기 시작하셨다. 너무 많은 군중이 모여들어, 그분께서는 호수에 있는 배에 올라앉으시고 군중은 모두 호숫가 뭍에 그대로 있었다.","예수께서 다시 호숫가에서 가르치셨다. 군중이 너무나 많이 모여들었기 때문에 예수께서는 배를 타고 그 안에 앉으신 다음 배를 물에 띄웠다. 그리고 군중은 모두 호숫가에 그대로 서 있었다.","예수께서 다시 바닷가에서 가르치시니 큰 무리가 모여들거늘 예수께서 바다에 떠 있는 배에 올라 앉으시고 온 무리는 바닷가 육지에 있더라","예수께서 다시 바닷가에서 가르치시니 큰 무리가 모여 들거늘 예수께서 배에 올라 바다에 떠 앉으시고 온 무리는 바다 곁 육지에 있더라","예수께서 다시 바닷가로 나가셨는데 모여든 군중이 너무도 많아 바다 위에 떠 있는 배에 올라앉아 가르치셨다.","On another occasion he began to teach by the sea. A very large crowd gathered around him so that he got into a boat on the sea and sat down. And the whole crowd was beside the sea on land.","And he began again to teach by the sea side: and there was gathered unto him a great multitude, so that he entered into a ship, and sat in the sea; and the whole multitude was by the sea on the land.","Again Jesus began to teach by the lake. The crowd that gathered around him was so large that he got into a boat and sat in it out on the lake, while all the people were along the shore at the water's edge.","Et iterum coepit docere ad ma re. Et congregatur ad eum tur ba plurima, ita ut in navem ascendens sederet in mari, et omnis turba circa mare super terram erant.","וישב אל הים ויחל ללמד ויקהלו אליו המון עם רב עד אשר ירד לשבת באניה בים וכל העם עומד על חוף הים ביבשה׃"],["48","4","2","예수님께서 그들에게 많은 것을 비유로 가르치셨다. 그렇게 가르치시면서 말씀하셨다.","예수께서는 비유로 여러 가지를 가르치시면서 이렇게 말씀하셨다.","이에 예수께서 여러 가지를 비유로 가르치시니 그 가르치시는 중에 그들에게 이르시되","이에 예수께서 여러가지를 비유로 가르치시니 그 가르치시는 중에 저희에게 이르시되","예수께서 사람들을 가르치실 때는 언제나 여러 가지 비유를 들어 말씀하셨는데, 그날은 이런 비유를 말씀하셨다.","And he taught them at length in parables, and in the course of his instruction he said to them,","And he taught them many things by parables, and said unto them in his doctrine,","He taught them many things by parables, and in his teaching said:","Et docebat eos in parabolis multa et dicebat illis in doctrina sua:","וילמדם הרבה במשלים ויאמר אליהם בלמדו אתם׃"],["48","4","3","“자, 들어 보아라. 씨 뿌리는 사람이 씨를 뿌리러 나갔다.","\"자, 들어보아라. 씨 뿌리는 사람이 씨를 뿌리러 나갔다.","들으라 씨를 뿌리는 자가 뿌리러 나가서","들으라 씨를 뿌리는 자가 뿌리러 나가서","\"들으라, 한 농부가 씨를 뿌리러 나갔다.","“Hear this! A sower went out to sow.","Hearken; Behold, there went out a sower to sow:","\"Listen! A farmer went out to sow his seed.","Audite. Ecce exiit seminans ad seminandum.","שמעו שמוע הנה הזרע יצא לזרע׃"],["48","4","4","그가 씨를 뿌리는데, 어떤 것은 길에 떨어져 새들이 와서 먹어 버렸다.","씨를 뿌리는데 어떤 것은 길바닥에 떨어져 새들이 와서 쪼아먹고","뿌릴새 더러는 길 가에 떨어지매 새들이 와서 먹어 버렸고","뿌릴쌔 더러는 길 가에 떨어지매 새들이 와서 먹어 버렸고","그가 자기 밭에 씨를 뿌렸는데 어떤 것은 길가에 떨어져 새들이 와서 쪼아 먹었고","And as he sowed, some seed fell on the path, and the birds came and ate it up.","And it came to pass, as he sowed, some fell by the way side, and the fowls of the air came and devoured it up.","As he was scattering the seed, some fell along the path, and the birds came and ate it up.","Et factum est, dum seminat, aliud cecidit circa viam, et venerunt volucres et comederunt illud.","ויהי בזרעו ויפל מן הזרע על יד הדרך ויבא עוף השמים ויאכלהו׃"],["48","4","5","어떤 것은 흙이 많지 않은 돌밭에 떨어졌다. 흙이 깊지 않아 싹은 곧 돋아났지만,","어떤 것은 흙이 많지 않은 돌밭에 떨어졌다. 흙이 깊지 않아서 싹은 곧 나왔지만","더러는 흙이 얕은 돌밭에 떨어지매 흙이 깊지 아니하므로 곧 싹이 나오나","더러는 흙이 얇은 돌밭에 떨어지매 흙이 깊지 아니하므로 곧 싹이 나오나","어떤 것은 흙이 얇게 덮인 돌밭에 떨어져 싹은 곧 나왔지만 흙이 깊지 않아","Other seed fell on rocky ground where it had little soil. It sprang up at once because the soil was not deep.","And some fell on stony ground, where it had not much earth; and immediately it sprang up, because it had no depth of earth:","Some fell on rocky places, where it did not have much soil. It sprang up quickly, because the soil was shallow.","Aliud cecidit super petrosa, ubi non habebat terram multam, et statim exortum est, quoniam non habebat altitudinem terrae;","ויש אשר נפל על מקום הסלע אשר אין לו שם אדמה הרבה וימהר לצמח כי לא היה לו עמק אדמה׃"],["48","4","6","해가 솟아오르자 타고 말았다. 뿌리가 없어서 말라 버린 것이다.","해가 뜨자 뿌리도 내리지 못한 채 말라버렸다.","해가 돋은 후에 타서 뿌리가 없으므로 말랐고","해가 돋은 후에 타져서 뿌리가 없으므로 말랐고","해가 뜨자 뿌리도 내리지 못한 채 말라 버렸다.","And when the sun rose, it was scorched and it withered for lack of roots.","But when the sun was up, it was scorched; and because it had no root, it withered away.","But when the sun came up, the plants were scorched, and they withered because they had no root.","et quando exortus est sol, exaestuavit et, eo quod non haberet radicem, exaruit.","ויהי כזרח השמש ויצרב וייבש כי אין לו שרש׃"],["48","4","7","또 어떤 것은 가시덤불 속에 떨어졌는데, 가시덤불이 자라면서 숨을 막아 버려 열매를 맺지 못하였다.","또 어떤 것은 가시덤불 속에 떨어졌다. 가시나무들이 자라자 숨이 막혀 열매를 맺지 못하였다.","더러는 가시떨기에 떨어지매 가시가 자라 기운을 막으므로 결실하지 못하였고","더러는 가시떨기에 떨어지매 가시가 자라 기운을 막으므로 결실치 못하였고","또 어떤 것은 가시덤불 속에 떨어졌는데 가시나무들이 자라서 그것을 덮어 버렸기 때문에 열매를 맺지 못하였다.","Some seed fell among thorns, and the thorns grew up and choked it and it produced no grain.","And some fell among thorns, and the thorns grew up, and choked it, and it yielded no fruit.","Other seed fell among thorns, which grew up and choked the plants, so that they did not bear grain.","Et aliud cecidit in spinas, et ascenderunt spinae et suffocaverunt illud, et fructum non dedit.","ויש אשר נפל בין הקצים ויעלו הקצים וימעכהו ולא נתן פרי׃"],["48","4","8","그러나 어떤 것들은 좋은 땅에 떨어져, 싹이 나고 자라서 열매를 맺었다. 그리하여 어떤 것은 서른 배, 어떤 것은 예순 배, 어떤 것은 백 배의 열매를 맺었다.”","그러나 어떤 것은 좋은 땅에 떨어져서 싹이 나고 잘 자라 열매를 맺었는데, 열매가 삼십 배가 된 것도 있고 육십 배가 된 것도 있고 백 배가 된 것도 있었다.\"","더러는 좋은 땅에 떨어지매 자라 무성하여 결실하였으니 삼십 배나 육십 배나 백 배가 되었느니라 하시고","더러는 좋은 땅에 떨어지매 자라 무성하여 결실하였으니 삼십배와 육십배와 백배가 되었느니라 하시고","그러나 어떤 것은 좋은 땅에 떨어져 싹이 나고 잘 자라서 삼십 배의 열매를 맺었고, 어떤 것은 육십 배, 어떤 것은 백 배의 열매를 맺었다.","And some seed fell on rich soil and produced fruit. It came up and grew and yielded thirty, sixty, and a hundredfold.”","And other fell on good ground, and did yield fruit that sprang up and increased; and brought forth, some thirty, and some sixty, and some an hundred.","Still other seed fell on good soil. It came up, grew and produced a crop, multiplying thirty, sixty, or even a hundred times.\"","Et alia ceciderunt in terram bonam et dabant fructum: ascendebant et crescebant et afferebant unum triginta et unum sexaginta et unum centum “.","ויש אשר נפל על האדמה הטובה ויתן פרי עלה וגדל ויעש זה שלשים שערים וזה ששים וזה מאה׃"],["48","4","9","예수님께서는 이어서 말씀하셨다. “들을 귀 있는 사람은 들어라.”","예수께서는 이어서 \"들을 귀가 있는 사람은 알아들어라.\" 하고 말씀하셨다.","또 이르시되 들을 귀 있는 자는 들으라 하시니라","또 이르시되 들을 귀 있는 자는 들으라 하시니라","들을 귀가 있는 사람은 들으라\"","He added, “Whoever has ears to hear ought to hear.”","And he said unto them, He that hath ears to hear, let him hear.","Then Jesus said, \"He who has ears to hear, let him hear.\"","Et dicebat:  “Qui habet aures audiendi, audiat “.","ויאמר אליהם מי אשר אזנים לו לשמע ישמע׃"],["48","4","10","예수님께서 혼자 계실 때, 그분 둘레에 있던 이들이 열두 제자와 함께 와서 비유들의 뜻을 물었다.","예수께서 혼자 계실 때에 예수를 따르는 사람들이 열두 제자와 함께 와서 비유의 뜻을 물었다.","예수께서 홀로 계실 때에 함께 한 사람들이 열두 제자와 더불어 그 비유들에 대하여 물으니","예수께서 홀로 계실 때에 함께한 사람들이 열 두 제자로 더불어 그 비유들을 묻자오니","그후 예수께서 혼자 계실 때 열두 제자와 늘 예수를 따르는 사람들이 함께 찾아와 물었다. \"그 비유의 뜻이 무엇입니까?\"","And when he was alone, those present along with the Twelve questioned him about the parables.","And when he was alone, they that were about him with the twelve asked of him the parable.","When he was alone, the Twelve and the others around him asked him about the parables.","Et cum esset singularis, interrogaverunt eum hi, qui circa eum erant cum Duodecim, parabolas.","ויהי בהיותו לבדו וישאלוהו האנשים אשר סביביו עם שנים העשר על המשל׃"],["48","4","11","예수님께서 그들에게 대답하셨다. “너희에게는 하느님 나라의 신비가 주어졌지만, 저 바깥 사람들에게는 모든 것이 그저 비유로만 다가간다.","예수께서는 이렇게 대답하셨다. \"너희에게는 하느님 나라의 신비를 알게 해주었지만 다른 사람들에게는 모든 것을 비유로 들려준다.","이르시되 하나님 나라의 비밀을 너희에게는 주었으나 외인에게는 모든 것을 비유로 하나니","이르시되 하나님 나라의 비밀을 너희에게는 주었으나 외인에게는 모든 것을 비유로 하나니","예수께서 대답하셨다. \"하나님 나라의 비밀을 아는 것이 너희에게는 허락이 되어 있지만","He answered them, “The mystery of the kingdom of God has been granted to you. But to those outside everything comes in parables,","And he said unto them, Unto you it is given to know the mystery of the kingdom of God: but unto them that are without, all these things are done in parables:","He told them, \"The secret of the kingdom of God has been given to you. But to those on the outside everything is said in parables","Et dicebat eis:  “Vobis datum est mysterium regni Dei; illis autem, qui foris sunt, in parabolis omnia fiunt,","ויאמר אליהם לכם נתן לדעת סוד מלכות האלהים ואשר בחוץ להם הכל במשלים׃"],["48","4","12","‘보고 또 보아도 알아보지 못하고 듣고 또 들어도 깨닫지 못하여 저들이 돌아와 용서받는 일이 없게 하려는 것이다.’”","그것은 그들이 '1)보고 또 보아도 알아보지 못하고 듣고 또 들어도 알아듣지 못하게 하려는 것이다. 그들이 알아보고 알아듣기만 한다면 나에게 돌아와 용서를 받게 될 것이다.'\"이사 6:9-10.","이는 ㄱ)그들로 보기는 보아도 알지 못하며 듣기는 들어도 깨닫지 못하게 하여 돌이켜 죄 사함을 얻지 못하게 하려 함이라 하시고","이는 ㄱ)저희로 보기는 보아도 알지 못하며 듣기는 들어도 깨닫지 못하게 하여 돌이켜 죄 사함을 얻지 못하게 하려 함이니라 하시고 사 6:9, 10","다른 사람들에게는 감추어져 있다. ㄱ) 그들이 보기는 보아도 알지 못하고 듣기는 들어도 깨닫지 못하는 것은 하나님께로 돌아와 용서받으려 하지 않기 때문이다. (ㄱ. 70인역 사6:9-10)","so that ‘they may look and see but not perceive, and hear and listen but not understand, in order that they may not be converted and be forgiven.’”","That seeing they may see, and not perceive; and hearing they may hear, and not understand; lest at any time they should be converted, and their sins should be forgiven them.","so that, \"'they may be ever seeing but never perceiving, and ever hearing but never understanding; otherwise they might turn and be forgiven!'\"","ut videntes videant et non videant, et audientes audiant et non intellegant, ne quando convertantur, et dimittatur eis “.","למען יראו ראו ולא ידעו ושמעו שמוע ולא יבינו פן ישובו ונסלח לחטאתם׃"],["48","4","13","예수님께서 또 그들에게 말씀하셨다. “너희는 이 비유를 알아듣지 못하겠느냐? 그러면서 어떻게 모든 비유를 깨달을 수 있겠느냐?","예수께서는 이어서 이렇게 말씀하셨다. \"너희가 이 비유도 알아듣지 못하면서 어떻게 다른 비유들을 알아듣겠느냐?","또 이르시되 너희가 이 비유를 알지 못할진대 어떻게 모든 비유를 알겠느냐","또 가라사대 너희가 이 비유를 알지 못할찐대 어떻게 모든 비유를 알겠느뇨","만일 너희가 이 간단한 비유도 알아듣지 못한다면 내가 말하려고 하는 다른 여러 가지 비유를 어떻게 다 알아 들을 수가 있겠느냐?","Jesus said to them, “Do you not understand this parable? Then how will you understand any of the parables?","And he said unto them, Know ye not this parable? and how then will ye know all parables?","Then Jesus said to them, \"Don't you understand this parable? How then will you understand any parable?","Et ait illis:  “Nescitis parabolam hanc, et quomodo omnes parabolas cognoscetis?","ויאמר להם הן לא ידעתם את המשל הזה ואיך תבינו את המשלים כלם׃"],["48","4","14","씨 뿌리는 사람은 실상 말씀을 뿌리는 것이다.","씨 뿌리는 사람이 뿌린 씨는 하늘 나라에 관한 말씀이다.","뿌리는 자는 말씀을 뿌리는 것이라","뿌리는 자는 말씀을 뿌리는 것이라","내가 말한 씨를 뿌리는 농부는 하나님의 말씀을 전하는 사람이다.","The sower sows the word.","The sower soweth the word.","The farmer sows the word.","Qui seminat, verbum seminat.","הזרע הוא זרע את הדבר׃"],["48","4","15","말씀이 길에 뿌려지는 것은 이러한 사람들을 두고 하는 말이다. 그들이 말씀을 들으면 곧바로 사탄이 와서 그들 안에 뿌려진 말씀을 앗아 가 버린다.","길바닥에 떨어졌다는 것은 마음속에 뿌려지는 그 말씀을 듣기는 하지만 날쌔게 달려드는 사탄에게 그것을 빼앗겨버리는 사람들을 두고 하는 말이다.","말씀이 길 가에 뿌려졌다는 것은 이들을 가리킴이니 곧 말씀을 들었을 때에 사탄이 즉시 와서 그들에게 뿌려진 말씀을 빼앗는 것이요","말씀이 길 가에 뿌리웠다는 것은 이들이니 곧 말씀을 들었을 때에 사단이 즉시 와서 저희에게 뿌리운 말씀을 빼앗는 것이요","길가에 씨가 뿌려졌다는 것은 하나님의 말씀을 듣기는 하지만 마음에 받아들이지 않았기 때문에 사단이 와서 그 말씀을 곧 잊어버리게 만드는 사람을 두고 하는 말이다.","These are the ones on the path where the word is sown. As soon as they hear, Satan comes at once and takes away the word sown in them.","And these are they by the way side, where the word is sown; but when they have heard, Satan cometh immediately, and taketh away the word that was sown in their hearts.","Some people are like seed along the path, where the word is sown. As soon as they hear it, Satan comes and takes away the word that was sown in them.","Hi autem sunt, qui circa viam, ubi seminatur verbum: et cum audierint, confestim venit Satanas et aufert verbum, quod seminatum est in eos.","ואלה הם הנזרעים על יד הדרך אשר יזרע בם הדבר וכשמעם אותו מיד בא השטן וישא את הדבר הזרוע בלבבם׃"],["48","4","16","그리고 말씀이 돌밭에 뿌려지는 것은 이러한 사람들이다. 그들은 말씀을 들으면 곧 기쁘게 받는다.","씨가 돌밭에 떨어졌다는 것은 그 말씀을 듣고 기꺼이 받아들이기는 하지만","또 이와 같이 돌밭에 뿌려졌다는 것은 이들을 가리킴이니 곧 말씀을 들을 때에 즉시 기쁨으로 받으나","또 이와 같이 돌밭에 뿌리웠다는 것은 이들이니 곧 말씀을 들을 때에 즉시 기쁨으로 받으나","돌밭에 씨가 뿌려졌다는 것은 하나님의 말씀을 기쁘게 듣기는 하지만","And these are the ones sown on rocky ground who, when they hear the word, receive it at once with joy.","And these are they likewise which are sown on stony ground; who, when they have heard the word, immediately receive it with gladness;","Others, like seed sown on rocky places, hear the word and at once receive it with joy.","Et hi sunt, qui super petrosa seminantur: qui cum audierint verbum, statim cum gaudio accipiunt illud","וכן הנזרעים על מקמות הסלע הם השמעים את הדבר ומהר בשמחה יקחהו׃"],["48","4","17","그러나 그들에게 뿌리가 없어서 오래가지 못한다. 그래서 말씀 때문에 환난이나 박해가 일어나면 곧 걸려 넘어지고 만다.","그 마음속에 뿌리가 내리지 않아 오래 가지 못하고 그 후에 말씀 때문에 환난이나 박해를 당하게 되면 곧 넘어지는 사람들을 두고 하는 말이다.","그 속에 뿌리가 없어 잠깐 견디다가 말씀으로 인하여 환난이나 박해가 일어나는 때에는 곧 넘어지는 자요","그 속에 뿌리가 없어 잠간 견디다가 말씀을 인하여 환난이나 핍박이 일어나는 때에는 곧 넘어지는 자요","그 마음속에 깊이 뿌리를 내리지 못하여 처음에는 잘나가다가 박해가 시작되면 곧 넘어지는 사람을 두고 하는 말이다.","But they have no root; they last only for a time. Then when tribulation or persecution comes because of the word, they quickly fall away.","And have no root in themselves, and so endure but for a time: afterward, when affliction or persecution ariseth for the word's sake, immediately they are offended.","But since they have no root, they last only a short time. When trouble or persecution comes because of the word, they quickly fall away.","et non habent radicem in se, sed temporales sunt; deinde orta tribulatione vel persecutione propter verbum, confestim scandalizantur.","אך אין להם שרש בקרבם ורק לשעה יעמדו ואחר כן בהיות צרה ורדיפה על אדות הדבר מהרה יכשלו׃"],["48","4","18","말씀이 가시덤불 속에 뿌려지는 것은 또 다른 사람들이다. 이들은 말씀을 듣기는 하지만,","그리고 씨가 가시덤불 속에 떨어졌다는 것은 그 말씀을 듣기는 하지만","또 어떤 이는 가시떨기에 뿌려진 자니 이들은 말씀을 듣기는 하되","또 어떤이는 가시떨기에 뿌리우는 자니 이들은 말씀을 듣되","가시덤불 속에 씨가 뿌려졌다는 것은 하나님의 말씀을 듣고 받아들이기는 하나","Those sown among thorns are another sort. They are the people who hear the word,","And these are they which are sown among thorns; such as hear the word,","Still others, like seed sown among thorns, hear the word;","Et alii sunt, qui in spinis seminantur: hi sunt, qui verbum audierunt,","והאחרים הנזרעים בין הקצים הם השמעים את הדבר׃"],["48","4","19","세상 걱정과 재물의 유혹과 그 밖의 여러 가지 욕심이 들어가, 그 말씀의 숨을 막아 버려 열매를 맺지 못한다.","세상 걱정과 재물의 유혹과 그 밖의 여러 가지 욕심이 들어와서 그 말씀을 가로막아 열매를 맺지 못하는 사람들을 두고 하는 말이다.","세상의 염려와 재물의 유혹과 기타 욕심이 들어와 말씀을 막아 결실하지 못하게 되는 자요","세상의 염려와 재리의 유혹과 기타 욕심이 들어와 말씀을 막아 결실치 못하게 되는 자요","세상살이의 염려와 재물의 유혹과 기타 여러 가지 욕심이 하나님의 말씀을 그 마음에서 밀어내 버려 열매 맺지 못하는 사람을 두고 하는 말이다.","but worldly anxiety, the lure of riches, and the craving for other things intrude and choke the word, and it bears no fruit.","And the cares of this world, and the deceitfulness of riches, and the lusts of other things entering in, choke the word, and it becometh unfruitful.","but the worries of this life, the deceitfulness of wealth and the desires for other things come in and choke the word, making it unfruitful.","et aerumnae saeculi et deceptio divitiarum et circa reliqua concupiscentiae introeuntes suffocant verbum, et sine fructu efficitur.","ודאגות העולם הזה ומרמת העשר ותאות שאר הדברים באות וממעכות את הדבר ופרי לא יהיה לו׃"],["48","4","20","그러나 말씀이 좋은 땅에 뿌려진 것은 이러한 사람들이다. 그들은 말씀을 듣고 받아들여, 어떤 이는 서른 배, 어떤 이는 예순 배, 어떤 이는 백 배의 열매를 맺는다.”","그러나 씨가 좋은 땅에 떨어졌다는 것은 그 말씀을 듣고 잘 받아들여 삼십 배, 육십 배, 백 배의 열매를 맺는 사람들을 두고 하는 말이다.\"","좋은 땅에 뿌려졌다는 것은 곧 말씀을 듣고 받아 삼십 배나 육십 배나 백 배의 결실을 하는 자니라","좋은 땅에 뿌리웠다는 것은 곧 말씀을 듣고 받아 삼십배와 육십배와 백배의 결실을 하는 자니라","그러나 좋은 땅에 씨가 뿌려졌다는 것은 하나님의 말씀을 진실하게 받아들임으로써 풍성한 열매를 거두는 사람, 즉 그 마음속에 심어진 씨가 삼십 배, 육십 배, 백 배의 열매를 맺는 사람을 두고 하는 말이다\"","But those sown on rich soil are the ones who hear the word and accept it and bear fruit thirty and sixty and a hundredfold.”","And these are they which are sown on good ground; such as hear the word, and receive it, and bring forth fruit, some thirtyfold, some sixty, and some an hundred.","Others, like seed sown on good soil, hear the word, accept it, and produce a crop--thirty, sixty or even a hundred times what was sown.\"","Et hi sunt, qui super terram bonam seminati sunt: qui audiunt verbum et suscipiunt et fructificant unum triginta et unum sexaginta et unum centum “.","ואלה המזרעים על האדמה הטובה הם השמעים את הדבר ומקבלים אתו ועשים פרי לשלשים שערים ולששים ולמאה׃"],["48","4","21","예수님께서 또 그들에게 말씀하셨다. “누가 등불을 가져다가 함지 속이나 침상 밑에 놓겠느냐? 등경 위에 놓지 않느냐?","예수께서는 또 이렇게 말씀하셨다. \"등불을 가져다가 됫박 아래나 침상 밑에 두는 사람이 어디 있겠느냐? 누구나 등경 위에 얹어놓지 않느냐?","또 그들에게 이르시되 사람이 등불을 가져오는 것은 말 아래에나 평상 아래에 두려 함이냐 등경 위에 두려 함이 아니냐","또 저희에게 이르시되 사람이 등불을 가져오는 것은 말 아래나 평상 아래나 두려 함이냐 등경 위에 두려 함이 아니냐","예수께서 또 그들에게 말씀하셨다. \"등불을 켜서 됫박으로 덮어 두거나 침상 밑에 두는 사람이 어디 있겠느냐? 누구나 등잔대 위에 두지 않겠느냐?","He said to them, “Is a lamp brought in to be placed under a bushel basket or under a bed, and not to be placed on a lampstand?","And he said unto them, Is a candle brought to be put under a bushel, or under a bed? and not to be set on a candlestick?","He said to them, \"Do you bring in a lamp to put it under a bowl or a bed? Instead, don't you put it on its stand?","Et dicebat illis:  “Numquid venit lucerna, ut sub modio ponatur aut sub lecto? Nonne ut super candelabrum ponatur?","ויאמר אליהם הכי יביאו הנר למען יושם תחת האיפה ותחת המטה ולא למען יעלהו על המנורה׃"],["48","4","22","숨겨진 것도 드러나기 마련이고 감추어진 것도 드러나게 되어 있다.","감추어둔 것은 드러나게 마련이고 비밀은 알려지게 마련이다.","드러내려 하지 않고는 숨긴 것이 없고 나타내려 하지 않고는 감추인 것이 없느니라","드러내려 하지 않고는 숨긴 것이 없고 나타내려 하지 않고는 감추인 것이 없느니라","아무리 감추어 둔 것이라도 언젠가는 드러나기 마련이다.","For there is nothing hidden except to be made visible; nothing is secret except to come to light.","For there is nothing hid, which shall not be manifested; neither was any thing kept secret, but that it should come abroad.","For whatever is hidden is meant to be disclosed, and whatever is concealed is meant to be brought out into the open.","Non enim est aliquid absconditum, nisi ut manifestetur, nec factum est occultum, nisi ut in palam veniat.","כי אין דבר סתום אשר לא יגלה ולא נעלם דבר כי אם למען יבא לגלוי׃"],["48","4","23","누구든지 들을 귀가 있거든 들어라.”","들을 귀가 있는 사람은 알아들어라.\"","들을 귀 있는 자는 들으라","들을 귀 있는 자는 들으라","들을 귀가 있는 사람은 들으라.","Anyone who has ears to hear ought to hear.”","If any man have ears to hear, let him hear.","If anyone has ears to hear, let him hear.\"","Si quis habet aures audiendi, audiat “.","כל אשר אזנים לו לשמע ישמע׃"],["48","4","24","예수님께서 다시 그들에게 말씀하셨다. “너희는 새겨들어라. 너희가 되어서 주는 만큼 되어서 받고 거기에 더 보태어 받을 것이다.","또 말씀하셨다. \"내 말을 마음에 새겨들어라. 너희가 남에게 달아주면 달아주는 만큼 받을 뿐만 아니라 덤까지 얹어 받을 것이다.","또 이르시되 너희가 무엇을 듣는가 스스로 삼가라 너희의 헤아리는 그 헤아림으로 너희가 헤아림을 받을 것이며 더 받으리니","또 가라사대 너희가 무엇을 듣는가 스스로 삼가라 너희의 헤아리는 그 헤아림으로 너희가 헤아림을 받을 것이요 또 더 받으리니","이 말을 명심하여 들으라. 너희가 남에게 달아주면 주는 만큼 받을 뿐만 아니라 덤까지 받을 것이다.","He also told them, “Take care what you hear. The measure with which you measure will be measured out to you, and still more will be given to you.","And he said unto them, Take heed what ye hear: with what measure ye mete, it shall be measured to you: and unto you that hear shall more be given.","\"Consider carefully what you hear,\" he continued. \"With the measure you use, it will be measured to you--and even more.","Et dicebat illis:  “Videte quid audiatis. In qua mensura mensi fueritis, remetietur vobis et adicietur vobis.","ויאמר אליהם ראו מה אתם שמעים במדה אשר אתם מודדים בה ימד לכם ועוד יוסף לכם השמעים׃"],["48","4","25","정녕 가진 자는 더 받고 가진 것 없는 자는 가진 것마저 빼앗길 것이다.”","누구든지 가진 사람은 더 받을 것이며 가지지 못한 사람은 그 가진 것마저 빼앗길 것이다.\"","있는 자는 받을 것이요 없는 자는 그 있는 것까지도 빼앗기리라","있는 자는 받을 것이요 없는 자는 그 있는 것까지 빼앗기리라","누구든지 가진 사람은 더 받을 것이고 가지지 못한 사람은 그 가진 것마저 빼앗길 것이다.","To the one who has, more will be given; from the one who has not, even what he has will be taken away.”","For he that hath, to him shall be given: and he that hath not, from him shall be taken even that which he hath.","Whoever has will be given more; whoever does not have, even what he has will be taken from him.\"","Qui enim habet, dabitur illi; et, qui non habet, etiam quod habet, auferetur ab illo “.","כי מי שיש לו נתון ינתן לו ומי שאין לו גם את אשר יש לו יקח ממנו׃"],["48","4","26","예수님께서 또 말씀하셨다. “하느님의 나라는 이와 같다. 어떤 사람이 땅에 씨를 뿌려 놓으면,","예수께서 또 말씀하셨다. \"하느님 나라는 이렇게 비유할 수 있다. 어떤 사람이 땅에 씨앗을 뿌려놓았다.","또 이르시되 하나님의 나라는 사람이 씨를 땅에 뿌림과 같으니","또 가라사대 하나님의 나라는 사람이 씨를 땅에 뿌림과 같으니","하나님 나라는 농사꾼이 그의 밭에 뿌려 놓은 씨와 같다.","He said, “This is how it is with the kingdom of God; it is as if a man were to scatter seed on the land","And he said, So is the kingdom of God, as if a man should cast seed into the ground;","He also said, \"This is what the kingdom of God is like. A man scatters seed on the ground.","Et dicebat:  “Sic est regnum Dei, quemadmodum si homo iaciat sementem in terram","ויאמר מלכות האלהים היא כאשר ישליך איש זרע על האדמה׃"],["48","4","27","밤에 자고 낮에 일어나고 하는 사이에 씨는 싹이 터서 자라는데, 그 사람은 어떻게 그리되는지 모른다.","하루하루 자고 일어나고 하는 사이에 씨앗은 싹이 트고 자라나지만 그 사람은 그것이 어떻게 자라는지 모른다.","그가 밤낮 자고 깨고 하는 중에 씨가 나서 자라되 어떻게 그리 되는지를 알지 못하느니라","저가 밤낮 자고 깨고 하는 중에 씨가 나서 자라되 그 어떻게 된 것을 알지 못하느니라","그 씨는 농사꾼이 가꾸지 않아도 자고 깨고 하는 동안에 저절로 싹이 돋아 자란다.","and would sleep and rise night and day and the seed would sprout and grow, he knows not how.","And should sleep, and rise night and day, and the seed should spring and grow up, he knoweth not how.","Night and day, whether he sleeps or gets up, the seed sprouts and grows, though he does not know how.","et dormiat et exsurgat nocte ac die, et semen germinet et increscat, dum nescit ille.","וישן וקם לילה ויום והזרע יצמח וגדל והוא לא ידע׃"],["48","4","28","땅이 저절로 열매를 맺게 하는데, 처음에는 줄기가, 다음에는 이삭이 나오고 그다음에는 이삭에 낟알이 영근다.","땅이 저절로 열매를 맺게 하는 것인데 처음에는 싹이 돋고 그 다음에는 이삭이 패고 마침내 이삭에 알찬 낟알이 맺힌다.","땅이 스스로 열매를 맺되 처음에는 싹이요 다음에는 이삭이요 그 다음에는 이삭에 충실한 곡식이라","땅이 스스로 열매를 맺되 처음에는 싹이요 다음에는 이삭이요 그 다음에는 이삭에 충실한 곡식이라","땅이 그 씨를 자라게 하기 때문이다. 처음에는 싹이 돋고 그 다음에는 이삭이 나며 마침내는 이삭에 낟알이 맺힌다.","Of its own accord the land yields fruit, first the blade, then the ear, then the full grain in the ear.","For the earth bringeth forth fruit of herself; first the blade, then the ear, after that the full corn in the ear.","All by itself the soil produces grain--first the stalk, then the head, then the full kernel in the head.","Ultro terra fructificat primum herbam, deinde spicam, deinde plenum frumentum in spica.","כי הארץ מאליה מוציאה פריה את הדשא ראשונה ואחריו את השבלת ואחרי כן את החטה המלאה בשבלת׃"],["48","4","29","곡식이 익으면 그 사람은 곧 낫을 댄다. 수확 때가 되었기 때문이다.”","곡식이 익으면 그 사람은 추수 때가 된 줄을 알고 곧 낫을 댄다.\"","열매가 익으면 곧 낫을 대나니 이는 추수 때가 이르렀음이라","열매가 익으면 곧 낫을 대나니 이는 추수 때가 이르렀음이니라","그러면 농사꾼은 낫을 가지고 나가 익은 곡식을 거두어들인다.\"","And when the grain is ripe, he wields the sickle at once, for the harvest has come.”","But when the fruit is brought forth, immediately he putteth in the sickle, because the harvest is come.","As soon as the grain is ripe, he puts the sickle to it, because the harvest has come.\"","Et cum se produxerit fructus, statim mittit falcem, quoniam adest messis “.","וכאשר גמל הפרי ימהר לשלח את המגל כי בשל הקציר׃"],["48","4","30","예수님께서 다시 말씀하셨다. “하느님의 나라를 무엇에 비길까? 무슨 비유로 그것을 나타낼까?","예수께서 또 말씀하셨다. \"하느님 나라를 무엇에 견주며 무엇으로 비유할 수 있을까?","또 이르시되 우리가 하나님의 나라를 어떻게 비교하며 또 무슨 비유로 나타낼까","또 가라사대 우리가 하나님의 나라를 어떻게 비하며 또 무슨 비유로 나타낼꼬","예수께서 말씀하셨다. \"하나님 나라를 어떻게 묘사할 수 있을까? 무슨 비유로 그것을 설명할 수 있을까?","He said, “To what shall we compare the kingdom of God, or what parable can we use for it?","And he said, Whereunto shall we liken the kingdom of God? or with what comparison shall we compare it?","Again he said, \"What shall we say the kingdom of God is like, or what parable shall we use to describe it?","Et dicebat:  “Quomodo assimilabimus regnum Dei aut in qua parabola ponemus illud?","ויאמר אל מה נדמה את מלכות האלהים ובאי זה משל נמשילנה׃"],["48","4","31","하느님의 나라는 겨자씨와 같다. 땅에 뿌릴 때에는 세상의 어떤 씨앗보다도 작다.","그것은 겨자씨 한 알과 같다. 땅에 심을 때에는 세상의 어떤 씨앗보다도 더욱 작은 것이지만","겨자씨 한 알과 같으니 땅에 심길 때에는 땅 위의 모든 씨보다 작은 것이로되","겨자씨 한 알과 같으니 땅에 심길 때에는 땅위의 모든 씨보다 작은 것이로되","하나님 나라는 겨자씨 한 알과 같다. 겨자씨는 모든 씨 가운데 가장 작은 것이지만","It is like a mustard seed that, when it is sown in the ground, is the smallest of all the seeds on the earth.","It is like a grain of mustard seed, which, when it is sown in the earth, is less than all the seeds that be in the earth:","It is like a mustard seed, which is the smallest seed you plant in the ground.","Sicut granum sinapis, quod cum seminatum fuerit in terra, minus est omnibus seminibus, quae sunt in terra;","כגרגר של חרדל אשר יזרע באדמה והוא קטן מכל הזרעים אשר על הארץ׃"],["48","4","32","그러나 땅에 뿌려지면 자라나서 어떤 풀보다도 커지고 큰 가지들을 뻗어, 하늘의 새들이 그 그늘에 깃들일 수 있게 된다.”","심어놓으면 어떤 푸성귀보다도 더 크게 자라고 큰 가지가 뻗어서 공중의 새들이 그 그늘에 깃들일 만큼 된다.\"","심긴 후에는 자라서 모든 풀보다 커지며 큰 가지를 내나니 공중의 새들이 그 그늘에 깃들일 만큼 되느니라","심긴 후에는 자라서 모든 나물보다 커지며 큰 가지를 내니 공중의 새들이 그 그늘에 깃들일 만큼 되느니라","땅에 뿌려진 다음에는 어떤 식물보다도 크게 자라서 공중의 새들이 그 그늘진 가지에 깃들일 만큼 무성하게 된다.\"","But once it is sown, it springs up and becomes the largest of plants and puts forth large branches, so that the birds of the sky can dwell in its shade.”","But when it is sown, it groweth up, and becometh greater than all herbs, and shooteth out great branches; so that the fowls of the air may lodge under the shadow of it.","Yet when planted, it grows and becomes the largest of all garden plants, with such big branches that the birds of the air can perch in its shade.\"","et cum seminatum fuerit, ascendit et fit maius omnibus holeribus et facit ramos magnos, ita ut possint sub umbra eius aves caeli habitare “.","ואחרי הזרעו יעלה ויגדל על כל הירקות ועשה ענפים גדולים עד אשר יוכלו עוף השמים לקנן בצלו׃"],["48","4","33","예수님께서는 그들이 알아들을 수 있을 정도로, 이처럼 많은 비유로 말씀을 하셨다.","예수께서는 그들이 알아들을 수 있을 정도로 이와 같은 여러 가지 비유로써 말씀을 전하셨다.","예수께서 이러한 많은 비유로 그들이 알아 들을 수 있는 대로 말씀을 가르치시되","예수께서 이러한 많은 비유로 저희가 알아 들을 수 있는대로 말씀을 가르치시되","예수께서는 사람들이 알아듣기 쉽도록 이와같이 많은 비유로 가르치셨다.","With many such parables he spoke the word to them as they were able to understand it.","And with many such parables spake he the word unto them, as they were able to hear it.","With many similar parables Jesus spoke the word to them, as much as they could understand.","Et talibus multis parabolis loquebatur eis verbum, prout poterant audire;","ובמשלים רבים כאלה דבר אליהם את הדבר כפי אשר יכלו לשמע׃"],["48","4","34","비유를 들지 않고는 그들에게 말씀하지 않으셨다. 그러나 당신의 제자들에게는 따로 모든 것을 풀이해 주셨다.","그들에게는 이렇게 비유로만 말씀하셨지만 제자들에게는 따로 일일이 그 뜻을 풀이해 주셨다.","비유가 아니면 말씀하지 아니하시고 다만 혼자 계실 때에 그 제자들에게 모든 것을 해석하시더라","비유가 아니면 말씀하지 아니하시고 다만 혼자 계실 때에 그 제자들에게 모든 것을 해석하시더라","예수께서는 여러 사람들 앞에서는 비유가 아니면 말씀하지 않으셨으나 제자들에게만은 따로 그 뜻을 설명해 주셨다.","Without parables he did not speak to them, but to his own disciples he explained everything in private.","But without a parable spake he not unto them: and when they were alone, he expounded all things to his disciples.","He did not say anything to them without using a parable. But when he was alone with his own disciples, he explained everything.","sine parabola autem non loquebatur eis. Seorsum autem discipulis suis disserebat omnia.","ובבלי משל לא דבר אליהם והיה בהיותו עם תלמידיו לבדם יבאר להם את הכל׃"],["48","4","35","그날 저녁이 되자 예수님께서 제자들에게, “호수 저쪽으로 건너가자.” 하고 말씀하셨다.","그 날 저녁이 되자 예수께서 제자들에게 \"호수 저편으로 건너가자.\" 하고 말씀하셨다.","그 날 저물 때에 제자들에게 이르시되 우리가 저편으로 건너가자 하시니","그날 저물 때에 제자들에게 이르시되 우리가 저편으로 건너가자 하시니","저녁때가 되자 예수께서는 제자들에게 \"바다 저편으로 건너가자\"고 말씀하셨다.","On that day, as evening drew on, he said to them, “Let us cross to the other side.”","And the same day, when the even was come, he saith unto them, Let us pass over unto the other side.","That day when evening came, he said to his disciples, \"Let us go over to the other side.\"","Et ait illis illa die, cum sero esset factum:  “Transeamus contra “.","ויאמר אליהם ביום ההוא לפנות ערב נעברה העבר׃"],["48","4","36","그래서 그들이 군중을 남겨 둔 채, 배에 타고 계신 예수님을 그대로 모시고 갔는데, 다른 배들도 그분을 뒤따랐다.","그래서 그들이 군중을 남겨둔 채 예수께서 타고 계신 배를 저어 가자 다른 배들도 함께 따라갔다.","그들이 무리를 떠나 예수를 배에 계신 그대로 모시고 가매 다른 배들도 함께 하더니","저희가 무리를 떠나 예수를 배에 계신 그대로 모시고 가매 다른 배들도 함께 하더니","그래서 제자들이 무리를 그대로 남겨 둔 채 예수를 보시고 배를 저어 가자 다른 배들도 뒤따랐다.","Leaving the crowd, they took him with them in the boat just as he was. And other boats were with him.","And when they had sent away the multitude, they took him even as he was in the ship. And there were also with him other little ships.","Leaving the crowd behind, they took him along, just as he was, in the boat. There were also other boats with him.","Et dimittentes turbam, assumunt eum, ut erat in navi; et aliae naves erant cum illo.","ויעזבו את המון העם ויקחו אתו כאשר הוא באניה וגם אניות אחרות הלכו עמו׃"],["48","4","37","그때에 거센 돌풍이 일어 물결이 배 안으로 들이쳐서, 물이 배에 거의 가득 차게 되었다.","그런데 마침 거센 바람이 일더니 물결이 배 안으로 들이쳐서 물이 배에 거의 가득 차게 되었다.","큰 광풍이 일어나며 물결이 배에 부딪쳐 들어와 배에 가득하게 되었더라","큰 광풍이 일어나며 물결이 부딪혀 배에 들어와 배에 가득하게 되었더라","그런데 얼마 못 가서 거센 폭풍이 일면서 큰 물결이 배 안으로 덮쳐 배가 가라 앉을 지경이 되었다.","A violent squall came up and waves were breaking over the boat, so that it was already filling up.","And there arose a great storm of wind, and the waves beat into the ship, so that it was now full.","A furious squall came up, and the waves broke over the boat, so that it was nearly swamped.","Et exoritur procella magna venti, et fluctus se mittebant in navem, ita ut iam impleretur navis.","ותקם רוח סערה גדולה וישטפו הגלים אל תוך האניה עד אשר כמעט נמלאה׃"],["48","4","38","그런데도 예수님께서는 고물에서 베개를 베고 주무시고 계셨다. 제자들이 예수님을 깨우며, “스승님, 저희가 죽게 되었는데도 걱정되지 않으십니까?” 하고 말하였다.","그런데도 예수께서는 뱃고물을 베개삼아 주무시고 계셨다. 제자들이 예수를 깨우며 \"선생님, 저희가 죽게 되었는데도 돌보시지 않습니까?\" 하고 부르짖었다.","예수께서는 고물에서 베개를 베고 주무시더니 제자들이 깨우며 이르되 선생님이여 우리가 죽게 된 것을 돌보지 아니하시나이까 하니","예수께서는 고물에서 베개를 베시고 주무시더니 제자들이 깨우며 가로되 선생님이여 우리의 죽게 된것을 돌아보지 아니하시나이까 하니","그러나 예수께서는 배 고물에 머리를 기대고 주무시고 계셨다. 제자들이 예수를 깨우며 소리쳤다. \"선생님, 저희가 빠져 죽게 되었는데도 돌보지 않으시렵니까?\"","Jesus was in the stern, asleep on a cushion. They woke him and said to him, “Teacher, do you not care that we are perishing?”","And he was in the hinder part of the ship, asleep on a pillow: and they awake him, and say unto him, Master, carest thou not that we perish?","Jesus was in the stern, sleeping on a cushion. The disciples woke him and said to him, \"Teacher, don't you care if we drown?\"","Et erat ipse in puppi supra cervical dormiens; et excitant eum et dicunt ei:  “Magister, non ad te pertinet quia perimus? “.","והוא ישן על הכסת באחרי האניה ויעירו אותו ויאמרו אליו רבי האינך דאג לנו כי נאבד׃"],["48","4","39","그러자 예수님께서 깨어나시어 바람을 꾸짖으시고 호수더러, “잠잠해져라. 조용히 하여라!” 하시니 바람이 멎고 아주 고요해졌다.","예수께서 일어나 바람을 꾸짖으시며 바다를 향하여 \"고요하고 잠잠해져라!\" 하고 호령하시자 바람은 그치고 바다는 아주 잔잔해졌다.","예수께서 깨어 바람을 꾸짖으시며 바다더러 이르시되 잠잠하라 고요하라 하시니 바람이 그치고 아주 잔잔하여지더라","예수께서 깨어 바람을 꾸짖으시며 바다더러 이르시되 잠잠하라 고요하라 하시니 바람이 그치고 아주 잔잔하여지더라","예수께서 일어나 바람을 꾸짖으시며 바다를 향하여 \"고요하고 잔잔하라!\"고 말씀하셨다. 그러자 바람이 그치고 물결은 아주 잔잔해졌다.","He woke up, rebuked the wind, and said to the sea, “Quiet! Be still!” The wind ceased and there was great calm.","And he arose, and rebuked the wind, and said unto the sea, Peace, be still. And the wind ceased, and there was a great calm.","He got up, rebuked the wind and said to the waves, \"Quiet! Be still!\" Then the wind died down and it was completely calm.","Et exsurgens comminatus est vento et dixit mari:  “Tace, obmutesce! “. Et cessavit ventus, et facta est tranquillitas magna.","ויעור ויגער ברוח ויאמר אל הים הס ודם ותשך הרוח ותהי דממה גדולה׃"],["48","4","40","예수님께서는 그들에게, “왜 겁을 내느냐? 아직도 믿음이 없느냐?” 하고 말씀하셨다.","그렇게 하시고 나서 예수께서는 그들에게 \"왜 그렇게들 겁이 많으냐? 아직도 믿음이 없느냐?\" 하고 책망하셨다.","이에 제자들에게 이르시되 어찌하여 이렇게 무서워하느냐 너희가 어찌 믿음이 없느냐 하시니","이에 제자들에게 이르시되 어찌하여 이렇게 무서워하느냐 너희가 1)어찌 믿음이 없느냐 하시니 어떤 사본에, 어찌 아직도 믿음이","예수께서 제자들을 꾸짖으셨다. \"왜 그렇게도 겁이 많으냐? 아직도 나를 믿지 못하느냐?\"","Then he asked them, “Why are you terrified? Do you not yet have faith?”","And he said unto them, Why are ye so fearful? how is it that ye have no faith?","He said to his disciples, \"Why are you so afraid? Do you still have no faith?\"","Et ait illis:  “Quid timidi estis? Necdum habetis fidem? “.","ויאמר אליהם למה ככה אתם חרדים איך אין לכם אמונה׃"],["48","4","41","그들은 큰 두려움에 사로잡혀 서로 말하였다. “도대체 이분이 누구시기에 바람과 호수까지 복종하는가?”","그들은 두려움에 사로잡혀 \"도대체 이분이 누구인데 바람과 바다까지 복종할까?\" 하며 서로 수군거렸다.","그들이 심히 두려워하여 서로 말하되 그가 누구이기에 바람과 바다도 순종하는가 하였더라","저희가 심히 두려워하여 서로 말하되 저가 뉘기에 바람과 바다라도 순종하는고 하였더라","그들은 두려움에 사로잡혀 자기들끼리 수군거렸다. \"이분이 대체 누구시기에 바람과 바다까지도 복종하는가?\"","They were filled with great awe and said to one another, “Who then is this whom even wind and sea obey?”","And they feared exceedingly, and said one to another, What manner of man is this, that even the wind and the sea obey him?","They were terrified and asked each other, \"Who is this? Even the wind and the waves obey him!\"","Et timuerunt magno timore et dicebant ad alterutrum:  “Quis putas est iste, quia et ventus et mare oboediunt ei? “.","וייראו יראה גדולה ויאמרו איש אל רעהו מי אפוא הוא אשר גם הרוח והים שמעים לו׃"],["48","5","1","그들은 호수 건너편 게라사인들의 지방으로 갔다.","그들은 호수 건너편 게라사 지방에 이르렀다.","예수께서 바다 건너편 거라사인의 지방에 이르러","예수께서 바다 건너편 거라사인의 지방에 이르러","예수와 그 일행이 바다 건너편 거라사인의 지방에 이르렀을 때","They came to the other side of the sea, to the territory of the Gerasenes.","And they came over unto the other side of the sea, into the country of the Gadarenes.","They went across the lake to the region of the Gerasenes.","Et venerunt trans fretum maris in regionem Gerasenorum.","ויבאו אל עבר הים אל ארץ הגדרים׃"],["48","5","2","예수님께서 배에서 내리시자마자, 더러운 영이 들린 사람이 무덤에서 나와 그분께 마주 왔다.","예수께서 배에서 내리셨을 때에 더러운 악령 들린 사람 하나가 무덤 사이에서 나오다가 예수를 만나게 되었다.","배에서 나오시매 곧 더러운 귀신 들린 사람이 무덤 사이에서 나와 예수를 만나니라","배에서 나오시매 곧 더러운 귀신 들린 사람이 무덤 사이에서 나와 예수를 만나다","방금 무덤 사이에서 내려온 더러운 귀신 들린 사람을 만나게 되었다.","When he got out of the boat, at once a man from the tombs who had an unclean spirit met him.","And when he was come out of the ship, immediately there met him out of the tombs a man with an unclean spirit,","When Jesus got out of the boat, a man with an evil spirit came from the tombs to meet him.","Et exeunte eo de navi, statim occurrit ei de monumentis homo in spiritu immundo,","והוא יצא מן האניה והנה איש בא לקראתו מבין הקברים אשר רוח טמאה בו׃"],["48","5","3","그는 무덤에서 살았는데, 어느 누구도 더 이상 그를 쇠사슬로 묶어 둘 수가 없었다.","그는 무덤에서 살았는데 이제는 아무도 그를 매어둘 수가 없었다. 쇠사슬도 소용이 없었다.","그 사람은 무덤 사이에 거처하는데 이제는 아무도 그를 쇠사슬로도 맬 수 없게 되었으니","그 사람은 무덤 사이에 거처하는데 이제는 아무나 쇠사슬로도 맬 수 없게 되었으니","이 사람은 무덤에서 살았는데, 누구도 그를 매어 둘 수 없었다.","The man had been dwelling among the tombs, and no one could restrain him any longer, even with a chain.","Who had his dwelling among the tombs; and no man could bind him, no, not with chains:","This man lived in the tombs, and no one could bind him any more, not even with a chain.","qui domicilium habebat in monumentis; et neque catenis iam quisquam eum poterat ligare,","ומושבו בקברים וגם בעבתים לא יכל איש לאסרו׃"],["48","5","4","이미 여러 번 족쇄와 쇠사슬로 묶어 두었으나, 그는 쇠사슬도 끊고 족쇄도 부수어 버려 아무도 그를 휘어잡을 수가 없었다.","여러 번 쇠고랑을 채우고 쇠사슬로 묶어두었지만 그는 번번이 쇠사슬을 끊고 쇠고랑도 부수어버려 아무도 그를 휘어잡지 못하였다.","이는 여러 번 고랑과 쇠사슬에 매였어도 쇠사슬을 끊고 고랑을 깨뜨렸음이러라 그리하여 아무도 그를 제어할 힘이 없는지라","이는 여러번 고랑과 쇠사슬에 매였어도 쇠사슬을 끊고 고랑을 깨뜨렸음이러라 그리하여 아무도 저를 제어할 힘이 없는지라","여러 번 쇠고랑도 채우고 쇠사슬로 묶어도 보았으나 그는 번번이 그것들을 끊어 버렸다. 결국 아무도 그를 휘어잡지 못하였다.","In fact, he had frequently been bound with shackles and chains, but the chains had been pulled apart by him and the shackles smashed, and no one was strong enough to subdue him.","Because that he had been often bound with fetters and chains, and the chains had been plucked asunder by him, and the fetters broken in pieces: neither could any man tame him.","For he had often been chained hand and foot, but he tore the chains apart and broke the irons on his feet. No one was strong enough to subdue him.","quoniam saepe compedibus et catenis vinctus dirupisset catenas et compedes comminuisset, et nemo poterat eum domare;","כי פעמים הרבה אסרוהו בכבלים ובעבתים וינתק את העבתים וישבר את הכבלים ואין איש יכל לכבשו׃"],["48","5","5","그는 밤낮으로 무덤과 산에서 소리를 지르고 돌로 제 몸을 치곤 하였다.","그리고 그는 밤이나 낮이나 항상 묘지와 산을 돌아다니면서 소리를 지르고 돌로 제 몸을 짓찧곤 하였다.","밤낮 무덤 사이에서나 산에서나 늘 소리 지르며 돌로 자기의 몸을 해치고 있었더라","밤낮 무덤 사이에서나 산에서나 늘 소리지르며 돌로 제 몸을 상하고 있었더라","그는 밤이나 낮이나 무덤과 산기슭을 돌아다니면서 소리를 지르고 뾰족한 돌로 자기 몸을 짓찧어 상처를 내곤 하였다.","Night and day among the tombs and on the hillsides he was always crying out and bruising himself with stones.","And always, night and day, he was in the mountains, and in the tombs, crying, and cutting himself with stones.","Night and day among the tombs and in the hills he would cry out and cut himself with stones.","et semper nocte ac die in monumentis et in montibus erat clamans et concidens se lapidibus.","ותמיד לילה ויומם היה בהרים ובקברים צעק ופצע את עצמו באבנים׃"],["48","5","6","그는 멀리서 예수님을 보고 달려와 그 앞에 엎드려 절하며,","그는 멀찍이서 예수를 보자 곧 달려가 그 앞에 엎드려","그가 멀리서 예수를 보고 달려와 절하며","그가 멀리서 예수를 보고 달려와 절하며","그는 저 멀리 배를 타고 오시는 예수를 보고 달려 내려와 그 앞에 엎드렸다.","Catching sight of Jesus from a distance, he ran up and prostrated himself before him,","But when he saw Jesus afar off, he ran and worshipped him,","When he saw Jesus from a distance, he ran and fell on his knees in front of him.","Et videns Iesum a longe cucurrit et adoravit eum","ויהי כראותו את ישוע מרחוק וירץ וישתחו לו׃"],["48","5","7","큰 소리로 “지극히 높으신 하느님의 아들 예수님, 당신께서 저와 무슨 상관이 있습니까? 하느님의 이름으로 당신께 말합니다. 저를 괴롭히지 말아 주십시오.” 하고 외쳤다.","\"지극히 높으신 하느님의 아들 예수님, 왜 저를 간섭하십니까? 제발 저를 괴롭히지 마십시오.\" 하고 큰소리로 외쳤다.","큰 소리로 부르짖어 이르되 지극히 높으신 하나님의 아들 예수여 나와 당신이 무슨 상관이 있나이까 원하건대 하나님 앞에 맹세하고 나를 괴롭히지 마옵소서 하니","큰 소리로 부르짖어 가로되 지극히 높으신 하나님의 아들 예수여 나와 당신과 무슨 상관이 있나이까 원컨대 하나님 앞에 맹세하고 나를 괴롭게 마옵소서 하니","예수께서 그 사람 속에 있는 귀신을 보고 \"이리 나오라, 이 더러운 귀신아\" 하고 말씀하셨다. 그러자 귀신은 소리를 지르며 말하였다. \"지극히 높으신 하나님의 아들 예수여, 저를 어떻게 하실 작정입니까? 제발 저를 괴롭히지 마십시오.\"","crying out in a loud voice, “What have you to do with me, Jesus, Son of the Most High God? I adjure you by God, do not torment me!”","And cried with a loud voice, and said, What have I to do with thee, Jesus, thou Son of the most high God? I adjure thee by God, that thou torment me not.","He shouted at the top of his voice, \"What do you want with me, Jesus, Son of the Most High God? Swear to God that you won't torture me!\"","et clamans voce magna dicit:  “Quid mihi et tibi, Iesu, fili Dei Altissimi? Adiuro te per Deum, ne me torqueas “.","ויצעק בקול גדול ויאמר מה לי ולך ישוע בן אל עליון באלהים אני משביעך אשר לא תענני׃"],["48","5","8","예수님께서 그에게 “더러운 영아, 그 사람에게서 나가라.” 하고 말씀하셨기 때문이다.","그것은 예수께서 악령을 보시기만 하면 \"더러운 악령아, 그 사람에게서 나오너라.\" 하고 명령하시기 때문이었다.","이는 예수께서 이미 그에게 이르시기를 더러운 귀신아 그 사람에게서 나오라 하셨음이라","이는 예수께서 이미 저에게 이르시기를 더러운 귀신아 그 사람에게서 나오라 하셨음이라","(7절에 포함되어 있음)","(He had been saying to him, “Unclean spirit, come out of the man!”)","For he said unto him, Come out of the man, thou unclean spirit.","For Jesus had said to him, \"Come out of this man, you evil spirit!\"","Dicebat enim illi:  “Exi, spiritus immunde, ab homine “.","כי הוא אמר אליו צא רוח טמא מן האדם הזה׃"],["48","5","9","예수님께서 그에게 “네 이름이 무엇이냐?” 하고 물으시자, 그가 “제 이름은 군대입니다. 저희 수가 많기 때문입니다.” 하고 대답하였다.","예수께서 \"네 이름이 무엇이냐?\" 하고 물으시자 그는 \"군대라고 합니다. 수효가 많아서 그렇습니다.\" 하고 대답하였다.","이에 물으시되 네 이름이 무엇이냐 이르되 내 이름은 군대니 우리가 많음이니이다 하고","이에 물으시되 네 이름이 무엇이냐 가로되 내 이름은 군대니 우리가 많음이니이다 하고","\"네 이름이 무엇이냐?\" 하고 예수께서 물으시자 그 귀신이 대답하였다. \"군대라 합니다. 우리의 수효가 엄청나게 많기 때문입니다.\"","He asked him, “What is your name?” He replied, “Legion is my name. There are many of us.”","And he asked him, What is thy name? And he answered, saying, My name is Legion: for we are many.","Then Jesus asked him, \"What is your name?\" \"My name is Legion,\" he replied, \"for we are many.\"","Et interrogabat eum:  “Quod tibi nomen est? “. Et dicit ei:  “Legio nomen mihi est, quia multi sumus “.","וישאל אתו מה שמך ויען ויאמר לגיון שמי כי רבים אנחנו׃"],["48","5","10","그러고 나서 예수님께 자기들을 그 지방 밖으로 쫓아내지 말아 달라고 간곡히 청하였다.","그리고 자기들을 그 지방에서 쫓아내지 말아달라고 애걸하였다.","자기를 그 지방에서 내보내지 마시기를 간구하더니","자기를 이 지방에서 내어 보내지 마시기를 간절히 구하더니","그리고 귀신은 예수께 자기들을 다른 지방으로 쫓아내지 말아달라고 간절히 빌었다.","And he pleaded earnestly with him not to drive them away from that territory.","And he besought him much that he would not send them away out of the country.","And he begged Jesus again and again not to send them out of the area.","Et deprecabatur eum multum, ne se expelleret extra regionem.","ויתחנן אליו מאד לבלתי שלחם אל מחוץ לארץ׃"],["48","5","11","마침 그곳 산 쪽에는 놓아 기르는 많은 돼지 떼가 있었다.","마침 그 곳 산기슭에는 놓아 기르는 돼지떼가 우글거리고 있었는데","마침 거기 돼지의 큰 떼가 산 곁에서 먹고 있는지라","마침 거기 돼지의 큰 떼가 산 곁에서 먹고 있는지라","마침 그곳 산기슭에는 놓아 기르는 큰 돼지 떼가 있었다. 그것을 본 귀신이","Now a large herd of swine was feeding there on the hillside.","Now there was there nigh unto the mountains a great herd of swine feeding.","A large herd of pigs was feeding on the nearby hillside.","Erat autem ibi circa montem grex porcorum magnus pascens;","ועדר חזירים רבים היה שם במרעה ההרים׃"],["48","5","12","그래서 더러운 영들이 예수님께, “저희를 돼지들에게 보내시어 그 속으로 들어가게 해 주십시오.” 하고 청하였다.","악령들은 예수께 \"저희를 저 돼지들에게 보내어 그 속에 들어가게 해주십시오.\" 하고 간청하였다.","이에 간구하여 이르되 우리를 돼지에게로 보내어 들어가게 하소서 하니","이에 간구하여 가로되 우리를 돼지에게로 보내어 들어가게 하소서 하니","\"저희를 저 돼지들에게 들여보내 주십시오\" 하고 간청하였다.","And they pleaded with him, “Send us into the swine. Let us enter them.”","And all the devils besought him, saying, Send us into the swine, that we may enter into them.","The demons begged Jesus, \"Send us among the pigs; allow us to go into them.\"","et deprecati sunt eum dicentes:  “Mitte nos in porcos, ut in eos introeamus “.","ויתחננו לו כל השדים לאמר שלחנו אל החזירים ונבאה אל תוכם׃"],["48","5","13","예수님께서 허락하시니 더러운 영들이 나와 돼지들 속으로 들어갔다. 그러자 이천 마리쯤 되는 돼지 떼가 호수를 향해 비탈을 내리 달려, 호수에 빠져 죽고 말았다.","예수께서 허락하시자 더러운 악령들은 그 사람에게서 나와 돼지들 속으로 들어갔다. 그러자 거의 이천 마리나 되는 돼지떼가 바다를 향하여 비탈을 내리달려 물 속에 빠져 죽고 말았다.","허락하신대 더러운 귀신들이 나와서 돼지에게로 들어가매 거의 이천 마리 되는 떼가 바다를 향하여 비탈로 내리달아 바다에서 몰사하거늘","허락하신대 더러운 귀신들이 나와서 돼지에게로 들어가니 거의 이천 마리 되는 떼가 바다를 향하여 비탈로 내리달아 바다에서 몰사하거늘","예수께서 허락하시자 더러운 귀신들이 그 사람에게서 나와 돼지들 속으로 들어갔다. 그러자 무려 2천 마리나 되는 돼지 떼가 비탈을 내리달려 바다에 빠져 죽었다.","And he let them, and the unclean spirits came out and entered the swine. The herd of about two thousand rushed down a steep bank into the sea, where they were drowned.","And forthwith Jesus gave them leave. And the unclean spirits went out, and entered into the swine: and the herd ran violently down a steep place into the sea, (they were about two thousand;) and were choked in the sea.","He gave them permission, and the evil spirits came out and went into the pigs. The herd, about two thousand in number, rushed down the steep bank into the lake and were drowned.","Et concessit eis. Et exeuntes spiritus immundi introierunt in porcos. Et magno impetu grex ruit per praecipitium in mare, ad duo milia, et suffocabantur in mari.","וינח להם ויצאו רוחות הטמאה ויבאו בחזירים וישתער העדר מן המורד אל הים כאלפים במספר ויטבעו בים׃"],["48","5","14","돼지를 치던 이들이 달아나 그 고을과 여러 촌락에 알렸다. 사람들은 무슨 일이 일어났는지 보려고 왔다.","돼지 치던 사람들은 읍내와 촌락으로 달려가서 이 일을 알렸다. 동네 사람들은 무슨 일이 일어났는지 보러 나왔다가","치던 자들이 도망하여 읍내와 여러 마을에 말하니 사람들이 어떻게 되었는지를 보러 와서","치던 자들이 도망하여 읍내와 촌에 고하니 사람들이 그 어떻게 된것을 보러 와서","돼지 치던 사람들이 놀라 읍내와 마을로 뛰어가 이 일을 알렸다. 마을 사람들이 무슨 일이 일어났는지 궁금하여 예수께서 계시는 곳으로 모여들었다.","The swineherds ran away and reported the incident in the town and throughout the countryside. And people came out to see what had happened.","And they that fed the swine fled, and told it in the city, and in the country. And they went out to see what it was that was done.","Those tending the pigs ran off and reported this in the town and countryside, and the people went out to see what had happened.","Qui autem pascebant eos, fugerunt et nuntiaverunt in civitatem et in agros; et egressi sunt videre quid esset facti.","וינוסו רעי החזירים ויגידו זאת בעיר ובשדות ויצאו לראות מה נהיתה׃"],["48","5","15","그들은 예수님께 와서 마귀 들렸던 사람, 곧 군대라는 마귀가 들렸던 사람이 옷을 입고 제정신으로 앉아 있는 것을 보고는 그만 겁이 났다.","예수께서 계신 곳에 이르러 군대라는 마귀가 들렸던 사람이 옷을 바로 입고 멀쩡한 정신으로 앉아 있는 것을 보고는 그만 겁이 났다.","예수께 이르러 그 귀신 들렸던 자 곧 군대 귀신 지폈던 자가 옷을 입고 정신이 온전하여 앉은 것을 보고 두려워하더라","예수께 이르러 그 귀신 들렸던 자 곧 군대 지폈던 자가 옷을 입고 정신이 온전하여 앉은 것을 보고 두려워하더라","그들은 귀신 들렸던 사람이 옷을 갖추어 입고서 멀쩡하게 앉아 있는 모습을 보고는 겁이 났다.","As they approached Jesus, they caught sight of the man who had been possessed by Legion, sitting there clothed and in his right mind. And they were seized with fear.","And they come to Jesus, and see him that was possessed with the devil, and had the legion, sitting, and clothed, and in his right mind: and they were afraid.","When they came to Jesus, they saw the man who had been possessed by the legion of demons, sitting there, dressed and in his right mind; and they were afraid.","Et veniunt ad Iesum; et vident illum, qui a daemonio vexabatur, sedentem, vestitum et sanae mentis, eum qui legionem habuerat, et timuerunt.","ויבאו אל ישוע ויראו את אחוז השדים אשר הלגיון בו והוא יושב מלבש וטוב שכל וייראו׃"],["48","5","16","그 일을 본 사람들이 마귀 들렸던 이와 돼지들에게 무슨 일이 일어났는지 그들에게 이야기해 주었다.","이 일을 지켜본 사람들이 마귀 들렸던 사람이 어떻게 해서 나았으며 돼지떼가 어떻게 되었는가를 동네 사람들에게 들려주자","이에 귀신 들렸던 자가 당한 것과 돼지의 일을 본 자들이 그들에게 알리매","이에 귀신 들렸던 자의 당한 것과 돼지의 일을 본 자들이 저에게 고하매","그 일어난 일을 처음부터 지켜 본 사람들이 모여든 마을 사람들에게 사실대로 말해 주자","Those who witnessed the incident explained to them what had happened to the possessed man and to the swine.","And they that saw it told them how it befell to him that was possessed with the devil, and also concerning the swine.","Those who had seen it told the people what had happened to the demon-possessed man--and told about the pigs as well.","Et qui viderant, narraverunt illis qualiter factum esset ei, qui daemonium habuerat, et de porcis.","ויספרו להם הראים את אשר נעשה לאחוז השדים ואת דבר החזירים׃"],["48","5","17","그러자 그들은 예수님께 저희 고장에서 떠나 주십사고 청하기 시작하였다.","그들은 예수께 그 지방을 떠나달라고 간청하였다.","그들이 예수께 그 지방에서 떠나시기를 간구하더라","저희가 예수께 그 지경에서 떠나시기를 간구하더라","마을 사람들은 예수께 그곳을 떠나달라고 간청하였다.","Then they began to beg him to leave their district.","And they began to pray him to depart out of their coasts.","Then the people began to plead with Jesus to leave their region.","Et rogare eum coeperunt, ut discederet a finibus eorum.","ויחלו להתחנן לו לסור מגבוליהם׃"],["48","5","18","그리하여 예수님께서 배에 오르시자, 마귀 들렸던 이가 예수님께 같이 있게 해 주십사고 청하였다.","예수께서 배에 오르실 때에 마귀 들렸던 사람이 예수를 따라다니게 해달라고 애원하였지만","예수께서 배에 오르실 때에 귀신 들렸던 사람이 함께 있기를 간구하였으나","예수께서 배에 오르실 때에 귀신 들렸던 사람이 함께 있기를 간구하였으나","예수께서 배 있는 데로 발걸음을 옮기자 귀신들렸던 사람이 자기도 따라가겠다고 애원하였으나","As he was getting into the boat, the man who had been possessed pleaded to remain with him.","And when he was come into the ship, he that had been possessed with the devil prayed him that he might be with him.","As Jesus was getting into the boat, the man who had been demon-possessed begged to go with him.","Cumque ascenderet navem, qui daemonio vexatus fuerat, deprecabatur eum, ut esset cum illo.","ויהי ברדתו אל האניה התחנן אליו האיש אשר היה אחוז שדים לתתו לשבת עמו׃"],["48","5","19","그러나 예수님께서는 허락하지 않으시고 그에게 말씀하셨다. “집으로 가족들에게 돌아가, 주님께서 너에게 해 주신 일과 자비를 베풀어 주신 일을 모두 알려라.”","예수께서는 허락하지 않으시고 \"주께서 자비를 베풀어 너에게 얼마나 큰일을 해주셨는지 집에 가서 가족에게 알려라.\" 하고 이르셨다.","허락하지 아니하시고 그에게 이르시되 집으로 돌아가 주께서 네게 어떻게 큰 일을 행하사 너를 불쌍히 여기신 것을 네 가족에게 알리라 하시니","허락지 아니하시고 저에게 이르시되 집으로 돌아가 주께서 네게 어떻게 큰 일을 행하사 너를 불쌍히 여기신 것을 네 친속에게 고하라 하신대","예수께서는 허락하지 않고 이렇게 말씀하셨다. \"집으로 돌아가 주께서 네게 어떤 이적을 행하셨고 어떤 자비를 베풀어 주셨는가를 이웃에게 전하라.\"","But he would not permit him but told him instead, “Go home to your family and announce to them all that the Lord in his pity has done for you.”","Howbeit Jesus suffered him not, but saith unto him, Go home to thy friends, and tell them how great things the Lord hath done for thee, and hath had compassion on thee.","Jesus did not let him, but said, \"Go home to your family and tell them how much the Lord has done for you, and how he has had mercy on you.\"","Et non admisit eum, sed ait illi:  “Vade in domum tuam ad tuos et annuntia illis quanta tibi Dominus fecerit et misertus sit tui “.","ולא הניח לו כי אם אמר אליו שוב לביתך אל בני משפחתך והגד להם את הגדלות אשר עשה לך יהוה ויחנך׃"],["48","5","20","그래서 그는 물러가, 예수님께서 자기에게 해 주신 모든 일을 데카폴리스 지방에 선포하기 시작하였다. 그러자 사람들이 모두 놀랐다.","그는 물러가서 예수께서 자기에게 해주신 일을 데카폴리스 지방에 두루 알렸다. 이 말을 듣는 사람마다 모두 놀랐다.","그가 가서 예수께서 자기에게 어떻게 큰 일 행하셨는지를 데가볼리에 전파하니 모든 사람이 놀랍게 여기더라","그가 가서 예수께서 자기에게 어떻게 큰 일 행하신 것을 데가볼리에 전파하니 모든 사람이 기이히 여기더라","그 사람은 데가볼리 온 지역을 돌아다니며 예수께서 자기에게 베푸신 위대한 일을 널리 전하였다. 그리고 이야기를 듣는 사람마다 모두 놀라워하였다.","Then the man went off and began to proclaim in the Decapolis what Jesus had done for him; and all were amazed.","And he departed, and began to publish in Decapolis how great things Jesus had done for him: and all men did marvel.","So the man went away and began to tell in the Decapolis how much Jesus had done for him. And all the people were amazed.","Et abiit et coepit praedicare in Decapoli quanta sibi fecisset Iesus, et omnes mirabantur.","וילך לו ויחל לקרא בעשר הערים את הגדלות אשר עשה לו ישוע ויתמהו כלם׃"],["48","5","21","예수님께서 배를 타시고 다시 건너편으로 가시자 많은 군중이 그분께 모여들었다. 예수님께서 호숫가에 계시는데,","예수께서 배를 타고 건너편으로 다시 가시자 많은 사람들이 또 모여들었다. 예수께서 호숫가에 계셨을 때에","예수께서 배를 타시고 다시 맞은편으로 건너가시니 큰 무리가 그에게로 모이거늘 이에 바닷가에 계시더니","예수께서 배를 타시고 다시 저편으로 건너 가시매 큰 무리가 그에게로 모이거늘 이에 바닷가에 계시더니","예수께서 배를 타고 건너편으로 다시 돌아오시자 큰 무리가 또다시 바닷가로 모여 들었다.","When Jesus had crossed again [in the boat] to the other side, a large crowd gathered around him, and he stayed close to the sea.","And when Jesus was passed over again by ship unto the other side, much people gathered unto him: and he was nigh unto the sea.","When Jesus had again crossed over by boat to the other side of the lake, a large crowd gathered around him while he was by the lake.","Et cum transcendisset Iesus in navi rursus trans fretum, convenit turba multa ad illum, et erat circa mare.","וישב ישוע לעבר באניה אל עבר הים ויקהל אליו המון רב והוא על שפת הים׃"],["48","5","22","야이로라는 한 회당장이 와서 예수님을 뵙고 그분 발 앞에 엎드려,","야이로라 하는 한 회당장이 와서 예수를 뵙고 그 발 앞에 엎드려","회당장 중의 하나인 야이로라 하는 이가 와서 예수를 보고 발 아래 엎드리어","회당장 중 하나인 야이로라 하는 이가 와서 예수를 보고 발 아래 엎드리어","그때 야이로라는 한 회당장이 와서 예수 앞에 엎드려","One of the synagogue officials, named Jairus, came forward. Seeing him he fell at his feet","And, behold, there cometh one of the rulers of the synagogue, Jairus by name; and when he saw him, he fell at his feet,","Then one of the synagogue rulers, named Jairus, came there. Seeing Jesus, he fell at his feet","Et venit quidam de archisynagogis nomine Iairus et videns eum procidit ad pedes eius","והנה בא אחד מראשי הכנסת ושמו יאיר וירא אתו ויפל לרגליו׃"],["48","5","23","“제 어린 딸이 죽게 되었습니다. 가셔서 아이에게 손을 얹으시어 그 아이가 병이 나아 다시 살게 해 주십시오.” 하고 간곡히 청하였다.","\"제 어린 딸이 다 죽게 되었습니다. 제 집에 오셔서 그 아이에게 손을 얹어 병을 고쳐 살려주십시오.\" 하고 애원하였다. 그래서 예수께서는 그를 따라 나서시었다.","간곡히 구하여 이르되 내 어린 딸이 죽게 되었사오니 오셔서 그 위에 손을 얹으사 그로 구원을 받아 살게 하소서 하거늘","많이 간구하여 가로되 내 어린 딸이 죽게 되었사오니 오셔서 그 위에 손을 얹으사 그로 구원을 얻어 살게 하소서 하거늘","어린 딸을 고쳐 달라고 애원하였다. \"제 딸이 다 죽게 되었습니다. 제발 오셔서 그 아이에게 손을 얹어 살려 주십시오.\"","and pleaded earnestly with him, saying, “My daughter is at the point of death. Please, come lay your hands on her that she may get well and live.”","And besought him greatly, saying, My little daughter lieth at the point of death: I pray thee, come and lay thy hands on her, that she may be healed; and she shall live.","and pleaded earnestly with him, \"My little daughter is dying. Please come and put your hands on her so that she will be healed and live.\"","et deprecatur eum multum dicens:  “Filiola mea in extremis est; veni, impone manus super eam, ut salva sit et vivat “.","ויתחנן אליו מאד לאמר בתי הקטנה חלתה עד למות אנא בוא נא ושים ידיך עליה למען תרפא ותחיה׃"],["48","5","24","그리하여 예수님께서는 그와 함께 나서시었다. 많은 군중이 그분을 따르며 밀쳐 댔다.","그 때에 많은 사람들이 예수를 둘러싸고 밀어대며 따라갔다.","이에 그와 함께 가실새 큰 무리가 따라가며 에워싸 밀더라","이에 그와 함께 가실쌔 큰 무리가 따라가며 에워싸 밀더라","예수께서 그를 따라 나서자 많은 무리가 함께 예수의 뒤를 좇았다.","He went off with him, and a large crowd followed him and pressed upon him.","And Jesus went with him; and much people followed him, and thronged him.","So Jesus went with him. A large crowd followed and pressed around him.","Et abiit cum illo. Et sequebatur eum turba multa et comprimebant illum.","וילך אתו וילכו אחריו המון רב וידחקהו׃"],["48","5","25","그 가운데에 열두 해 동안이나 하혈하는 여자가 있었다.","그런데 군중 속에는 열두 해 동안이나 하혈증으로 앓고 있던 여자가 있었다.","열두 해를 혈루증으로 앓아 온 한 여자가 있어","열 두 해를 혈루증으로 앓는 한 여자가 있어","그 무리 가운데는 열두 해 동안이나 하혈병으로 고생하는 여자가 있었다.","There was a woman afflicted with hemorrhages for twelve years.","And a certain woman, which had an issue of blood twelve years,","And a woman was there who had been subject to bleeding for twelve years.","Et mulier, quae erat in profluvio sanguinis annis duodecim","ואשה היתה זבת דם שתים עשרה שנה׃"],["48","5","26","그 여자는 숱한 고생을 하며 많은 의사의 손에 가진 것을 모두 쏟아 부었지만, 아무 효험도 없이 상태만 더 나빠졌다.","그 여자는 여러 의사에게 보이느라고 고생만 하고 가산마저 탕진했는데도 아무 효험도 없이 오히려 병은 점점 더 심해졌다.","많은 의사에게 많은 괴로움을 받았고 가진 것도 다 허비하였으되 아무 효험이 없고 도리어 더 중하여졌던 차에","많은 의원에게 많은 괴로움을 받았고 있던 것도 다 허비하였으되 아무 효험이 없고 도리어 더 중하여졌던 차에","그 여자는 많은 의사를 찾아다니며 치료받았으나 돈만 허비하였을 뿐 오히려 상태가 더 나빠졌다.","She had suffered greatly at the hands of many doctors and had spent all that she had. Yet she was not helped but only grew worse.","And had suffered many things of many physicians, and had spent all that she had, and was nothing bettered, but rather grew worse,","She had suffered a great deal under the care of many doctors and had spent all she had, yet instead of getting better she grew worse.","et fuerat multa perpessa a compluribus medicis et erogaverat omnia sua nec quidquam profecerat, sed magis deterius habebat,","והיא סבלה הרבה תחת ידי רפאים רבים והוציאה את כל אשר לה ולא להועיל ויהי חליה חזק מאד׃"],["48","5","27","그가 예수님의 소문을 듣고, 군중에 섞여 예수님 뒤로 가서 그분의 옷에 손을 대었다.","그러던 차에 예수의 소문을 듣고 군중 속에 끼여 따라가다가 뒤에서 예수의 옷에 손을 대었다.","예수의 소문을 듣고 무리 가운데 끼어 뒤로 와서 그의 옷에 손을 대니","예수의 소문을 듣고 무리 가운데 섞여 뒤로 와서 그의 옷에 손을 대니","그럴 즈음에 예수께서 놀라운 이적을 행하신다는 소문을 듣고 무리 속에 끼여 따라가다가 뒤에서 예수의 옷에 손을 대었다.","She had heard about Jesus and came up behind him in the crowd and touched his cloak.","When she had heard of Jesus, came in the press behind, and touched his garment.","When she heard about Jesus, she came up behind him in the crowd and touched his cloak,","cum audisset de Iesu, venit in turba retro et tetigit vestimentum eius;","ויהי כשמעה את שמע ישוע ותבוא בהמון העם מאחריו ותגע בבגדו׃"],["48","5","28","‘내가 저분의 옷에 손을 대기만 하여도 구원을 받겠지.’ 하고 생각하였던 것이다.","그 옷에 손을 대기만 해도 병이 나으리라고 생각하였던 것이다.","이는 내가 그의 옷에만 손을 대어도 구원을 받으리라 생각함일러라","이는 내가 그의 옷에만 손을 대어도 구원을 얻으리라 함일러라","그것은 \"그분의 옷에 손을 대기만 해도 병이 나을 것이다\"라는 믿음이 있었기 때문이다.","She said, “If I but touch his clothes, I shall be cured.”","For she said, If I may touch but his clothes, I shall be whole.","because she thought, \"If I just touch his clothes, I will be healed.\"","dicebat enim:  “Si vel vestimenta eius tetigero, salva ero “.","כי אמרה רק אם אגע בבגדיו אושע׃"],["48","5","29","과연 곧 출혈이 멈추고 병이 나은 것을 몸으로 느낄 수 있었다.","손을 대자마자 그 여자는 과연 출혈이 그치고 병이 나은 것을 스스로 알 수 있었다.","이에 그의 혈루 근원이 곧 마르매 병이 나은 줄을 몸에 깨달으니라","이에 그의 혈루 근원이 곧 마르매 병이 나은 줄을 몸에 깨달으니라","과연 그 여자는 예수의 옷자락에 손을 대자마자 하혈이 멈추면서 병이 나은 것을 느낄 수 있었다.","Immediately her flow of blood dried up. She felt in her body that she was healed of her affliction.","And straightway the fountain of her blood was dried up; and she felt in her body that she was healed of that plague.","Immediately her bleeding stopped and she felt in her body that she was freed from her suffering.","Et confestim siccatus est fons sanguinis eius, et sensit corpore quod sanata esset a plaga.","וייבש מקור דמיה פתאם ותבן בבשרה כי נרפא נגעה׃"],["48","5","30","예수님께서는 곧 당신에게서 힘이 나간 것을 아시고 군중에게 돌아서시어, “누가 내 옷에 손을 대었느냐?” 하고 물으셨다.","예수께서는 곧 자기에게서 기적의 힘이 나간 것을 아시고 돌아서서 군중을 둘러보시며 \"누가 내 옷에 손을 대었느냐?\" 하고 물으셨다.","예수께서 그 능력이 자기에게서 나간 줄을 곧 스스로 아시고 무리 가운데서 돌이켜 말씀하시되 누가 내 옷에 손을 대었느냐 하시니","예수께서 그 능력이 자기에게서 나간 줄을 곧 스스로 아시고 무리 가운데서 돌이켜 말씀하시되 누가 내 옷에 손을 대었느냐 하시니","예수께서는 곧 자신에게서 병 고치는 능력이 나간 것을 아시고 돌아서서 무리들을 둘러보며 물으셨다. \"누가 내 옷에 손을 대었느냐?\"","Jesus, aware at once that power had gone out from him, turned around in the crowd and asked, “Who has touched my clothes?”","And Jesus, immediately knowing in himself that virtue had gone out of him, turned him about in the press, and said, Who touched my clothes?","At once Jesus realized that power had gone out from him. He turned around in the crowd and asked, \"Who touched my clothes?\"","Et statim Iesus cognoscens in semetipso virtutem, quae exierat de eo, conversus ad turbam aiebat:  “Quis tetigit vestimenta mea? “.","וברגע ידע ישוע בנפשו כי גבורה יצאה ממנו ויפן בתוך העם ויאמר מי נגע בבגדי׃"],["48","5","31","그러자 제자들이 예수님께 반문하였다. “보시다시피 군중이 스승님을 밀쳐 대는데, ‘누가 나에게 손을 대었느냐?’ 하고 물으십니까?”","제자들은 \"누가 손을 대다니요? 보시다시피 이렇게 군중이 사방에서 밀어대고 있지 않습니까?\" 하고 반문하였다.","제자들이 여짜오되 무리가 에워싸 미는 것을 보시며 누가 내게 손을 대었느냐 물으시나이까 하되","제자들이 여짜오되 무리가 에워싸 미는 것을 보시며 누가 내게 손을 대었느냐 물으시나이까 하되","그러자 제자 한 사람이 \"이렇게 많은 무리가 사방에서 밀어대고 있는데 누가 선생님께 손을 댔는지 어떻게 알 수 있겠습니까?\" 하고 반문하였다. 그러나","But his disciples said to him, “You see how the crowd is pressing upon you, and yet you ask, ‘Who touched me?’”","And his disciples said unto him, Thou seest the multitude thronging thee, and sayest thou, Who touched me?","\"You see the people crowding against you,\" his disciples answered, \"and yet you can ask, 'Who touched me?'\"","Et dicebant ei discipuli sui:  “Vides turbam comprimentem te et dicis: “Quis me tetigit? “ “.","ויאמר אליו תלמידיו אתה ראה את ההמון דוחק אתך ואמרת מי נגע בי׃"],["48","5","32","그러나 예수님께서는 누가 그렇게 하였는지 보시려고 사방을 살피셨다.","그러나 예수께서는 둘러보시며 옷에 손을 댄 여자를 찾으셨다.","예수께서 이 일 행한 여자를 보려고 둘러 보시니","예수께서 이 일 행한 여자를 보려고 둘러 보시니","예수께서는 여전히 주위를 둘러보며 손댄 사람을 찾으셨다.","And he looked around to see who had done it.","And he looked round about to see her that had done this thing.","But Jesus kept looking around to see who had done it.","Et circumspiciebat videre eam, quae hoc fecerat.","ויבט סביב לראות את אשר עשתה זאת׃"],["48","5","33","그 부인은 자기에게 일어난 일을 알았기 때문에, 두려워 떨며 나와서 예수님 앞에 엎드려 사실대로 다 아뢰었다.","그 여자는 자기 몸에 일어난 일을 알았기 때문에 두려워 떨며 예수 앞에 엎드려 사실대로 말씀 드렸다.","여자가 자기에게 이루어진 일을 알고 두려워하여 떨며 와서 그 앞에 엎드려 모든 사실을 여쭈니","여자가 제게 이루어진 일을 알고 두려워하여 떨며 와서 그 앞에 엎드려 모든 사실을 여짜온대","그때 그 여자는 자기 몸에 일어난 일을 알기 때문에 두려워 떨며 예수의 발 앞에 엎드려 자기가 한 일을 그대로 말씀드렸다.","The woman, realizing what had happened to her, approached in fear and trembling. She fell down before Jesus and told him the whole truth.","But the woman fearing and trembling, knowing what was done in her, came and fell down before him, and told him all the truth.","Then the woman, knowing what had happened to her, came and fell at his feet and, trembling with fear, told him the whole truth.","Mulier autem timens et tremens, sciens quod factum esset in se, venit et procidit ante eum et dixit ei omnem veritatem.","ותירא האשה ותחרד כי ידעה את אשר נעשה לה ותבא ותפל לפניו ותגד לו את האמת כלה׃"],["48","5","34","그러자 예수님께서 그 여자에게 이르셨다. “딸아, 네 믿음이 너를 구원하였다. 평안히 가거라. 그리고 병에서 벗어나 건강해져라.”","예수께서는 그 여자에게 \"여인아, 네 믿음이 너를 살렸다. 병이 완전히 나았으니 안심하고 가거라.\" 하고 말씀하셨다.","예수께서 이르시되 딸아 네 믿음이 너를 구원하였으니 평안히 가라 네 병에서 놓여 건강할지어다","예수께서 가라사대 딸아 네 믿음이 너를 구원하였으니 평안히 가라 네 병에서 놓여 건강할찌어다","예수께서 그 여자에게 말씀하셨다. \"딸아, 네 믿음이 너를 구원하였다. 평안히 가거라. 그리고 네 병에서 완전히 해방되어 건강해져라.\"","He said to her, “Daughter, your faith has saved you. Go in peace and be cured of your affliction.”","And he said unto her, Daughter, thy faith hath made thee whole; go in peace, and be whole of thy plague.","He said to her, \"Daughter, your faith has healed you. Go in peace and be freed from your suffering.\"","Ille autem dixit ei:  “Filia, fides tua te salvam fecit. Vade in pace et esto sana a plaga tua “.","ויאמר אליה בתי אמונתך הושיעה לך לכי לשלום וחיית מנגעך׃"],["48","5","35","예수님께서 아직 말씀하고 계실 때에 회당장의 집에서 사람들이 와서는, “따님이 죽었습니다. 그러니 이제 스승님을 수고롭게 할 필요가 어디 있겠습니까?” 하고 말하였다.","예수의 말씀이 채 끝나기도 전에 회당장의 집에서 사람들이 와서 회당장에게 \"따님이 죽었습니다. 그러니 저 선생님께 더 폐를 끼쳐드릴 필요가 있겠습니까?\" 하고 말하였다.","아직 예수께서 말씀하실 때에 회당장의 집에서 사람들이 와서 회당장에게 이르되 당신의 딸이 죽었나이다 어찌하여 선생을 더 괴롭게 하나이까","아직 말씀하실 때에 회당장의 집에서 사람들이 와서 가로되 당신의 딸이 죽었나이다 어찌하여 선생을 더 괴롭게 하나이까","예수께서 아직 말씀을 끝내기도 전에 회당장의 집에서 사람이 뛰어와 야이로에게 말하였다. \"너무 늦었습니다. 따님이 죽었어요. 이제 선생님께서 오신다해도 아무 소용이 없습니다.\"","While he was still speaking, people from the synagogue official’s house arrived and said, “Your daughter has died; why trouble the teacher any longer?”","While he yet spake, there came from the ruler of the synagogue's house certain which said, Thy daughter is dead: why troublest thou the Master any further?","While Jesus was still speaking, some men came from the house of Jairus, the synagogue ruler. \"Your daughter is dead,\" they said. \"Why bother the teacher any more?\"","Adhuc eo loquente, veniunt ab archisynagogo dicentes:  “Filia tua mortua est; quid ultra vexas magistrum? “.","עודנו מדבר והנה באים מבית ראש הכנסת לאמר בתך מתה למה תטריח עוד את המורה׃"],["48","5","36","예수님께서는 그들이 말하는 것을 곁에서 들으시고 회당장에게 말씀하셨다. “두려워하지 말고 믿기만 하여라.”","예수께서는 이 말을 들은 체도 아니하시고 회당장에게 \"걱정하지 말고 믿기만 하여라.\" 하고 말씀하셨다.","예수께서 그 하는 말을 곁에서 들으시고 회당장에게 이르시되 두려워하지 말고 믿기만 하라 하시고","예수께서 그 하는 말을 곁에서 들으시고 회당장에게 이르시되 두려워 말고 믿기만 하라 하시고","예수께서는 그들의 말을 들은 척도 하지 않으시고 야이로에게 \"두려워하지 말고, 나를 믿기만 하여라\"하고 말씀하셨다.","Disregarding the message that was reported, Jesus said to the synagogue official, “Do not be afraid; just have faith.”","As soon as Jesus heard the word that was spoken, he saith unto the ruler of the synagogue, Be not afraid, only believe.","Ignoring what they said, Jesus told the synagogue ruler, \"Don't be afraid; just believe.\"","Iesus autem, verbo, quod dicebatur, audito, ait archisynagogo:  “Noli timere; tantummodo crede! “.","וכשמע ישוע את הדבר אשר דברו ויאמר אל ראש הכנסת אל תירא רק האמינה׃"],["48","5","37","그리고 베드로와 야고보와 야고보의 동생 요한 외에는 아무도 당신을 따라오지 못하게 하셨다.","그리고 베드로와 야고보와 야고보의 동생 요한 외에는 아무도 따라오지 못하게 하시고","베드로와 야고보와 야고보의 형제 요한 외에 아무도 따라옴을 허락하지 아니하시고","베드로와 야고보와 야고보의 형제 요한 외에 아무도 따라옴을 허치 아니하시고","그리고 베드로와 야고보와 요한외에는 아무도 따라오지 못하게 하셨다.","He did not allow anyone to accompany him inside except Peter, James, and John, the brother of James.","And he suffered no man to follow him, save Peter, and James, and John the brother of James.","He did not let anyone follow him except Peter, James and John the brother of James.","Et non admisit quemquam sequi se nisi Petrum et Iacobum et Ioannem fratrem Iacobi.","ולא הניח לאיש ללכת אתו בלתי אם לפטרוס וליעקב וליוחנן אחי יעקב׃"],["48","5","38","그들이 회당장의 집에 이르렀다. 예수님께서는 소란한 광경과 사람들이 큰 소리로 울며 탄식하는 것을 보시고,","회당장의 집으로 가셨다. 예수께서는 거기서 사람들이 울며불며 떠드는 것을 보시고","회당장의 집에 함께 가사 떠드는 것과 사람들이 울며 심히 통곡함을 보시고","회당장의 집에 함께 가사 훤화함과 사람들의 울며 심히 통곡함을 보시고","일행이 야이로의 집에 이르렀을 때 사람들이 통곡하고 있는 것을 보시고","When they arrived at the house of the synagogue official, he caught sight of a commotion, people weeping and wailing loudly.","And he cometh to the house of the ruler of the synagogue, and seeth the tumult, and them that wept and wailed greatly.","When they came to the home of the synagogue ruler, Jesus saw a commotion, with people crying and wailing loudly.","Et veniunt ad domum archisynagogi; et videt tumultum et flentes et eiulantes multum,","ויבא בית ראש הכנסת וירא המון הבכים והמיללים הרבה׃"],["48","5","39","안으로 들어가셔서 그들에게, “어찌하여 소란을 피우며 울고 있느냐? 저 아이는 죽은 것이 아니라 자고 있다.” 하고 말씀하셨다.","집 안으로 들어가셔서 그들에게 \"왜 떠들며 울고 있느냐? 그 아이는 죽은 것이 아니라 잠을 자고 있다.\" 하고 말씀하셨다.","들어가서 그들에게 이르시되 너희가 어찌하여 떠들며 우느냐 이 아이가 죽은 것이 아니라 잔다 하시니","들어가서 저희에게 이르시되 너희가 어찌하여 훤화하며 우느냐 이 아이가 죽은 것이 아니라 잔다 하시니","예수께서 말씀하셨다. \"왜 이렇게 소란하게 울고 있느냐? 그 아이는 죽은 것이 아니다. 잠을 자고 있을 뿐이다!\"","So he went in and said to them, “Why this commotion and weeping? The child is not dead but asleep.”","And when he was come in, he saith unto them, Why make ye this ado, and weep? the damsel is not dead, but sleepeth.","He went in and said to them, \"Why all this commotion and wailing? The child is not dead but asleep.\"","et ingressus ait eis:  “Quid turbamini et ploratis? Puella non est mortua, sed dormit “.","ובבאו אמר אליהם מה תהמו ותבכו הנערה לא מתה אך ישנה היא׃"],["48","5","40","그들은 예수님을 비웃었다. 예수님께서는 그들을 다 내쫓으신 다음, 아이 아버지와 어머니와 당신의 일행만 데리고 아이가 있는 곳으로 들어가셨다.","그들은 코웃음만 쳤다. 예수께서는 그들을 다 내보내신 다음에 아이의 부모와 세 제자만 데리고 아이가 누워 있는 방에 들어가셨다.","그들이 비웃더라 예수께서 그들을 다 내보내신 후에 아이의 부모와 또 자기와 함께 한 자들을 데리시고 아이 있는 곳에 들어가사","저희가 비웃더라 예수께서 저희를 다 내어보내신 후에 아이의 부모와 또 자기와 함께한 자들을 데리시고 아이 있는 곳에 들어가사","사람들은 예수를 비웃었다. 그러나 예수께서는 그들을 내보내신 후 그 아이의 부모와 세 제자만을 데리고 아이가 누워 있는 곳으로 들어가셨다.","And they ridiculed him. Then he put them all out. He took along the child’s father and mother and those who were with him and entered the room where the child was.","And they laughed him to scorn. But when he had put them all out, he taketh the father and the mother of the damsel, and them that were with him, and entereth in where the damsel was lying.","But they laughed at him. After he put them all out, he took the child's father and mother and the disciples who were with him, and went in where the child was.","Et irridebant eum. Ipse vero, eiectis omnibus, assumit patrem puellae et matrem et, qui secum erant, et ingreditur, ubi erat puella;","וישחקו לו והוא גרש את כלם ויקח את אבי הנערה ואת אמה ואת אשר אתו ויבא החדרה אשר שם שכבת הנערה׃"],["48","5","41","그리고 아이의 손을 잡으시고 말씀하셨다. “탈리타 쿰!” 이는 번역하면 ‘소녀야, 내가 너에게 말한다. 일어나라!’는 뜻이다.","그리고 아이의 손을 잡고 \"탈리다 쿰.\" 하고 말씀하셨다. 이 말은 '소녀야, 어서 일어나거라.'라는 뜻이다.","그 아이의 손을 잡고 이르시되 달리다굼 하시니 번역하면 곧 내가 네게 말하노니 소녀야 일어나라 하심이라","그 아이의 손을 잡고 가라사대 달리다굼 하시니 번역하면 곧 소녀야 내가 네게 말하노니 일어나라 하심이라","그리고 아이의 손을 잡고 \"달리다굼!\"이라고 말씀하셨다. 이 말은 \"소녀야, 일어나라\" 하는 뜻이다. 그러자 소녀가 곧 일어나서 걸어다녔다. 그 소녀의 나이는 열두 살이었다. 소녀의 부모는 너무 놀라서 꿈인지 생시인지 분간을 못할 지경이었다.","He took the child by the hand and said to her, “Talitha koum,” which means, “Little girl, I say to you, arise!”","And he took the damsel by the hand, and said unto her, Talitha cumi; which is, being interpreted, Damsel, I say unto thee, arise.","He took her by the hand and said to her, \"Talitha koum!\" (which means, \"Little girl, I say to you, get up!\").","et tenens manum puellae ait illi:  “Talitha, qum! “ ? quod est interpretatum:  “Puella, tibi dico: Surge! “ - .","ויאחז ביד הנערה ויאמר אליה טליתא קומי אשר פרושו הילדה אני אמר לך קומי נא׃"],["48","5","42","그러자 소녀가 곧바로 일어서서 걸어 다녔다. 소녀의 나이는 열두 살이었다. 사람들은 몹시 놀라 넋을 잃었다.","그러자 소녀는 곧 일어나서 걸어다녔다. 소녀의 나이는 열두 살이었다. 이 광경을 본 사람들은 놀라 마지않았다.","소녀가 곧 일어나서 걸으니 나이가 열두 살이라 사람들이 곧 크게 놀라고 놀라거늘","소녀가 곧 일어나서 걸으니 나이 열 두살이라 사람들이 곧 크게 놀라고 놀라거늘","(41절에 포함되어 있음)","The girl, a child of twelve, arose immediately and walked around. [At that] they were utterly astounded.","And straightway the damsel arose, and walked; for she was of the age of twelve years. And they were astonished with a great astonishment.","Immediately the girl stood up and walked around (she was twelve years old). At this they were completely astonished.","Et confestim surrexit puella et ambulabat; erat enim annorum duodecim. Et obstupuerunt continuo stupore magno.","ומיד קמה הילדה ותתהלך והיא בת שתים עשרה שנה וישמו שמה גדולה׃"],["48","5","43","예수님께서는 아무에게도 이 일을 알리지 말라고 그들에게 거듭 분부하시고 나서, 소녀에게 먹을 것을 주라고 이르셨다.","예수께서는 그들에게 이 일을 아무에게도 알리지 말라고 엄하게 이르시고 소녀에게 먹을 것을 주라고 하셨다.","예수께서 이 일을 아무도 알지 못하게 하라고 그들을 많이 경계하시고 이에 소녀에게 먹을 것을 주라 하시니라","예수께서 이 일을 아무도 알지 못하게 하라고 저희를 많이 경계하시고 이에 소녀에게 먹을 것을 주라 하시니라","예수께서는 그들에게 이 일을 아무에게도 알리지 말라고 엄하게 이르신 뒤, 소녀에게 먹을 것을 주라고 하셨다.","He gave strict orders that no one should know this and said that she should be given something to eat.","And he charged them straitly that no man should know it; and commanded that something should be given her to eat.","He gave strict orders not to let anyone know about this, and told them to give her something to eat.","Et praecepit illis vehementer, ut nemo id sciret, et dixit dari illi manducare.","ויזהר אותם מאד שלא יודע הדבר לאיש ויאמר לתת לה לאכול׃"],["48","6","1","예수님께서 그곳을 떠나 고향으로 가셨는데 제자들도 그분을 따라갔다.","예수께서 그 곳을 떠나 제자들과 함께 고향으로 돌아가셨다.","예수께서 거기를 떠나사 고향으로 가시니 제자들도 따르니라","예수께서 거기를 떠나사 고향으로 가시니 제자들도 좇으니라","예수께서 그곳을 떠나 제자들과 함께 고향인 나사렛으로 가셨다.","He departed from there and came to his native place, accompanied by his disciples.","And he went out from thence, and came into his own country; and his disciples follow him.","Jesus left there and went to his hometown, accompanied by his disciples.","Et egressus est inde et venit in patriam suam, et sequuntur il lum discipuli sui.","ויצא משם ויבא אל ארצו וילכו אחריו תלמידיו׃"],["48","6","2","안식일이 되자 예수님께서는 회당에서 가르치기 시작하셨다. 많은 이가 듣고는 놀라서 이렇게 말하였다. “저 사람이 어디서 저 모든 것을 얻었을까? 저런 지혜를 어디서 받았을까? 그의 손에서 저런 기적들이 일어나다니!","안식일이 되어 회당에서 가르치시자 많은 사람이 그 말씀을 듣고 놀라며 \"저 사람이 어떤 지혜를 받았기에 저런 기적들을 행하는 것일까? 그런 모든 것이 어디서 생겨났을까?","안식일이 되어 회당에서 가르치시니 많은 사람이 듣고 놀라 이르되 이 사람이 어디서 이런 것을 얻었느냐 이 사람이 받은 지혜와 그 손으로 이루어지는 이런 권능이 어찌됨이냐","안식일이 되어 회당에서 가르치시니 많은 사람이 듣고 놀라 가로되 이 사람이 어디서 이런 것을 얻었느뇨 이 사람의 받은 지혜와 그 손으로 이루어지는 이런 권능이 어찌됨이뇨","안식일이 되어 회당에서 가르치시자 사람들은 본래 자기 고향 사람인 예수가 지혜로운 말씀과 이적을 행하시는 데 놀라서 이렇게 말하였다.","When the sabbath came he began to teach in the synagogue, and many who heard him were astonished. They said, “Where did this man get all this? What kind of wisdom has been given him? What mighty deeds are wrought by his hands!","And when the sabbath day was come, he began to teach in the synagogue: and many hearing him were astonished, saying, From whence hath this man these things? and what wisdom is this which is given unto him, that even such mighty works are wrought by his hands?","When the Sabbath came, he began to teach in the synagogue, and many who heard him were amazed. \"Where did this man get these things?\" they asked. \"What's this wisdom that has been given him, that he even does miracles!","Et facto sabbato, coepit in synagoga docere; et multi audientes admirabantur dicentes:  “Unde huic haec, et quae est sapientia, quae data est illi, et virtutes tales, quae per manus eius efficiuntur?","וביום השבת החל ללמד בבית הכנסת וישמעו רבים וישתוממו לאמר מאין לזה כאלה ומה היא החכמה הנתונה לו עד אשר נעשו גבורות כאלה על ידיו׃"],["48","6","3","저 사람은 목수로서 마리아의 아들이며, 야고보, 요세, 유다, 시몬과 형제간이 아닌가? 그의 누이들도 우리와 함께 여기에 살고 있지 않는가? 그러면서 그들은 그분을 못마땅하게 여겼다.","저 사람은 그 목수가 아닌가? 그 어머니는 마리아요, 그 형제들은 야고보, 요셉, 유다, 시몬이 아닌가? 그의 누이들도 다 우리와 같이 여기 살고 있지 않은가?\" 하면서 좀처럼 예수를 믿으려 하지 않았다.","이 사람이 마리아의 아들 목수가 아니냐 야고보와 요셉과 유다와 시몬의 형제가 아니냐 그 누이들이 우리와 함께 여기 있지 아니하냐 하고 예수를 배척한지라","이 사람이 마리아의 아들 목수가 아니냐 야고보와 요셉과 유다와 시몬의 형제가 아니냐 그 누이들이 우리와 함께 여기 있지 아니하냐 하고 1)예수를 배척한지라 혹 예수를 인하여 실족한지라","\"저 사람이 어디서 이런 놀라운 지혜와 권능을 얻었을까? 저 사람은 우리보다 하나도 나을 게 없는 목수가 아닌가? 마리아의 아들이고, 야고보와 요셉, 유다, 시몬의 형이 아닌가? 또 그의 누이들도 여기서 우리와 같이 살고 있지 않은가?\" 그들은 예수를 믿으려 하지 않았다.","Is he not the carpenter, the son of Mary, and the brother of James and Joses and Judas and Simon? And are not his sisters here with us?” And they took offense at him.","Is not this the carpenter, the son of Mary, the brother of James, and Joses, and of Juda, and Simon? and are not his sisters here with us? And they were offended at him.","Isn't this the carpenter? Isn't this Mary's son and the brother of James, Joseph, Judas and Simon? Aren't his sisters here with us?\" And they took offense at him.","Nonne iste est faber, filius Mariae et frater Iacobi et Iosetis et Iudae et Simonis? Et nonne sorores eius hic nobiscum sunt? “. Et scandalizabantur in illo.","הלא זה הוא החרש בן מרים ואחי יעקב ויוסי ויהודה ושמעון והלא אחיותיו אתנו פה ויהי להם למכשול׃"],["48","6","4","그러자 예수님께서 그들에게 이르셨다. “예언자는 어디에서나 존경받지만 고향과 친척과 집안에서만은 존경받지 못한다.”","예수께서는 그들에게 이렇게 말씀하셨다. \"어디서나 존경을 받는 예언자라도 자기 고향과 친척과 집안에서만은 존경을 받지 못한다.\"","예수께서 그들에게 이르시되 선지자가 자기 고향과 자기 친척과 자기 집 외에서는 존경을 받지 못함이 없느니라 하시며","예수께서 저희에게 이르시되 선지자가 자기 고향과 자기 친척과 자기 집 외에서는 존경을 받지 않음이 없느니라 하시며","예수께서는 그러한 고향사람들이 안타까운 듯이 \"예언자는 어디서나 존경받지만 자기 고향과 친척과 자기 집에서만은 존경받지 못한다\"고 말씀하셨다.","Jesus said to them, “A prophet is not without honor except in his native place and among his own kin and in his own house.”","But Jesus, said unto them, A prophet is not without honour, but in his own country, and among his own kin, and in his own house.","Jesus said to them, \"Only in his hometown, among his relatives and in his own house is a prophet without honor.\"","Et dicebat eis Iesus:  “Non est propheta sine honore nisi in patria sua et in cognatione sua et in domo sua “.","ויאמר אליהם ישוע אין הנביא נקלה כי אם בארצו ובין קרוביו ובביתו׃"],["48","6","5","그리하여 예수님께서는 그곳에서 몇몇 병자에게 손을 얹어서 병을 고쳐 주시는 것밖에는 아무런 기적도 일으키실 수 없었다.","예수께서는 거기서 병자 몇 사람에게만 손을 얹어 고쳐주셨을 뿐, 다른 기적은 행하실 수 없었다.","거기서는 아무 권능도 행하실 수 없어 다만 소수의 병자에게 안수하여 고치실 뿐이었고","거기서는 아무 권능도 행하실 수 없어 다만 소수의 병인에게 안수하여 고치실 뿐이었고","그리고 거기서는 그들이 믿지 않기 때문에 다만 몇 사람의 병자에게만 손을 얹어 고쳐 주셨을 뿐, 아무 이적도 행하실 수 없었다.","So he was not able to perform any mighty deed there, apart from curing a few sick people by laying his hands on them.","And he could there do no mighty work, save that he laid his hands upon a few sick folk, and healed them.","He could not do any miracles there, except lay his hands on a few sick people and heal them.","Et non poterat ibi virtutem ullam facere, nisi paucos infirmos impositis manibus curavit;","ולא יכל לעשות שם פלא רק על חלשים מעטים שם את ידיו וירפאם׃"],["48","6","6","그리고 그들이 믿지 않는 것에 놀라셨다. 예수님께서는 여러 마을을 두루 돌아다니며 가르치셨다.","그리고 그들에게 믿음이 없는 것을 보시고 이상하게 여기셨다.","그들이 믿지 않음을 이상히 여기셨더라","저희의 믿지 않음을 이상히 여기셨더라","예수께서는 그들이 믿지 않는 것을 보시고 이상하게 생각하셨다.  예수께서는 여러 마을을 두루 돌아다니시며 가르치셨다.","He was amazed at their lack of faith. He went around to the villages in the vicinity teaching.","And he marvelled because of their unbelief. And he went round about the villages, teaching.","And he was amazed at their lack of faith. Then Jesus went around teaching from village to village.","et mirabatur propter incredulitatem eorum. Et circumibat castella in circuitu docens.","ויתמה על חסרון אמונתם ויסב בכפרים סבוב ולמד׃"],["48","6","7","그리고 열두 제자를 부르시어 더러운 영들에 대한 권한을 주시고, 둘씩 짝지어 파견하기 시작하셨다.","열두 제자를 불러 더러운 악령을 제어하는 권세를 주시고 둘씩 짝지어 파견하셨다.","열두 제자를 부르사 둘씩 둘씩 보내시며 더러운 귀신을 제어하는 권능을 주시고","열 두 제자를 부르사 둘씩 둘씩 보내시며 더러운 귀신을 제어하는 권세를 주시고","그리고 열두 제자를 불러 더러운 귀신을 쫓아내는 능력을 주시고 둘씩 짝지어 보내셨다.","He summoned the Twelve and began to send them out two by two and gave them authority over unclean spirits.","And he called unto him the twelve, and began to send them forth by two and two; and gave them power over unclean spirits;","Calling the Twelve to him, he sent them out two by two and gave them authority over evil spirits.","Et convocat Duodecim et coepit eos mittere binos et dabat illis potestatem in spiritus immundos;","ויקרא אל שנים העשר ויחל לשלח אותם שנים שנים ויתן להם שלטן על רוחות הטמאה׃"],["48","6","8","그러면서 길을 떠날 때에 지팡이 외에는 아무것도, 빵도 여행 보따리도 전대에 돈도 가져가지 말라고 명령하시고,","그리고 여행하는 데 지팡이 외에는 아무것도 지니지 말라고 하시며 먹을 것이나 자루도 가지지 말고 전대에 돈도 지니지 말며","명하시되 여행을 위하여 지팡이 외에는 양식이나 배낭이나 전대의 돈이나 아무 것도 가지지 말며","명하시되 여행을 위하여 지팡이 외에는 양식이나 주머니나 전대의 2)돈이나 아무 것도 가지지 말며 헬, 동","예수께서는 그들에게 \"여행할 때 지팡이 외에는 먹을 것도, 자루도, 돈도, 갈아 신을 신과 갈아입을 옷도 가지고 다니지 말라\"고 이르셨다.","He instructed them to take nothing for the journey but a walking stick—no food, no sack, no money in their belts.","And commanded them that they should take nothing for their journey, save a staff only; no scrip, no bread, no money in their purse:","These were his instructions: \"Take nothing for the journey except a staff--no bread, no bag, no money in your belts.","et praecepit eis, ne quid tollerent in via nisi virgam tantum: non panem, non peram neque in zona aes,","ויצו אותם אשר לא ישאו מאומה לדרך זולתי מקל לבדו לא תרמיל ולא לחם ולא נחשת בחגורה׃"],["48","6","9","신발은 신되 옷도 두 벌은 껴입지 말라고 이르셨다.","신발은 신고 있는 것을 그대로 신고 속옷은 두 벌씩 껴입지 말라고 분부하셨다.","신만 신고 두 벌 옷도 입지 말라 하시고","신만 신고 두 벌 옷도 입지 말라 하시고","(8절에 포함되어 있음)","They were, however, to wear sandals but not a second tunic.","But be shod with sandals; and not put on two coats.","Wear sandals but not an extra tunic.","sed ut calcearentur sandaliis et ne induerentur duabus tunicis.","רק להיות נעולי סנדל ושתי כתנות לא ילבשו׃"],["48","6","10","그리고 그들에게 말씀하셨다. “어디에서나 어떤 집에 들어가거든 그 고장을 떠날 때까지 그 집에 머물러라.","그리고 이렇게 말씀하셨다. \"어디서 누구의 집에 들어가든지 그 고장을 떠나기까지 그 집에 머물러 있어라.","또 이르시되 어디서든지 누구의 집에 들어가거든 그 곳을 떠나기까지 거기 유하라","또 가라사대 어디서든지 뉘 집에 들어가거든 그곳을 떠나기까지 거기 유하라","그리고 이렇게 말씀하셨다. \"어느 마을에 가든지 그곳을 떠날 때까지 한 집에 머무르라.","He said to them, “Wherever you enter a house, stay there until you leave from there.","And he said unto them, In what place soever ye enter into an house, there abide till ye depart from that place.","Whenever you enter a house, stay there until you leave that town.","Et dicebat eis:  “Quocumque introieritis in domum, illic manete, donec exeatis inde.","ויאמר אליהם במקום אשר תבאו בית איש שבו בו עד כי תצאו משם׃"],["48","6","11","또한 어느 곳이든 너희를 받아들이지 않고 너희 말도 듣지 않으면, 그곳을 떠날 때에 그들에게 보이는 증거로 너희 발밑의 먼지를 털어 버려라.”","그???너희를 환영하지 않거나 너희의 말을 듣지 않는 고장이 있거든 그 곳을 떠나면서 그들에게 경고하는 표시로 너희의 발에서 먼지를 털어버려라.\"","어느 곳에서든지 너희를 영접하지 아니하고 너희 말을 듣지도 아니하거든 거기서 나갈 때에 발 아래 먼지를 떨어버려 그들에게 증거를 삼으라 하시니","어느 곳에서든지 너희를 영접지 아니하고 너희 말을 듣지도 아니하거든 거기서 나갈 때에 발아래 먼지를 떨어버려 저희에게 증거를 삼으라 하시니","어떤 마을이든지 너희를 환영하지 않거나 너희 말을 듣지 않거든 그곳을 떠나되 나올 때에는 그들에게 경고하는 표로 너희 발에서 먼지를 떨어 버리라.\"","Whatever place does not welcome you or listen to you, leave there and shake the dust off your feet in testimony against them.”","And whosoever shall not receive you, nor hear you, when ye depart thence, shake off the dust under your feet for a testimony against them. Verily I say unto you, It shall be more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrha in the day of judgment, than for that city.","And if any place will not welcome you or listen to you, shake the dust off your feet when you leave, as a testimony against them.\"","Et quicumque locus non receperit vos nec audierint vos, exeuntes inde excutite pulverem de pedibus vestris in testimonium illis “.","וכל אשר לא יקבלו אתכם ולא ישמעו אליכם צאו משם ונערו את עפר כפות רגליכם לעדות להם אמן אני אמר לכם לסדם ולעמרה יקל ביום הדין מן העיר ההיא׃"],["48","6","12","그리하여 제자들은 떠나가서, 회개하라고 선포하였다.","이 말씀을 듣고 열두 제자는 나가서 사람들에게 회개하라고 가르치며","제자들이 나가서 회개하라 전파하고","제자들이 나가서 회개하라 전파하고","제자들은 길을 떠나 만나는 사람마다 회개하라고 가르치고","So they went off and preached repentance.","And they went out, and preached that men should repent.","They went out and preached that people should repent.","Et exeuntes praedicaverunt, ut paenitentiam agerent;","ויצאו ויקראו לשוב בתשובה׃"],["48","6","13","그리고 많은 마귀를 쫓아내고 많은 병자에게 기름을 부어 병을 고쳐 주었다.","마귀들을 많이 쫓아내고 수많은 병자들에게 기름을 발라 병을 고쳐주었다.","많은 귀신을 쫓아내며 많은 병자에게 기름을 발라 고치더라","많은 귀신을 쫓아내며 많은 병인에게 기름을 발라 고치더라","많은 귀신들을 쫓아내며 병자들에게 기름을 발라 낫게 하였다.","They drove out many demons, and they anointed with oil many who were sick and cured them.","And they cast out many devils, and anointed with oil many that were sick, and healed them.","They drove out many demons and anointed many sick people with oil and healed them.","et daemonia multa eiciebant et ungebant oleo multos aegrotos et sanabant.","ויגרשו שדים רבים ויסוכו בשמן חלשים רבים וירפאום׃"],["48","6","14","예수님의 이름이 널리 알려져 마침내 헤로데 임금도 소문을 듣게 되었다. 사람들은 “세례자 요한이 죽은 이들 가운데에서 되살아난 것이다. 그러니 그에게서 그런 기적의 힘이 일어나지.” 하고 말하였다.","예수의 이름이 널리 알려져 마침내 그 소문이 헤로데 왕의 귀에 들어갔다. 어떤 사람들은 \"그에게서 그런 기적의 힘이 나타나는 것을 보면 죽은 세례자 요한이 다시 살아난 것이 틀림없다.\" 하고 말하는가 하면","이에 예수의 이름이 드러난지라 헤롯 왕이 듣고 이르되 이는 세례 요한이 죽은 자 가운데서 살아났도다 그러므로 이런 능력이 그 속에서 일어나느니라 하고","이에 예수의 이름이 드러난지라 헤롯왕이 듣고 가로되 이는 세례 요한이 죽은 자 가운데서 살아났도다 그러므로 이런 능력이 그 속에서 운동하느니라 하고","예수께서 이적을 베푸신 소문이 온 사방에 퍼져 나가 마침내 헤롯왕의 귀까지 들어갔다. 헤롯왕은 예수를 침례 요한이 다시 살아서 돌아온 것이라고 생각하였다. 그래서 \"그가 그런 이적을 행하는 것은 조금도 이상할 게 없다\"고 말하였다.","King Herod heard about it, for his fame had become widespread, and people were saying, “John the Baptist has been raised from the dead; that is why mighty powers are at work in him.”","And king Herod heard of him; (for his name was spread abroad:) and he said, That John the Baptist was risen from the dead, and therefore mighty works do shew forth themselves in him.","King Herod heard about this, for Jesus' name had become well known. Some were saying, \"John the Baptist has been raised from the dead, and that is why miraculous powers are at work in him.\"","Et audivit Herodes rex; manifestum enim factum est nomen eius. Et dicebant:  “Ioannes Baptista resurrexit a mortuis, et propterea inoperantur virtutes in illo “.","וישמע עליו המלך הורדוס כי נודע שמו ויאמר יוחנן הטובל קם מן המתים ועל כן פעלות בו הגבורות׃"],["48","6","15","그러나 어떤 이들은 “그는 엘리야다.” 하는가 하면, 또 어떤 이들은 “옛 예언자들과 같은 예언자다.” 하였다.","더러는 엘리야라고도 하고, 또 더러는 옛 예언자들과 같은 예언자라고도 하였다.","어떤 이는 그가 엘리야라 하고 또 어떤 이는 그가 선지자니 옛 선지자 중의 하나와 같다 하되","어떤이는 이가 엘리야라 하고 또 어떤이는 이가 선지자니 옛 선지자 중의 하나와 같다 하되","어떤 사람들은 예수를 옛 예언자 엘리야가 다시 살아온 것이라고 말하는가 하면, 또 위대한 옛 예언자와 같은 새 예언자가 나타난 것이라고 말하기도 하였다.","Others were saying, “He is Elijah”; still others, “He is a prophet like any of the prophets.”","Others said, That it is Elias. And others said, That it is a prophet, or as one of the prophets.","Others said, \"He is Elijah.\" And still others claimed, \"He is a prophet, like one of the prophets of long ago.\"","Alii autem dicebant:  “Elias est “. Alii vero dicebant:  “Propheta est, quasi unus ex prophetis “.","ואחרים אמרו כי הוא אליהו ואחרים אמרו כי נביא הוא או כאחד הנביאים׃"],["48","6","16","헤로데는 이러한 소문을 듣고, “내가 목을 벤 그 요한이 되살아났구나.” 하고 말하였다.","그러나 예수의 소문을 들은 헤로데 왕은 \"바로 요한이다. 내가 목을 벤 요한이 다시 살아난 것이다.\" 하고 말하였다.","헤롯은 듣고 이르되 내가 목 벤 요한 그가 살아났다 하더라","헤롯은 듣고 가로되 내가 목 베인 요한 그가 살아났다 하더라","그러나 헤롯은 \"아니오. 내가 목을 벤 요한이 죽은 자 가운데서 살아난 것일게요\"라고 하였다.","But when Herod learned of it, he said, “It is John whom I beheaded. He has been raised up.”","But when Herod heard thereof, he said, It is John, whom I beheaded: he is risen from the dead.","But when Herod heard this, he said, \"John, the man I beheaded, has been raised from the dead!\"","Quo audito, Herodes aiebat:  “Quem ego decollavi Ioannem, hic resurrexit! “.","וישמע הורדוס ויאמר יוחנן אשר אנכי נשאתי את ראשו מעליו הוא קם מן המתים׃"],["48","6","17","이 헤로데는 사람을 보내어 요한을 붙잡아 감옥에 묶어 둔 일이 있었다. 그의 동생 필리포스의 아내 헤로디아 때문이었는데, 헤로데가 이 여자와 혼인하였던 것이다.","이 헤로데는 일찍이 사람을 시켜 요한을 잡아 결박하여 옥에 가둔 일이 있었다. 그것은 헤로데가 동생 필립보의 아내 헤로디아와 결혼하였다고 해서","전에 헤롯이 자기가 동생 빌립의 아내 헤로디아에게 장가 든 고로 이 여자를 위하여 사람을 보내어 요한을 잡아 옥에 가두었으니","전에 헤롯이 자기가 동생 빌립의 아내 헤로디아에게 장가 든 고로 이 여자를 위하여 사람을 보내어 요한을 잡아 옥에 가두었으니","전에 헤롯은 요한을 잡아다가 옥에 가둔 일이 있었다. 헤롯이 동생 빌립의 아내 헤로디아를 아내로 삼자","Herod was the one who had John arrested and bound in prison on account of Herodias, the wife of his brother Philip, whom he had married.","For Herod himself had sent forth and laid hold upon John, and bound him in prison for Herodias' sake, his brother Philip's wife: for he had married her.","For Herod himself had given orders to have John arrested, and he had him bound and put in prison. He did this because of Herodias, his brother Philip's wife, whom he had married.","Ipse enim Herodes misit ac tenuit Ioannem et vinxit eum in carcere propter Herodiadem uxorem Philippi fratris sui, quia duxerat eam.","כי הוא הורודס שלח לתפש את יוחנן ויאסרהו בבית הסהר בגלל הורודיה אשת פילפוס אחיו כי אתה לקח לו לאשה׃"],["48","6","18","그래서 요한은 헤로데에게, “동생의 아내를 차지하는 것은 옳지 않습니다.” 하고 여??차례 말하였다.","요한이 헤로데에게 \"동생의 아내를 데리고 사는 것은 옳지 않습니다.\" 하고 누차 간하였기 때문이었다.","이는 요한이 헤롯에게 말하되 동생의 아내를 취한 것이 옳지 않다 하였음이라","이는 요한이 헤롯에게 말하되 동생의 아내를 취한 것이 옳지 않다 하였음이라","요한이 헤롯에게 그 일은 옳지 않다고 바른말을 하였기 때문이다.","John had said to Herod, “It is not lawful for you to have your brother’s wife.”","For John had said unto Herod, It is not lawful for thee to have thy brother's wife.","For John had been saying to Herod, \"It is not lawful for you to have your brother's wife.\"","Dicebat enim Ioannes Herodi:  “Non licet tibi habere uxorem fratris tui “.","יען אשר אמר יוחנן אל הורדוס אשת אחיך איננה מתרת לך׃"],["48","6","19","헤로디아는 요한에게 앙심을 품고 그를 죽이려고 하였으나 뜻을 이루지 못하였다.","그래서 헤로디아는 요한에게 원한을 품고 그를 죽이려고 하였으나 뜻을 이루지 못하였다.","헤로디아가 요한을 원수로 여겨 죽이고자 하였으되 하지 못한 것은","헤로디아가 요한을 원수로 여겨 죽이고자 하였으되 하지 못한 것은","헤로디아는 요한에게 앙심을 품고 그를 죽이려 하였지만 헤롯의 동의 없이는 어쩔 수가 없었다.","Herodias harbored a grudge against him and wanted to kill him but was unable to do so.","Therefore Herodias had a quarrel against him, and would have killed him; but she could not:","So Herodias nursed a grudge against John and wanted to kill him. But she was not able to,","Herodias autem insidiabatur illi et volebat occidere eum nec poterat:","ותשטם אותו הורודיה ותבקש המיתו ולא יכלה׃"],["48","6","20","헤로데가 요한을 의롭고 거룩한 사람으로 알고 그를 두려워하며 보호해 주었을 뿐만 아니라, 그의 말을 들을 때에 몹시 당황해하면서도 기꺼이 듣곤 하였기 때문이다.","그것은 헤로데가 요한을 의롭고 거룩한 사람으로 알고 그를 두려워하여 보호해 주었을 뿐만 아니라 그가 간할 때마다 속으로는 몹시 괴로워하면서도 그것을 기꺼이 들어왔기 때문이다.","헤롯이 요한을 의롭고 거룩한 사람으로 알고 두려워하여 보호하며 또 그의 말을 들을 때에 크게 번민을 하면서도 달갑게 들음이러라","헤롯이 요한을 의롭고 거룩한 사람으로 알고 두려워하여 보호하며 또 그의 말을 들을 때에 크게 번민을 느끼면서도 달게 들음이러라","헤롯은 요한을 의롭고 거룩한 사람으로 알아 그를 두려워하여 은근히 보호해 주고 있었다. 게다가 자기에 대한 요한의 비난이 몹시 괴로웠지만 그의 충고를 늘 마음에 받아들이고 있었기 때문이다.","Herod feared John, knowing him to be a righteous and holy man, and kept him in custody. When he heard him speak he was very much perplexed, yet he liked to listen to him.","For Herod feared John, knowing that he was a just man and an holy, and observed him; and when he heard him, he did many things, and heard him gladly.","because Herod feared John and protected him, knowing him to be a righteous and holy man. When Herod heard John, he was greatly puzzled; yet he liked to listen to him.","Herodes enim metuebat Ioannem, sciens eum virum iustum et sanctum, et custodiebat eum, et, audito eo, multum haesitabat et libenter eum audiebat.","כי הורדוס ירא את יוחנן בדעתו כי הוא איש צדיק וקדוש ויגן בעדו והרבה עשה בשמעו אליו ויאהב לשמע אתו׃"],["48","6","21","그런데 좋은 기회가 왔다. 헤로데가 자기 생일에 고관들과 무관들과 갈릴래아의 유지들을 청하여 잔치를 베풀었다.","그런데 마침 헤로디아에게 좋은 기회가 왔다. 헤로데 왕이 생일을 맞아 고관들과 무관들과 갈릴래아의 요인들을 청하여 잔치를 베풀었는데","마침 기회가 좋은 날이 왔으니 곧 헤롯이 자기 생일에 대신들과 천부장들과 갈릴리의 귀인들로 더불어 잔치할새","마침 기회 좋은 날이 왔으니 곧 헤롯이 자기 생일에 대신들과 천부장들과 갈릴리의 귀인들로 더불어 잔치할쌔","그러던 중 마침내 헤로디아에게 좋은 기회가 왔다. 헤롯은 그의 생일날에 대신들과 천부장들과 갈릴리의 귀인들을 청하여 잔치를 베풀었는데","She had an opportunity one day when Herod, on his birthday, gave a banquet for his courtiers, his military officers, and the leading men of Galilee.","And when a convenient day was come, that Herod on his birthday made a supper to his lords, high captains, and chief estates of Galilee;","Finally the opportune time came. On his birthday Herod gave a banquet for his high officials and military commanders and the leading men of Galilee.","Et cum dies opportunus accidisset, quo Herodes natali suo cenam fecit principibus suis et tribunis et primis Galilaeae,","ויבא היום המכשר כי הורדוס ביום הלדת אתו עשה משתה לגדוליו ולשרי האלפים ולראשי הגליל׃"],["48","6","22","그 자리에 헤로디아의 딸이 들어가 춤을 추어, 헤로데와 그의 손님들을 즐겁게 하였다. 그래서 임금은 그 소녀에게, “무엇이든 원하는 것을 나에게 청하여라. 너에게 주겠다.” 하고 말할 뿐만 아니라,","그 자리에 헤로디아의 딸이 나와서 춤을 추어 헤로데와 그의 손님들을 매우 기쁘게 해주었다. 그러자 왕은 그 소녀에게 \"네 소원을 말해 보아라. 무엇이든지 들어주마.\" 하고는","헤로디아의 딸이 친히 들어와 춤을 추어 헤롯과 그와 함께 앉은 자들을 기쁘게 한지라 왕이 그 소녀에게 이르되 무엇이든지 네가 원하는 것을 내게 구하라 내가 주리라 하고","헤로디아의 3)딸이 친히 들어와 춤을 추어 헤롯과 및 함께 4)앉은 자들을 기쁘게 한지라 왕이 그 여아에게 이르되 무엇이든지 너 원하는 것을 내게 구하라 내가 주리라 하고 혹 친딸이 들어와헬, 기대어 누워 (유대인의 음식 먹을 때에 가지는 자세)","그 자리에 헤로디아의 딸이 나와서 춤을 추어 헤롯과 거기 앉은 모든 사람들을 기쁘게 하였다. 그러자 왕이 소녀에게 \"무엇이든지 네가 원하는 것을 말해보아라. 나라의 절반이라도 달라면 주겠다\" 하고 맹세의 말을 하였다.","Herodias’s own daughter came in and performed a dance that delighted Herod and his guests. The king said to the girl, “Ask of me whatever you wish and I will grant it to you.”","And when the daughter of the said Herodias came in, and danced, and pleased Herod and them that sat with him, the king said unto the damsel, Ask of me whatsoever thou wilt, and I will give it thee.","When the daughter of Herodias came in and danced, she pleased Herod and his dinner guests. The king said to the girl, \"Ask me for anything you want, and I'll give it to you.\"","cumque introisset filia ipsius Herodiadis et saltasset, placuit Herodi simulque recumbentibus. Rex ait puellae:  “Pete a me, quod vis, et dabo tibi “.","ותבא בת הורודיה ותרקד ותיטב בעיני הורדוס ובעיני המסבים עמו ויאמר המלך אל הנערה שאלי ממני את אשר תחפצי ואתן לך׃"],["48","6","23","“네가 청하는 것은 무엇이든, 내 왕국의 절반이라도 너에게 주겠다.” 하고 굳게 맹세까지 하였다.","\"네가 청하는 것이면 무엇이든지 주겠다. 내 왕국의 반이라도 주겠다.\" 하고 맹세하였던 것이다.","또 맹세하기를 무엇이든지 네가 내게 구하면 내 나라의 절반까지라도 주리라 하거늘","또 맹세하되 무엇이든지 네가 내게 구하면 내 나라의 절반까지라도 주리라 하거늘","소녀는 나가서 자기 어머니 헤로디아에게 무엇을 달라고 하면 좋겠느냐고 물었다. 그러자 헤로디아는 \"침례 요한의 머리를 달라고 하여라\"고 시켰다.","He even swore [many things] to her, “I will grant you whatever you ask of me, even to half of my kingdom.”","And he sware unto her, Whatsoever thou shalt ask of me, I will give it thee, unto the half of my kingdom.","And he promised her with an oath, \"Whatever you ask I will give you, up to half my kingdom.\"","Et iuravit illi multum:  “Quidquid petieris a me, dabo tibi, usque ad dimidium regni mei “.","וישבע לה לאמר כל אשר תשאלי ממני אתן לך עד חצי מלכותי׃"],["48","6","24","소녀가 나가서 자기 어머니에게 “무엇을 청할까요?” 하자, 그 여자는 “세례자 요한의 머리를 요구하여라.” 하고 일렀다.","소녀가 나가서 제 어미에게 \"무엇을 청할까요?\" 하고 의논하자 그 어미는 \"세례자 요한의 머리를 달라고 하여라.\" 하고 시켰다.","그가 나가서 그 어머니에게 말하되 내가 무엇을 구하리이까 그 어머니가 이르되 세례 요한의 머리를 구하라 하니","저가 나가서 그 어미에게 말하되 내가 무엇을 구하리이까 그 어미가 가로되 세례 요한의 머리를 구하라 하니","(23절에 포함되어 있음)","She went out and said to her mother, “What shall I ask for?” She replied, “The head of John the Baptist.”","And she went forth, and said unto her mother, What shall I ask? And she said, The head of John the Baptist.","She went out and said to her mother, \"What shall I ask for?\" \"The head of John the Baptist,\" she answered.","Quae cum exisset, dixit matri suae:  “Quid petam? “. At illa dixit:  “Caput Ioannis Baptistae “.","ותצא ותאמר לאמה מה אשאל ותאמר את ראש יוחנן המטביל׃"],["48","6","25","소녀는 곧 서둘러 임금에게 가서, “당장 세례자 요한의 머리를 쟁반에 담아 저에게 주시기를 바랍니다.” 하고 청하였다.","그러자 소녀는 급히 왕에게 돌아와 \"지금 곧 세례자 요한의 머리를 쟁반에 담아서 가져다 주십시오.\" 하고 청하였다.","그가 곧 왕에게 급히 들어가 구하여 이르되 세례 요한의 머리를 소반에 얹어 곧 내게 주기를 원하옵나이다 하니","저가 곧 왕에게 급히 들어가 구하여 가로되 세례 요한의 머리를 소반에 담아 곧 내게 주기를 원하옵나이다 한대","소녀는 급히 왕에게 돌아와 \"침례 요한의 머리를 쟁반에 담아서 주십시오\" 하고 청하였다.","The girl hurried back to the king’s presence and made her request, “I want you to give me at once on a platter the head of John the Baptist.”","And she came in straightway with haste unto the king, and asked, saying, I will that thou give me by and by in a charger the head of John the Baptist.","At once the girl hurried in to the king with the request: \"I want you to give me right now the head of John the Baptist on a platter.\"","Cumque introisset statim cum festinatione ad regem, petivit dicens:  “Volo ut protinus des mihi in disco caput Ioannis Baptistae “.","ותמהר מאד לבוא אל המלך ותשאל לאמר רצוני אשר תתן לי עתה בקערה את ראש יוחנן המטביל׃"],["48","6","26","임금은 몹시 괴로웠지만, 맹세까지 하였고 또 손님들 앞이라 그의 청을 물리치고 싶지 않았다.","왕은 마음이 몹시 괴로웠지만 이미 맹세한 바도 있고 또 손님들이 보는 앞이어서 그 청을 거절할 수가 없었다.","왕이 심히 근심하나 자기가 맹세한 것과 그 앉은 자들로 인하여 그를 거절할 수 없는지라","왕이 심히 근심하나 자기의 맹세한 것과 그 4)앉은 자들을 인하여 저를 거절할 수 없는지라 헬, 기대어 누워 (유대인의 음식 먹을 때에 가지는 자세)","왕은 마음이 몹시 괴로웠으나 많은 사람들 앞에서 한 맹세를 어기는 것도 난처한 일이었다.","The king was deeply distressed, but because of his oaths and the guests he did not wish to break his word to her.","And the king was exceeding sorry; yet for his oath's sake, and for their sakes which sat with him, he would not reject her.","The king was greatly distressed, but because of his oaths and his dinner guests, he did not want to refuse her.","Et contristatus rex, propter iusiurandum et propter recumbentes noluit eam decipere;","ויתעצב המלך מאד אך בעבור השבועה והמסבים עמו לא רצה להשיב פניה׃"],["48","6","27","그래서 임금은 곧 경비병을 보내며, 요한의 머리를 가져오라고 명령하였다. 경비병이 물러가 감옥에서 요한의 목을 베어,","그래서 왕은 곧 경비병 하나를 보내며 요한의 목을 베어 오라고 명령하였다. 경비병이 감옥으로 가서 요한의 목을 베어","왕이 곧 시위병 하나를 보내어 요한의 머리를 가져오라 명하니 그 사람이 나가 옥에서 요한을 목 베어","왕이 곧 시위병 하나를 보내어 요한의 머리를 가져오라 명하니 그 사람이 나가 옥에서 요한을 목 베어","그래서 경호원을 보내 요한의 목을 베어 오라고 명령하였다. 경호원이 감옥에 가서 요한을 죽이고","So he promptly dispatched an executioner with orders to bring back his head. He went off and beheaded him in the prison.","And immediately the king sent an executioner, and commanded his head to be brought: and he went and beheaded him in the prison,","So he immediately sent an executioner with orders to bring John's head. The man went, beheaded John in the prison,","et statim misso spiculatore rex praecepit afferri caput eius. Et abiens decollavit eum in carcere","ומיד שלח המלך אחד הטבחים ויצוהו להביא את ראשו׃"],["48","6","28","머리를 쟁반에 담아다가 소녀에게 주자, 소녀는 그것을 자기 어머니에게 주었다.","쟁반에 담아다가 소녀에게 건네자 소녀는 다시 그것을 제 어미에게 가져다 주었다.","그 머리를 소반에 얹어다가 소녀에게 주니 소녀가 이것을 그 어머니에게 주니라","그 머리를 소반에 담아다가 여아에게 주니 여아가 이것을 그 어미에게 주니라","그의 목을 쟁반에 담아다가 소녀에게 주자 소녀는 그것을 자기 어머니에게 갖다 주었다.","He brought in the head on a platter and gave it to the girl. The girl in turn gave it to her mother.","And brought his head in a charger, and gave it to the damsel: and the damsel gave it to her mother.","and brought back his head on a platter. He presented it to the girl, and she gave it to her mother.","et attulit caput eius in disco; et dedit illud puellae, et puella dedit illud matri suae.","וילך ויכרת את ראשו בבית הסהר ויביאהו בקערה ויתנהו לנערה והנערה נתנה אתו אל אמה׃"],["48","6","29","그 뒤에 요한의 제자들이 소문을 듣고 가서, 그의 주검을 거두어 무덤에 모셨다.","그 뒤 소식을 들은 요한의 제자들이 와서 그 시체를 거두어다가 장사를 지냈다.","요한의 제자들이 듣고 와서 시체를 가져다가 장사하니라","요한의 제자들이 듣고 와서 시체를 가져다가 장사하니라","요한의 제자들이 이 소식을 듣고 와서 그 시체를 거두어다가 장례를 치렀다.","When his disciples heard about it, they came and took his body and laid it in a tomb.","And when his disciples heard of it, they came and took up his corpse, and laid it in a tomb.","On hearing of this, John's disciples came and took his body and laid it in a tomb.","Quo audito, discipuli eius venerunt et tulerunt corpus eius et posuerunt illud in monumento.","וישמעו תלמידיו ויבאו וישאו את גויתו וישימוה בקבר׃"],["48","6","30","사도들이 예수님께 모여 와, 자기들이 한 일과 가르친 것을 다 보고하였다.","사도들이 돌아와서 자기들이 한 일과 가르친 것을 예수께 낱낱이 보고하였다.","사도들이 예수께 모여 자기들이 행한 것과 가르친 것을 낱낱이 고하니","사도들이 예수께 모여 자기들의 행한 것과 가르친 것을 낱낱이 고하니","사도들이 여행에서 돌아와 자기들이 행한 일과 가르친 것을 낱낱이 예수께 말씀드렸다.","The apostles gathered together with Jesus and reported all they had done and taught.","And the apostles gathered themselves together unto Jesus, and told him all things, both what they had done, and what they had taught.","The apostles gathered around Jesus and reported to him all they had done and taught.","Et convenientes apostoli ad Iesum renuntiaverunt illi omnia, quae egerant et docuerant.","ויקהלו השליחים אל ישוע ויגידו לו את כל אשר עשו ואת אשר למדו׃"],["48","6","31","그러자 예수님께서 그들에게, “너희는 따로 외딴곳으로 가서 좀 쉬어라.” 하고 말씀하셨다. 오고 가는 사람들이 너무 많아 음식을 먹을 겨를조차 없었던 것이다.","예수께서는 제자들에게 \"따로 한적한 곳으로 가서 함께 좀 쉬자.\" 하고 말씀하셨다. 찾아오는 사람이 너무 많아서 그들은 음식을 먹을 겨를조차 없었던 것이다.","이르시되 너희는 따로 한적한 곳에 가서 잠깐 쉬어라 하시니 이는 오고 가는 사람이 많아 음식 먹을 겨를도 없음이라","이르시되 너희는 따로 한적한 곳에 와서 잠간 쉬어라 하시니 이는 오고 가는 사람이 많아 음식 먹을 겨를도 없음이라","그러자 예수께서는 그들에게 \"여기를 떠나 잠시 한적한 곳에 가서 쉬자\" 고 말씀하셨다. 너무도 찾아오는 사람이 많아 제자들과 조용히 식사할 겨를조차 없었기 때문이다.","He said to them, “Come away by yourselves to a deserted place and rest a while.” People were coming and going in great numbers, and they had no opportunity even to eat.","And he said unto them, Come ye yourselves apart into a desert place, and rest a while: for there were many coming and going, and they had no leisure so much as to eat.","Then, because so many people were coming and going that they did not even have a chance to eat, he said to them, \"Come with me by yourselves to a quiet place and get some rest.\"","Et ait illis:  “Venite vos ipsi seorsum in desertum locum et requiescite pusillum “. Erant enim, qui veniebant et redibant, multi, et nec manducandi spatium habebant.","ויאמר אליהם באו אתם לבדד אל מקום חרבה ונוחו מעט כי רבים היו הבאים והיצאים עד לאין עת להם לאכול׃"],["48","6","32","그래서 그들은 따로 배를 타고 외딴곳으로 떠나갔다.","예수의 일행은 배를 타고 따로 한적한 곳을 찾아 떠났다.","이에 배를 타고 따로 한적한 곳에 갈새","이에 배를 타고 따로 한적한 곳에 갈쌔","예수와 제자들은 배를 타고 한적한 곳을 향해 떠났다.","So they went off in the boat by themselves to a deserted place.","And they departed into a desert place by ship privately.","So they went away by themselves in a boat to a solitary place.","Et abierunt in navi in desertum locum seorsum.","וילכו משם באניה אל מקום חרבה לבדד׃"],["48","6","33","그러자 많은 사람이 그들이 떠나는 것을 보고, 모든 고을에서 나와 육로로 함께 달려가 그들보다 먼저 그곳에 다다랐다.","그런데 사람들은 그 일행이 떠나는 것을 보고 그들이 예수의 일행이라는 것을 알고는 여러 동네에서 모두 달려나와 육로로 해서 그들을 앞질러 그 곳에 갔다.","그들이 가는 것을 보고 많은 사람이 그들인 줄 안지라 모든 고을로부터 도보로 그 곳에 달려와 그들보다 먼저 갔더라","그 가는 것을 보고 많은 사람이 저희인줄 안지라 모든 고을로부터 도보로 그 곳에 달려와 저희보다 먼저 갔더라","그러나 많은 사람들이 그것을 보고 사방에서 달려 나와 해변길을 따라 그곳에 먼저 가 있었다.","People saw them leaving and many came to know about it. They hastened there on foot from all the towns and arrived at the place before them.","And the people saw them departing, and many knew him, and ran afoot thither out of all cities, and outwent them, and came together unto him.","But many who saw them leaving recognized them and ran on foot from all the towns and got there ahead of them.","Et viderunt eos abeuntes et cognoverunt multi; et pedestre de omnibus civitatibus concurrerunt illuc et praevenerunt eos.","וההמון ראה אותם יצאים ויכירהו רבים וירוצו שמה ברגליהם מכל הערים ויעברו אותם ויאספו אליו׃"],["48","6","34","예수님께서는 배에서 내리시어 많은 군중을 보시고 가엾은 마음이 드셨다. 그들이 목자 없는 양들 같았기 때문이다. 그래서 그들에게 많은 것을 가르쳐 주기 시작하셨다.","예수께서 배에서 내려 군중이 많이 모여 있는 것을 보시고 1)목자 없는 양과 같은 그들을 측은히 여기시어 여러 가지로 가르쳐주셨다.민수 27:17(1열왕 22:17; 에제 34:5 참조).","예수께서 나오사 큰 무리를 보시고 그 목자 없는 양 같음으로 인하여 불쌍히 여기사 이에 여러 가지로 가르치시더라","예수께서 나오사 큰 무리를 보시고 그 목자 없는 양 같음을 인하여 불쌍히 여기사 이에 여러가지로 가르치시더라","예수께서는 배에서 내려 많은 군중이 모여 있는 것을 보시고 그들이 마치 ㄱ) 목자없는 양처럼 측은히 여겨져 그들에게 많은 것을 가르쳐 주셨다. (ㄱ. 민27:17(참조,왕상22:17,겔34:5)","When he disembarked and saw the vast crowd, his heart was moved with pity for them, for they were like sheep without a shepherd; and he began to teach them many things.","And Jesus, when he came out, saw much people, and was moved with compassion toward them, because they were as sheep not having a shepherd: and he began to teach them many things.","When Jesus landed and saw a large crowd, he had compassion on them, because they were like sheep without a shepherd. So he began teaching them many things.","Et exiens vidit multam turbam et misertus est super eos, quia erant sicut oves non habentes pastorem, et coepit docere illos multa.","ויצא וירא המון עם רב ויהמו מעיו עליהם כי היו כצאן אשר אין להם רעה ויחל ללמד אותם דברים הרבה׃"],["48","6","35","어느덧 늦은 시간이 되자 제자들이 예수님께 다가와 말하였다. “여기는 외딴곳이고 시간도 이미 늦었습니다.","저녁때가 되자 제자들이 예수께 와서 \"여기는 외딴 곳이고 시간도 이미 늦었습니다.","때가 저물어가매 제자들이 예수께 나아와 여짜오되 이 곳은 빈 들이요 날도 저물어가니","때가 저물어가매 제자들이 예수께 나아와 여짜오되 이곳은 빈 들이요 때도 저물어가니","저녁때가 되자 제자들이 예수께 와서 말하였다. \"모인 사람이 너무 많으므로 제각기 음식을 사먹도록 근처 마을이나 농가로 보내는 것이 좋겠습니다. 여기는 외딴 곳이라서 먹을 것이 아무 것도 없고 시간도 이미 늦었습니다.\"","By now it was already late and his disciples approached him and said, “This is a deserted place and it is already very late.","And when the day was now far spent, his disciples came unto him, and said, This is a desert place, and now the time is far passed:","By this time it was late in the day, so his disciples came to him. \"This is a remote place,\" they said, \"and it's already very late.","Et cum iam hora multa facta esset, accesserunt discipuli eius dicentes:  “Desertus est locus hic, et hora iam est multa;","ויהי כאשר רפה היום לערוב ויגשו אליו תלמידיו לאמר הנה המקום חרב והיום רד מאד׃"],["48","6","36","그러니 저들을 돌려보내시어, 주변 촌락이나 마을로 가서 스스로 먹을 것을 사게 하십시오.”","그러니 군중들을 헤쳐 제각기 음식을 사 먹도록 농가나 근처 마을로 보내는 것이 좋겠습니다.\" 하고 말하였다.","무리를 보내어 두루 촌과 마을로 가서 무엇을 사 먹게 하옵소서","무리를 보내어 두루 촌과 마을로 가서 무엇을 사 먹게 하옵소서","(35절에 포함되어 있음)","Dismiss them so that they can go to the surrounding farms and villages and buy themselves something to eat.”","Send them away, that they may go into the country round about, and into the villages, and buy themselves bread: for they have nothing to eat.","Send the people away so they can go to the surrounding countryside and villages and buy themselves something to eat.\"","dimitte illos, ut euntes in villas et vicos in circuitu emant sibi, quod manducent “.","שלח אותם וילכו אל החצרים והכפרים מסביב לקנות להם לחם כי אין להם מה לאכל׃"],["48","6","37","예수님께서 “너희가 그들에게 먹을 것을 주어라.” 하고 이르시니, 제자들은 “그러면 저희가 가서 빵을 이백 데나리온어치나 사다가 그들을 먹이라는 말씀입니까?” 하고 물었다.","예수께서 \"너희가 먹을 것을 주어라.\" 하고 이르시자 제자들은 \"그러면 저희가 가서 빵을 이백 데나리온 어치나 사다가 먹이라는 말씀입니까?\" 하고 물었다.","대답하여 이르시되 너희가 먹을 것을 주라 하시니 여짜오되 우리가 가서 이백 데나리온의 떡을 사다 먹이리이까","대답하여 가라사대 너희가 먹을 것을 주라 하시니 여짜오되 우리가 가서 이백 5)데나리온의 떡을 사다 먹이리이까 은전의 명칭","그러나 예수께서 말씀하셨다. \"너희가 먹을 것을 주어라.\" 제자들이 \"무엇을 가지고 먹입니까? 이 많은 사람이 먹을 만큼 사오려면 200데나리온은 있어야 합니다\" 하고 말하자","He said to them in reply, “Give them some food yourselves.” But they said to him, “Are we to buy two hundred days’ wages worth of food and give it to them to eat?”","He answered and said unto them, Give ye them to eat. And they say unto him, Shall we go and buy two hundred pennyworth of bread, and give them to eat?","But he answered, \"You give them something to eat.\" They said to him, \"That would take eight months of a man's wages! Are we to go and spend that much on bread and give it to them to eat?\"","Respondens autem ait illis:  “Date illis vos manducare “. Et dicunt ei:  “Euntes emamus denariis ducentis panes et dabimus eis manducare? “.","ויען ויאמר אליהם תנו אתם להם לאכלה ויאמרו אליו הנלך לקנות לחם במאתים דינר ונתן להם לאכלה׃"],["48","6","38","예수님께서 그들에게, “너희에게 빵이 몇 개나 있느냐? 가서 보아라.” 하고 이르셨다. 그들이 알아보고서, “빵 다섯 개, 그리고 물고기 두 마리가 있습니다.” 하고 대답하였다.","그러자 예수께서는 \"지금 가지고 있는 빵이 몇 개나 되는가 가서 알아보아라.\" 하셨다. 그들이 알아보고 돌아와서 \"빵 다섯 개와 물고기 두 마리가 있습니다.\" 하자","이르시되 너희에게 떡 몇 개나 있는지 가서 보라 하시니 알아보고 이르되 떡 다섯 개와 물고기 두 마리가 있더이다 하거늘","이르시되 너희에게 떡 몇 개나 있느냐 가서 보라 하시니 알아보고 가로되 떡 다섯 개와 물고기 두 마리가 있더이다 하거늘","예수께서 물으셨다. \"지금 가지고 있는 음식이 얼마나 되느냐? 가서 알아보아라.\" 그들이 돌아와서 떡 다섯 덩이와 물고기 두 마리가 있다고 보고하였다.","He asked them, “How many loaves do you have? Go and see.” And when they had found out they said, “Five loaves and two fish.”","He saith unto them, How many loaves have ye? go and see. And when they knew, they say, Five, and two fishes.","\"How many loaves do you have?\" he asked. \"Go and see.\" When they found out, they said, \"Five--and two fish.\"","Et dicit eis:  “Quot panes habetis? Ite, videte “. Et cum cognovissent, dicunt:  “Quinque et duos pisces “.","ויאמר אליהם כמה ככרות לחם יש לכם לכו וראו וידעו ויאמרו חמש ושני דגים׃"],["48","6","39","예수님께서는 제자들에게 명령하시어, 모두 푸른 풀밭에 한 무리씩 어울려 자리 잡게 하셨다.","예수께서는 제자들에게 군중을 풀밭에 떼지어 앉게 하라고 이르셨다.","제자들에게 명하사 그 모든 사람으로 떼를 지어 푸른 잔디 위에 앉게 하시니","제자들을 명하사 그 모든 사람으로 떼를 지어 푸른 잔디 위에 앉게 하시니","예수께서 많은 무리에게 모두 앉으라고 명하시자 그들은 50명씩, 100명씩 떼를 지어 풀밭에 앉았다.","So he gave orders to have them sit down in groups on the green grass.","And he commanded them to make all sit down by companies upon the green grass.","Then Jesus directed them to have all the people sit down in groups on the green grass.","Et praecepit illis, ut accumbere facerent omnes secundum contubernia super viride fenum.","ויצו אותם לשבת כלם חברה חברה לבדה על ירק הדשא׃"],["48","6","40","그래서 사람들은 백 명씩 또는 쉰 명씩 떼를 지어 자리를 잡았다.","군중은 백 명씩 또는 오십 명씩 모여 앉았다.","떼로 백 명씩 또는 오십 명씩 앉은지라","떼로 혹 백씩, 혹 오십씩 앉은지라","(39절에 포함되어 있음)","The people took their places in rows by hundreds and by fifties.","And they sat down in ranks, by hundreds, and by fifties.","So they sat down in groups of hundreds and fifties.","Et discubuerunt secundum areas per centenos et per quinquagenos.","וישבו להם שורות שורות למאות ולחמשים׃"],["48","6","41","예수님께서는 빵 다섯 개와 물고기 두 마리를 손에 들고 하늘을 우러러 찬미를 드리신 다음 빵을 떼어 제자들에게 주시며, 사람들에게 나누어 주도록 하셨다. 물고기 두 마리도 모든 사람에게 나누어 주셨다.","예수께서는 빵 다섯 개와 물고기 두 마리를 손에 드시고 하늘을 우러러 감사의 기도를 드리신 다음, 빵을 떼어 제자들에게 주시며 군중들에게 나누어주라고 하셨다. 그리고 물고기 두 마리도 모든 사람에게 나누어주셨다.","예수께서 떡 다섯 개와 물고기 두 마리를 가지사 하늘을 우러러 축사하시고 떡을 떼어 제자들에게 주어 사람들에게 나누어 주게 하시고 또 물고기 두 마리도 모든 사람에게 나누시매","예수께서 떡 다섯 개와 물고기 두 마리를 가지사 하늘을 우러러 축사하시고 떡을 떼어 제자들에게 주어 사람들 앞에 놓게 하시고 또 물고기 두 마리도 모든 사람에게 나누어 주시매","예수께서는 떡 다섯 덩이와 물고기 두 마리를 손에 들고 하늘을 우러러 감사기도를 드리셨다. 그러고는 떡을 여러 조각으로 나누어 물고기와 함께 제자들에게 주시며 사람들에게 나누어 주라고 하셨다.","Then, taking the five loaves and the two fish and looking up to heaven, he said the blessing, broke the loaves, and gave them to [his] disciples to set before the people; he also divided the two fish among them all.","And when he had taken the five loaves and the two fishes, he looked up to heaven, and blessed, and brake the loaves, and gave them to his disciples to set before them; and the two fishes divided he among them all.","Taking the five loaves and the two fish and looking up to heaven, he gave thanks and broke the loaves. Then he gave them to his disciples to set before the people. He also divided the two fish among them all.","Et acceptis quinque panibus et duobus piscibus, intuens in caelum benedixit et fregit panes et dabat discipulis suis, ut ponerent ante eos; et duos pisces divisit omnibus.","ויקח את חמשת ככרות הלחם ואת שני הדגים וישא עיניו השמימה ויברך ויפרס את הלחם ויתן לתלמידיו לשום לפניהם ואת שני הדגים חלק לכלם׃"],["48","6","42","사람들은 모두 배불리 먹었다.","사람들은 모두 배불리 먹었다.","다 배불리 먹고","다 배불리 먹고","많은 무리가 모두 배불리 먹었다.","They all ate and were satisfied.","And they did all eat, and were filled.","They all ate and were satisfied,","Et manducaverunt omnes et saturati sunt;","ויאכלו כלם וישבעו׃"],["48","6","43","그리고 남은 빵 조각과 물고기를 모으니 열두 광주리에 가득 찼다.","그리고 남은 빵조각과 물고기를 주워 모으니 열두 광주리에 가득 찼으며","남은 떡 조각과 물고기를 열두 바구니에 차게 거두었으며","남은 떡 조각과 물고기를 열 두 바구니에 차게 거두었으며","그리고 남은 떡덩이와 물고기를 주워 모으니 열두 광주리에 가득 찼다. 그날 떡을 먹은 사람은 남자만도 5천 명이나 되었다.","And they picked up twelve wicker baskets full of fragments and what was left of the fish.","And they took up twelve baskets full of the fragments, and of the fishes.","and the disciples picked up twelve basketfuls of broken pieces of bread and fish.","et sustulerunt fragmenta duodecim cophinos plenos, et de piscibus.","וישאו מן הפתותים מלוא סלים שנים עשר וגם מן הדגים׃"],["48","6","44","빵을 먹은 사람은 장정만도 오천 명이었다.","먹은 사람은 남자만도 오천 명이나 되었다.","떡을 먹은 남자는 오천 명이었더라","떡을 먹은 남자가 오천 명이었더라","(43절에 포함되어 있음)","Those who ate [of the loaves] were five thousand men.","And they that did eat of the loaves were about five thousand men.","The number of the men who had eaten was five thousand.","Et erant, qui manducaverunt panes, quinque milia virorum.","והאכלים מן הלחם היו כחמשת אלפי איש׃"],["48","6","45","예수님께서는 곧 제자들을 재촉하시어 배를 타고 건너편 벳사이다로 먼저 가게 하시고, 그동안에 당신께서는 군중을 돌려보내셨다.","그 뒤에 곧 예수께서는 제자들을 재촉하여 배를 태워 건너편 베싸이다로 먼저 가게 하시고 그 동안에 혼자서 군중을 돌려보내셨다.","예수께서 즉시 제자들을 재촉하사 자기가 무리를 보내는 동안에 배 타고 앞서 건너편 벳새다로 가게 하시고","예수께서 즉시 제자들을 재촉하사 자기가 무리를 보내는 동안에 배 타고 앞서 건너편 벳새다로 가게 하시고","그후에 예수께서는 제자들을 재촉하여 배를 타고 건너편 벳새다로 가게 하신 뒤 혼자 남아서 군중을 집으로 돌려보내셨다.","Then he made his disciples get into the boat and precede him to the other side toward Bethsaida, while he dismissed the crowd.","And straightway he constrained his disciples to get into the ship, and to go to the other side before unto Bethsaida, while he sent away the people.","Immediately Jesus made his disciples get into the boat and go on ahead of him to Bethsaida, while he dismissed the crowd.","Et statim coegit discipulos suos ascendere navem, ut praecederent trans fretum ad Bethsaidam, dum ipse dimitteret populum.","ואחרי כן האיץ בתלמידיו לרדת באניה ולעבור לפניו אל עבר הים אל בית צידה עד שלחו את העם׃"],["48","6","46","그들과 작별하신 뒤에 예수님께서는 기도하시려고 산에 가셨다.","그들을 보내시고 나서 기도하시려고 산으로 올라가셨다.","무리를 작별하신 후에 기도하러 산으로 가시니라","무리를 작별하신 후에 기도하러 산으로 가시다","군중과 작별하신 예수께서는 기도하려고 산으로 올라가셨다.","And when he had taken leave of them, he went off to the mountain to pray.","And when he had sent them away, he departed into a mountain to pray.","After leaving them, he went up on a mountainside to pray.","Et cum dimisisset eos, abiit in montem orare.","ויהי אחר שלחו אתם ויעל ההרה להתפלל׃"],["48","6","47","저녁이 되었을 때, 배는 호수 한가운데에 있었고 예수님께서는 혼자 뭍에 계셨다.","날이 저물었을 때에 배는 바다 한가운데 있었고 예수께서는 혼자 육지에 계셨다.","저물매 배는 바다 가운데 있고 예수께서는 홀로 뭍에 계시다가","저물매 배는 바다 가운데 있고 예수는 홀로 뭍에 계시다가","날이 저물었을 때 제자들은 배를 저어 호수 한가운데로 나아가고 있었고 예수께서는 혼자서 뭍에 계셨다.","When it was evening, the boat was far out on the sea and he was alone on shore.","And when even was come, the ship was in the midst of the sea, and he alone on the land.","When evening came, the boat was in the middle of the lake, and he was alone on land.","Et cum sero factum esset, erat navis in medio mari, et ipse solus in terra.","ויהי ערב והאניה באה בתוך הים והוא לבדו ביבשה׃"],["48","6","48","마침 맞바람이 불어 노를 젓느라고 애를 쓰는 제자들을 보시고, 예수님께서는 새벽녘에 호수 위를 걸으시어 그들 쪽으로 가셨다. 그분께서는 그들 곁을 지나가려고 하셨다.","제자들은 마침 역풍을 만나 배를 젓느라고 몹시 애를 쓰고 있었다. 이것을 보신 예수께서는 물 위를 걸어서 제자들 쪽으로 오시다가 그들 곁을 지나쳐 가시려고 하였다. 그것은 새벽 네시쯤이었다.","바람이 거스르므로 제자들이 힘겹게 노 젓는 것을 보시고 밤 사경쯤에 바다 위로 걸어서 그들에게 오사 지나가려고 하시매","바람이 거스리므로 제자들의 괴로이 노 젓는 것을 보시고 밤 사경 즈음에 바다 위로 걸어서 저희에게 오사 지나가려고 하시매","그런데 갑작스런 역풍으로 제자들이 배젓기에 몹시 시달리는 것을 보시고 새벽 4시쯤 되어 물위를 걸어 제자들에게로 가셨다. 그러나 예수께서는 그 곁을 짐짓 스쳐 지나려고 하셨다.","Then he saw that they were tossed about while rowing, for the wind was against them. About the fourth watch of the night, he came toward them walking on the sea. He meant to pass by them.","And he saw them toiling in rowing; for the wind was contrary unto them: and about the fourth watch of the night he cometh unto them, walking upon the sea, and would have passed by them.","He saw the disciples straining at the oars, because the wind was against them. About the fourth watch of the night he went out to them, walking on the lake. He was about to pass by them,","Et videns eos laborantes in remigando, erat enim ventus contrarius eis, circa quartam vigiliam noctis venit ad eos ambulans super mare et volebat praeterire eos.","וירא אותם מתעמלים בשוטם כי הרוח לנגדם ויהי כעת האשמרת הרביעית ויבא אליהם מתהלך על פני הים ויואל לעבור לפניהם׃"],["48","6","49","제자들은 예수님께서 호수 위를 걸으시는 것을 보고, 유령인 줄로 생각하여 비명을 질렀다.","제자들은 예수께서 물 위를 걸어오시는 것을 보고 유령인 줄 알고 비명을 질렀다.","제자들이 그가 바다 위로 걸어 오심을 보고 유령인가 하여 소리 지르니","제자들이 그의 바다 위로 걸어 오심을 보고 유령인가 하여 소리지르니","물 위를 걷는 예수를 보고서 제자들은 예수가 유령인 줄 알고 비명을 질렀다. 예수께서는 곧 제자들에게 \"나다. 겁내지 말아라\"고 말씀하시며","But when they saw him walking on the sea, they thought it was a ghost and cried out.","But when they saw him walking upon the sea, they supposed it had been a spirit, and cried out:","but when they saw him walking on the lake, they thought he was a ghost. They cried out,","At illi, ut viderunt eum ambulantem super mare, putaverunt phantasma esse et exclamaverunt;","והם בראתם אתו מתהלך על פני הים חשבו כי מראה רוח הוא ויצעקו׃"]]