[["14","12","7","주님께서는 그들이 자신을 낮추는 것을 보시고, 스마야에게 말씀을 내리셨다. “그들이 자신들을 낮추었으니 내가 그들을 멸망시키지는 않고, 가까스로 난을 피하게 해 주겠다. 나는 시삭을 시켜 내 분노를 예루살렘에 다 쏟지는 않겠다.","이렇게 머리를 숙이는 것을 보시고 야훼께서는 다시 스마야에게 말씀을 내리셨다. \"이렇게 머리를 숙이니, 나는 이 백성을 멸하지 아니하고 아슬아슬하게 난을 피하도록 하리라. 시삭을 시켜 예루살렘에 나의 분노를 다 쏟지는 않겠지만,","여호와께서 그들이 스스로 겸비함을 보신지라 여호와의 말씀이 스마야에게 임하여 이르시되 그들이 스스로 겸비하였으니 내가 멸하지 아니하고 저희를 조금 구원하여 나의 노를 시삭의 손을 통하여 예루살렘에 쏟지 아니하리라","여호와께서 저희의 스스로 겸비함을 보신지라 여호와의 말씀이 스마야에게 임하여 가라사대 저희가 스스로 겸비하였으니 내가 멸하지 아니하고 대강 구원하여 나의 노를 시삭의 손으로 예루살렘에 쏟지 아니하리라","그들이 자신의 죄를 깨달아 뉘우치자 여호와께서 스마야에게 말씀하셨다. \"스스로 허물을 깨달아 고백하였으니 내가 그들을 죽이지 않겠다. 내가 시삭이 예루살렘을 전멸시킬 정도로 화를 내지는 않겠다. 그러니 이번에도 전멸을 당하지는 않을 것이다.","When the LORD saw that they had humbled themselves, the word of the LORD came to Shemaiah: Because they have humbled themselves, I will not destroy them; I will give them some deliverance, and my wrath shall not be poured out upon Jerusalem through Shishak.","And when the LORD saw that they humbled themselves, the word of the LORD came to Shemaiah, saying, They have humbled themselves; therefore I will not destroy them, but I will grant them some deliverance; and my wrath shall not be poured out upon Jerusalem by the hand of Shishak.","When the LORD saw that they humbled themselves, this word of the LORD came to Shemaiah: \"Since they have humbled themselves, I will not destroy them but will soon give them deliverance. My wrath will not be poured out on Jerusalem through Shishak.","Cumque vidisset Dominus quod humiliati essent, factus est sermo Domini ad Semeiam dicens:  “Quia humiliati sunt, non disperdam eos daboque eis mox effugium, et non effundetur furor meus super Ierusalem per manum Sesac.","ובראות יהוה כי נכנעו היה דבר יהוה אל שמעיה לאמר נכנעו לא אשחיתם ונתתי להם כמעט לפליטה ולא תתך חמתי בירושלם ביד שישק׃"],["14","12","8","그러나 그들을 시삭의 종이 되게 하여 나를 섬기는 것과 세상의 나라들을 섬기는 것이 어떻게 다른지 알게 하겠다.”","이 백성은 시삭의 종이 되어, 나를 섬기는 것과 세상 임금들을 섬기는 것이 어떻게 다른지 알게 되리라.\"","그러나 그들이 시삭의 종이 되어 나를 섬기는 것과 세상 나라들을 섬기는 것이 어떠한지 알게 되리라 하셨더라","그러나 저희가 시삭의 종이 되어 나를 섬기는 것과 열국을 섬기는 것이 어떠한지 알게 되리라 하셨더라","그러나 나를 섬기는 것과 다른 나라의 왕들을 섬기는 것이 얼마나 다른지 알 수 있도록 시삭에게 정복당하게 할 것이다.\"","But they shall be his servants. Then they will know what it is to serve me and what it is to serve the kingdoms of the earth.","Nevertheless they shall be his servants; that they may know my service, and the service of the kingdoms of the countries.","They will, however, become subject to him, so that they may learn the difference between serving me and serving the kings of other lands.\"","Verumtamen servient ei, ut sciant distantiam servitutis meae et servitutis regni terrarum “.","כי יהיו לו לעבדים וידעו עבודתי ועבודת ממלכות הארצות׃"],["14","12","9","이집트 임금 시삭은 예루살렘에 올라와서, 주님의 집에 있는 보물과 왕궁의 보물을 가져갔다. 모조리 가져가 버렸다. 또한 솔로몬이 만든 금 방패들도 가져갔다.","1)이집트 왕 시삭은 예루살렘을 침공하여 야훼의 성전 창고와 왕실 창고를 모두 털어갔다. 또 솔로몬이 만든 금방패들도 빼앗아갔다.9-11절에 대해서는 1열왕 14:25-28 참조.","애굽 왕 시삭이 올라와서 예루살렘을 치고 여호와의 전 보물과 왕궁의 보물을 모두 빼앗고 솔로몬이 만든 금 방패도 빼앗은지라","애굽 왕 시삭이 올라와서 예루살렘을 치고 여호와의 전 보물과 왕궁의 보물을 몰수히 빼앗고 솔로몬의 만든 금방패도 빼앗은지라","그래서 시삭이 예루살렘으로 밀고 들어왔다. 그는 성전의 보물창고와 왕궁의 보물창고를 모조리 털어 갔다. 또 솔로몬이 만들어 두었던 금방패들도 남김없이 가지고 갔다.","Thereupon Shishak, king of Egypt, attacked Jerusalem and took away the treasures of the house of the LORD and the treasures of the house of the king. He took everything, including the gold shields that Solomon had made.","So Shishak king of Egypt came up against Jerusalem, and took away the treasures of the house of the LORD, and the treasures of the king's house; he took all: he carried away also the shields of gold which Solomon had made.","When Shishak king of Egypt attacked Jerusalem, he carried off the treasures of the temple of the LORD and the treasures of the royal palace. He took everything, including the gold shields Solomon had made.","Ascendit itaque Sesac rex Aegypti in Ierusalem, sublatis thesauris domus Domini et domus regis; omniaque secum tulit et clipeos aureos, quos fecerat Salomon.","ויעל שישק מלך מצרים על ירושלם ויקח את אצרות בית יהוה ואת אצרות בית המלך את הכל לקח ויקח את מגני הזהב אשר עשה שלמה׃"],["14","12","10","그러자 르하브암 임금은 금 방패 대신 청동 방패들을 만들어, 왕궁 대문을 지키는 호위대 장수들의 손에 맡겼다.","그래서 르호보암 왕은 그 대신 놋방패를 만들어 궁전 문을 경비하는 근위대 장교들을 무장시켰다.","르호보암 왕이 그 대신에 놋으로 방패를 만들어 궁문을 지키는 경호 책임자들의 손에 맡기매","르호보암왕이 그 대신에 놋으로 방패를 만들어 궁문을 지키는 시위대 장관들의 손에 맡기매","르호보암은 약탈당한 금방패 대신 놋쇠로 둥근 방패를 작게 만들어 왕궁의 입구에 배치된 경비대장들에게 주었다.","To replace them, King Rehoboam made bronze shields, which he entrusted to the officers of the attendants on duty at the entrance of the king’s house.","Instead of which king Rehoboam made shields of brass, and committed them to the hands of the chief of the guard, that kept the entrance of the king's house.","So King Rehoboam made bronze shields to replace them and assigned these to the commanders of the guard on duty at the entrance to the royal palace.","Pro quibus fecit rex Roboam aeneos et tradidit illos principibus cursorum, qui custodiebant vestibulum palatii.","ויעש המלך רחבעם תחתיהם מגני נחשת והפקיד על יד שרי הרצים השמרים פתח בית המלך׃"],["14","12","11","임금이 주님의 집에 들어갈 때마다, 호위병들은 그 청동 방패를 들고 들어갔다가 다시 호위대실로 가져다 두곤 하였다.","왕이 야훼의 전에 출입할 때마다 근위대원들은 그 놋방패를 들고 호위하여 섰다가 다시 근위대실에 가져다 두곤 하였다.","왕이 여호와의 전에 들어갈 때마다 경호하는 자가 그 방패를 들고 갔다가 경호실로 도로 가져갔더라","왕이 여호와의 전에 들어갈 때마다 시위하는 자가 그 방패를 들고 갔다가 시위소로 도로 가져갔더라","왕을 수행하는 경비원들은 왕이 여호와의 성전으로 들어갈 때마다 이 방패를 들고 왔다가 다시 보관소에 가져다 두었다.","Whenever the king visited the house of the LORD, the attendants would carry them, and then return them to the guardroom.","And when the king entered into the house of the LORD, the guard came and fetched them, and brought them again into the guard chamber.","Whenever the king went to the LORD'S temple, the guards went with him, bearing the shields, and afterward they returned them to the guardroom.","Cumque introiret rex domum Domini, veniebant cursores et tollebant eos; iterumque referebant eos ad armamentarium suum.","ויהי מדי בוא המלך בית יהוה באו הרצים ונשאום והשבום אל תא הרצים׃"],["14","12","12","르하브암이 자신을 낮추었기 때문에, 주님께서는 그에게서 진노를 거두시어 그를 완전히 멸망시키지는 않으셨으며, 유다도 형편이 좋아졌다.","그가 머리를 숙였기 때문에 야훼께서는 그에게서 진노를 거두셨다. 그리하여 그는 완전히 멸망하지 않았고 유다 나라도 모든 일이 다시 펴이게 되었다.","르호보암이 스스로 겸비하였고 유다에 선한 일도 있으므로 여호와께서 노를 돌이키사 다 멸하지 아니하셨더라","르호보암이 스스로 겸비하였고 유다에 선한 일도 있으므로 여호와께서 노를 돌이키사 다 멸하지 아니하셨더라","르호보암이 자신의 죄를 깨달은 것을 보시고, 여호와께서는 분노를 거두어 그를 완전히 멸망시키지는 않으셨다. 그뿐만 아니라 유다 나라에는 아직도 여호와께 충성하는 참된 이스라엘 백성이 많았기 때문이었다.","Because he had humbled himself, the anger of the LORD turned from him so as not to destroy him completely; in Judah, moreover, there was some good.","And when he humbled himself, the wrath of the LORD turned from him, that he would not destroy him altogether: and also in Judah things went well.","Because Rehoboam humbled himself, the LORD'S anger turned from him, and he was not totally destroyed. Indeed, there was some good in Judah.","Verumtamen, quia humiliatus est, aversa est ab eo ira Domini, nec deletus est penitus; siquidem et in Iuda inventa sunt opera bona.","ובהכנעו שב ממנו אף יהוה ולא להשחית לכלה וגם ביהודה היה דברים טובים׃"],["14","12","13","르하브암 임금은 이렇게 예루살렘에서 세력을 굳히고 다스렸다. 르하브암은 마흔한 살에 임금이 되어, 주님께서 당신의 이름을 두시려고 이스라엘의 모든 지파에서 선택하신 도성 예루살렘에서 열일곱 해 동안 다스렸다. 그의 어머니 이름은 나아마인데 암몬 여자였다.","르호보암 왕은 예루살렘에서 왕위를 굳혔다. 그는 사십일 세에 왕위에 올랐으며, 야훼께서 이스라엘 온 지파 가운데서 선택하시어 당신의 이름을 붙이신 예루살렘에서 십칠 년간 다스렸다. 그의 어머니 이름은 나아마라고 하는 암몬 여자였다.","르호보암 왕은 예루살렘에서 스스로 세력을 굳게 하여 다스리니라 르호보암이 왕위에 오를 때에 나이가 사십일 세라 예루살렘 곧 여호와께서 이스라엘의 모든 지파 중에서 택하여 그의 이름을 두신 성에서 십칠 년 동안 다스리니라 르호보암의 어머니의 이름은 나아마요 암몬 여인이더라","르호보암왕이 예루살렘에서 스스로 강하게 하여 치리하니라 르호보암이 위에 나아갈 때에 나이 사십 일세라 예루살렘 곧 여호와께서 이스라엘 모든 지파 중에서 택하여 그 이름을 두신 성에서 십 칠년을 치리하니라 르호보암의 모친의 이름은 나아마라 암몬 여인이더라","이리하여 르호보암이 자기의 통치권을 다시 강화시키고 계속 왕으로 다스릴 수가 있었다. 르호보암은 41세에 왕위에 올라 여호와께서 자기 백성과 가까이 계시기 위하여 이스라엘의 모든 지파들 중에서 선택하신 예루살렘 도성에서 17년 동안 통치하였다. 그의 어머니는 암몬 족속의 여인 나아마였다.","King Rehoboam was firmly in power in Jerusalem and continued to rule. Rehoboam was forty-one years old when he became king, and he reigned seventeen years in Jerusalem, the city in which, out of all the tribes of Israel, the LORD chose to set his name. His mother’s name was Naamah, the Ammonite.","So king Rehoboam strengthened himself in Jerusalem, and reigned: for Rehoboam was one and forty years old when he began to reign, and he reigned seventeen years in Jerusalem, the city which the LORD had chosen out of all the tribes of Israel, to put his name there. And his mother's name was Naamah an Ammonitess.","King Rehoboam established himself firmly in Jerusalem and continued as king. He was forty-one years old when he became king, and he reigned seventeen years in Jerusalem, the city the LORD had chosen out of all the tribes of Israel in which to put his Name. His mother's name was Naamah; she was an Ammonite.","Confortatus est igitur rex Roboam in Ierusalem atque regnavit. Quadraginta autem et unius anni erat, cum regnare coepisset, et decem septemque annis regnavit in Ierusalem urbe, quam elegit Dominus, ut confirmaret nomen suum ibi de cunctis tribubus Israel. Nomenque matris eius Naama Ammanitis.","ויתחזק המלך רחבעם בירושלם וימלך כי בן ארבעים ואחת שנה רחבעם במלכו ושבע עשרה שנה מלך בירושלם העיר אשר בחר יהוה לשום את שמו שם מכל שבטי ישראל ושם אמו נעמה העמנית׃"],["14","12","14","르하브암은 주님을 찾기로 마음을 굳히지 않아 악을 저지르게 되었다.","르호보암은 야훼를 찾는 데 마음을 쓰지 않고 악한 일을 하였다.","르호보암이 악을 행하였으니 이는 그가 여호와를 구하는 마음을 굳게 하지 아니함이었더라","르호보암이 마음을 오로지하여 여호와를 구하지 아니함으로 악을 행하였더라","르호보암은 마음이 여호와께만 있지 않았으므로 자주 악한 일을 저질렀다.","He did evil, for he had not set his heart to seek the LORD.","And he did evil, because he prepared not his heart to seek the LORD.","He did evil because he had not set his heart on seeking the LORD.","Fecit autem malum et non praeparavit cor suum, ut quaereret Dominum.","ויעש הרע כי לא הכין לבו לדרוש את יהוה׃"],["14","12","15","르하브암의 행적은 처음부터 끝까지 스마야 예언자와 이또 환시가의 기록에 쓰여 있지 않은가? 르하브암과 예로보암 사이에는 늘 전쟁이 있었다.","르호보암의 행적은 처음부터 끝까지 예언자 스마야와 선견자 이또의 역사서에 기록되어 있다. 르호보암과 여로보암 사이에는 전쟁이 그칠 날이 없었다.","르호보암의 처음부터 끝까지의 행적은 선지자 스마야와 선견자 잇도의 족보책에 기록되지 아니하였느냐 르호보암과 여로보암 사이에 항상 전쟁이 있으니라","르호보암의 시종 행적은 선지자 스마야와 선견자 잇도의 족보책에 기록되지 아니하였느냐 르호보암과 여로보암 사이에 항상 전쟁이 있으니라","르호보암의 행적에 대하여 더 말할 수 있는 것은 처음부터 끝까지 예언자 스마야의 책과 선견자 잇도가 쓴 족보에서 읽을 수 있다. 르호보암과 여로보암은 끊임없이 서로 전쟁을 벌였다.","The acts of Rehoboam, first and last, are recorded in the history of Shemaiah the prophet and of Iddo the seer (his family record). There were wars between Rehoboam and Jeroboam all their days.","Now the acts of Rehoboam, first and last, are they not written in the book of Shemaiah the prophet, and of Iddo the seer concerning genealogies? And there were wars between Rehoboam and Jeroboam continually.","As for the events of Rehoboam's reign, from beginning to end, are they not written in the records of Shemaiah the prophet and of Iddo the seer that deal with genealogies? There was continual warfare between Rehoboam and Jeroboam.","Opera vero Roboam prima et novissima scripta sunt in verbis Semeiae prophetae et Addo videntis, genealogia quoque et bella, quae erant inter Roboam et Ieroboam cunctis diebus.","ודברי רחבעם הראשנים והאחרונים הלא הם כתובים בדברי שמעיה הנביא ועדו החזה להתיחש ומלחמות רחבעם וירבעם כל הימים׃"],["14","12","16","르하브암은 자기 조상들과 함께 잠들어 다윗 성에 묻히고, 그의 아들 아비야가 그 뒤를 이어 임금이 되었다.","르호보암이 세상을 떠나 다윗 성에 안장되자 그의 아들 아비야가 뒤를 이어 왕위에 올랐다.","르호보암이 그의 조상들과 함께 누우매 다윗 성에 장사되고 그의 아들 아비야가 그를 대신하여 왕이 되니라","르호보암이 그 열조와 함께 자매 다윗성에 장사되고 그 아들 아비야가 대신하여 왕이 되니라","르호보암이 죽어 다윗성에 안장되자, 그의 아들 아비야가 뒤를 이어 왕위에 올랐다.","Rehoboam rested with his ancestors; he was buried in the City of David. His son Abijah succeeded him as king.","And Rehoboam slept with his fathers, and was buried in the city of David: and Abijah his son reigned in his stead.","Rehoboam rested with his fathers and was buried in the City of David. And Abijah his son succeeded him as king.","Et dormivit Roboam cum patribus suis sepultusque est in civitate David; et regnavit Abia filius eius pro eo.","וישכב רחבעם עם אבתיו ויקבר בעיר דויד וימלך אביה בנו תחתיו׃"],["14","13","1","예로보암 임금 제십팔년에 아비야가 유다의 임금이 되어,","아비야가 유다 왕이 된 것은 여로보암 왕 제십팔년이었다.","여로보암 왕 열여덟째 해에 아비야가 유다의 왕이 되고","여로보암왕 제 십팔년에 아비야가 유다 왕이 되고","아비야가 유다 왕위에 오른 것은 북왕국 이스라엘 왕 여로보암의 통치 18년째 되는 해였다.","In the eighteenth year of King Jeroboam, Abijah became king of Judah;","Now in the eighteenth year of king Jeroboam began Abijah to reign over Judah.","In the eighteenth year of the reign of Jeroboam, Abijah became king of Judah,","Anno octavo decimo regis Ieroboam regnavit Abia su per Iudam.","בשנת שמונה עשרה למלך ירבעם וימלך אביה על יהודה׃"],["14","13","2","예루살렘에서 세 해 동안 다스렸다. 그의 어머니 이름은 미카야인데 기브아 출신 우리엘의 딸이었다. 아비야와 예로보암 사이에 전쟁이 벌어졌다.","그는 삼 년 동안 예루살렘에서 다스렸다. 그의 어머니는 기브아 사람 우리엘의 딸로서 이름은 미가야라고 하였다.","예루살렘에서 삼 년 동안 다스리니라 그의 어머니의 이름은 미가야요 기브아 사람 우리엘의 딸이더라 아비야가 여로보암과 더불어 싸울새","예루살렘에서 삼년을 치리하니라 그 모친의 이름은 미가야라 기브아 사람 우리엘의 딸이더라 아비야가 여로보암으로 더불어 싸울쌔","아비야는 예루살렘에서 3년 동안 통치하였다. 그의 어머니는 기브아 사람 우리엘의 딸 미가야였다. 아비야는 다시 여로보암과 전쟁을 시작하여","he reigned three years in Jerusalem. His mother was named Micaiah, daughter of Uriel of Gibeah. There was war between Abijah and Jeroboam.","He reigned three years in Jerusalem. His mother's name also was Michaiah the daughter of Uriel of Gibeah. And there was war between Abijah and Jeroboam.","and he reigned in Jerusalem three years. His mother's name was Maacah, a daughter of Uriel of Gibeah. There was war between Abijah and Jeroboam.","Tribus annis regnavit in Ierusalem. Nomenque matris eius Michaia filia Uriel de Gabaa. Et erat bellum inter Abiam et Ieroboam.","שלוש שנים מלך בירושלם ושם אמו מיכיהו בת אוריאל מן גבעה ומלחמה היתה בין אביה ובין ירבעם׃"],["14","13","3","아비야는 전투에 능한 정예 용사 사십만을 이끌고 싸우러 나갔고, 그에게 맞서 예로보암은 정예 용사 팔십만을 거느리고 전열을 갖추었다.","아비야는 용맹한 정예군 사십만을 이끌고 싸우러 나갔고, 여로보암은 용맹한 정예군 팔십만을 거느리고 대진하였다.","아비야는 싸움에 용감한 군사 사십만 명을 택하여 싸움을 준비하였고 여로보암은 큰 용사 팔십만 명을 택하여 그와 대진한지라","아비야는 택한바 싸움에 용맹한 군사 사십만으로 싸움을 예비하였고 여로보암은 택한바 큰 용사 팔십만으로 대진한지라","40만 명의 정예 부대를 이끌고 공격해 들어갔다. 여로보암은 80만 명의 정예 부대를 이끌고 대치하였다.","Abijah joined battle with a force of four hundred thousand picked warriors, while Jeroboam lined up against him in battle with eight hundred thousand picked and valiant warriors.","And Abijah set the battle in array with an army of valiant men of war, even four hundred thousand chosen men: Jeroboam also set the battle in array against him with eight hundred thousand chosen men, being mighty men of valour.","Abijah went into battle with a force of four hundred thousand able fighting men, and Jeroboam drew up a battle line against him with eight hundred thousand able troops.","Cumque inisset Abia certamen et haberet bellicosissimos viros electorum quadringenta milia, Ieroboam instruxit e contra aciem octingenta milia virorum, qui et ipsi electi erant et ad bella fortissimi.","ויאסר אביה את המלחמה בחיל גבורי מלחמה ארבע מאות אלף איש בחור וירבעם ערך עמו מלחמה בשמונה מאות אלף איש בחור גבור חיל׃"],["14","13","4","그때에 아비야가 에프라임 산악 지방에 있는 츠마라임 산 위에 서서 말하였다. “예로보암과 온 이스라엘은 내 말을 들어라.","아비야는 에브라임 산악 지대에 있는 스마라임 산 위에 서서 말하였다. \"여로보암과 온 이스라엘은 내 말을 들어라.","아비야가 에브라임 산 중 스마라임 산 위에 서서 이르되 여로보암과 이스라엘 무리들아 다 들으라","아비야가 에브라임산 중 스마라임산 위에 서서 가로되 여로보암과 이스라엘 무리들아 다 들으라","양쪽 군대가 서로 대치하고 있을 때에, 아비야가 에브라임 산지의 스마라임산으로 올라가서 외쳤다. \"여로보암과 모든 이스라엘 백성들아, 내 말을 똑똑히 들어라!","Abijah stood on Mount Zemaraim, which is in the highlands of Ephraim, and said: “Listen to me, Jeroboam and all Israel!","And Abijah stood up upon mount Zemaraim, which is in mount Ephraim, and said, Hear me, thou Jeroboam, and all Israel;","Abijah stood on Mount Zemaraim, in the hill country of Ephraim, and said, \"Jeroboam and all Israel, listen to me!","Stetit igitur Abia super montem Semaraim, qui est in monte Ephraim, et ait:  “Audi, Ieroboam et omnis Israel:","ויקם אביה מעל להר צמרים אשר בהר אפרים ויאמר שמעוני ירבעם וכל ישראל׃"],["14","13","5","너희는 주 이스라엘의 하느님께서 소금 계약으로, 다윗과 그 자손들에게 이스라엘을 다스릴 왕권을 영원히 주신 것을 알지 않느냐?","너희도 알다시피 이스라엘의 하느님 야훼께서는 다윗과 소금으로 계약을 맺으시고 이스라엘을 다스릴 왕권을 그와 그의 후손에게 영원히 주셨는데","이스라엘 하나님 여호와께서 소금 언약으로 이스라엘 나라를 영원히 다윗과 그의 자손에게 주신 것을 너희가 알 것 아니냐","이스라엘 하나님 여호와께서 소금 언약으로 이스라엘 나라를 영원히 다윗과 그 자손에게 주신 것을 너희가 알것이 아니냐","이스라엘의 하나님 여호와께서 다윗과 영원히 변하지 않을 계약을 체결하셨던 일은 너희도 분명히 알고 있을 것이다. 그때에 여호와께서는 다윗과 그의 자손들에게 온 이스라엘을 통치할 권세를 영원히 맡겨 주셨다.","Do you not know that the LORD, the God of Israel, has given David kingship over Israel forever, to him and to his sons, by a covenant of salt?","Ought ye not to know that the LORD God of Israel gave the kingdom over Israel to David for ever, even to him and to his sons by a covenant of salt?","Don't you know that the LORD, the God of Israel, has given the kingship of Israel to David and his descendants forever by a covenant of salt?","Num ignoratis quod Dominus, Deus Israel, dederit regnum David super Israel in sempiternum, ipsi et filiis eius, pactum salis?","הלא לכם לדעת כי יהוה אלהי ישראל נתן ממלכה לדויד על ישראל לעולם לו ולבניו ברית מלח׃"],["14","13","6","그런데도 다윗의 아들 솔로몬의 신하, 느밧의 아들 예로보암이 일어나 자기 주군에게 반역하였다.","다윗의 아들 솔로몬의 신하였던 느밧의 아들 여로보암이 일어나 상전에게 반역하였다.","다윗의 아들 솔로몬의 신하 느밧의 아들 여로보암이 일어나 자기의 주를 배반하고","다윗의 아들 솔로몬의 신복 느밧의 아들 여로보암이 일어나 그 주를 배반하고","그런데도 솔로몬의 신하였던 여로보암은 주인을 배반하고 스스로 왕이 되었다.","Yet Jeroboam, son of Nebat, the servant of Solomon, son of David, arose and rebelled against his lord!","Yet Jeroboam the son of Nebat, the servant of Solomon the son of David, is risen up, and hath rebelled against his lord.","Yet Jeroboam son of Nebat, an official of Solomon son of David, rebelled against his master.","Et surrexit Ieroboam filius Nabat servus Salomonis filii David et rebellavit contra dominum suum;","ויקם ירבעם בן נבט עבד שלמה בן דויד וימרד על אדניו׃"],["14","13","7","그래서 건달들과 무뢰한들이 그에게 몰려들어, 솔로몬의 아들 르하브암에게 맞섰다. 그때에 르하브암은 아직 젊고 마음이 연약하여 그들에게 맞설 힘이 없었다.","무뢰배와 건달들이 그와 함께 작당하여 솔로몬의 아들 르호보암을 꺾었다. 르호보암은 나이도 어렸고 마음도 약하였으므로 당해 내지 못하고 말았다.","난봉꾼과 잡배가 모여 따르므로 스스로 강하게 되어 솔로몬의 아들 르호보암을 대적하였으나 그 때에 르호보암이 어리고 마음이 연약하여 그들의 입을 능히 막지 못하였었느니라","난봉과 비류가 모여 좇으므로 스스로 강하게 하여 솔로몬의 아들 르호보암을 대적하나 그 때에 르호보암이 어리고 마음이 연약하여 능히 막지 못하였었느니라","그리고 쓸모없고 포학하기만 한 무리들이 여로보암에게 몰려들자 솔로몬의 아들 르호보암보다 더 강하게 되었다. 그때 르호보암은 그러한 폭도들을 진압할 수 있을 만큼 경험도 없고 마음도 여린 사람이었다.","Worthless men, scoundrels, joined him and overcame Rehoboam, son of Solomon, when Rehoboam was young and inexperienced, and no match for them.","And there are gathered unto him vain men, the children of Belial, and have strengthened themselves against Rehoboam the son of Solomon, when Rehoboam was young and tenderhearted, and could not withstand them.","Some worthless scoundrels gathered around him and opposed Rehoboam son of Solomon when he was young and indecisive and not strong enough to resist them.","congregatique sunt ad eum viri vanissimi, filii Belial, et praevaluerunt contra Roboam filium Salomonis. Porro Roboam erat iuvenis et corde pavido nec potuit resistere eis.","ויקבצו עליו אנשים רקים בני בליעל ויתאמצו על רחבעם בן שלמה ורחבעם היה נער ורך לבב ולא התחזק לפניהם׃"],["14","13","8","지금 너희는 수많은 무리를 이루고, 예로보암이 신이라고 만들어 준 금송아지들이 너희와 함께 있다고 해서, 다윗 자손들의 손에 맡겨진 주님의 나라에 맞설 힘이 있다고 생각하느냐?","너희는 지금 감히 다윗 후손의 수중에 든 야훼의 왕권에 항거하고 있는 것이다. 너희가 지금 수많은 무리를 거느리고 거기에다가 여로보암이 하느님이랍시고 만들어준 금송아지마저 끌고 나왔구나.","이제 너희가 또 다윗 자손의 손으로 다스리는 여호와의 나라를 대적하려 하는도다 너희는 큰 무리요 또 여로보암이 너희를 위하여 신으로 만든 금송아지들이 너희와 함께 있도다","이제 너희가 또 다윗 자손의 손으로 다스리는 여호와의 나라를 대적하려 하는도다 너희는 큰 무리요 또 여로보암이 너희를 위하여 신으로 만든 금송아지가 너희와 함께 있도다","그런데 이제 너희가 또 다시 일어나 여호와께서 친히 다윗의 후손에게 맡겨 주신 이 나라를 뒤엎으려 하고 있다. 이것은 바로 여호와의 통치권을 빼앗는 일이다. 너희는 우리보다 배나 많은 군대에다가 여로보암이 신으로 만들어 섬기는 금송아지까지 끌고 나왔다.","But now, do you think you are a match for the kingdom of the LORD led by the descendants of David, simply because you are a huge multitude and have with you the golden calves which Jeroboam made you for gods?","And now ye think to withstand the kingdom of the LORD in the hand of the sons of David; and ye be a great multitude, and there are with your golden calves, which Jeroboam made you for gods.","\"And now you plan to resist the kingdom of the LORD, which is in the hands of David's descendants. You are indeed a vast army and have with you the golden calves that Jeroboam made to be your gods.","Nunc ergo vos dicitis quod resistere possitis regno Domini, quod possidet per filios David, habetisque grandem populi multitudinem atque vitulos aureos, quos fecit vobis Ieroboam in deos.","ועתה אתם אמרים להתחזק לפני ממלכת יהוה ביד בני דויד ואתם המון רב ועמכם עגלי זהב אשר עשה לכם ירבעם לאלהים׃"],["14","13","9","너희는 아론의 자손들인 주님의 사제들과 레위인들을 쫓아내고, 다른 나라 민족들처럼 너희 스스로 사제들을 만들지 않았느냐? 수송아지 한 마리나 숫양 일곱 마리를 끌고 오는 자마다 사제 직무를 맡는다면, 신이 아닌 것들의 사제가 되는 것이 아니냐?","너희는 아론의 후손인 사제들과 레위인들까지 내쫓고 이방인들처럼 너희 마음대로 사제를 내세우지 않았느냐? 누구나 성직을 맡겠다고 하여 수송아지 한 마리와 숫양 일곱 마리만 끌고 오면 허수아비 사제가 되는 판이다.","너희가 아론 자손인 여호와의 제사장들과 레위 사람들을 쫓아내고 이방 백성들의 풍속을 따라 제사장을 삼지 아니하였느냐 누구를 막론하고 어린 수송아지 한 마리와 숫양 일곱 마리를 끌고 와서 장립을 받고자 하는 자마다 허무한 신들의 제사장이 될 수 있도다","너희가 아론 자손 된 여호와의 제사장과 레위 사람을 쫓아내고 이방 백성의 풍속을 좇아 제사장을 삼지 아니하였느냐 무론 누구든지 수송아지 하나와 수양 일곱을 끌고 와서 장립을 받고자하는 자마다 허무한 신의 제사장이 될 수 있도다","그러나 아론의 후손인 여호와의 제사장들과 레위 사람들을 내쫓고 그 대신에 세상의 다른 민족들처럼 너희 마음대로 제사장들을 세운 자들이 너희가 아니냐? 누구든지 수송아지 한 마리와 숫 양 7마리를 끌고 와서 제물로 바치면 그들을 모두 신도 아닌 온갖 우상의 제사장으로 삼은 자들이 바로 너희가 아니냐?","Have you not expelled the priests of the LORD, the sons of Aaron, and the Levites, and made for yourselves priests like the peoples of other lands? Everyone who comes to consecrate himself with a young bull and seven rams becomes a priest of no-gods.","Have ye not cast out the priests of the LORD, the sons of Aaron, and the Levites, and have made you priests after the manner of the nations of other lands? so that whosoever cometh to consecrate himself with a young bullock and seven rams, the same may be a priest of them that are no gods.","But didn't you drive out the priests of the LORD, the sons of Aaron, and the Levites, and make priests of your own as the peoples of other lands do? Whoever comes to consecrate himself with a young bull and seven rams may become a priest of what are not gods.","Et eiecistis sacerdotes Domini filios Aaron atque Levitas et fecistis vobis sacerdotes sicut populi terrarum. Quicumque venerit et initiaverit manum suam in tauro de bobus et in arietibus septem, fit sacerdos eorum, qui non sunt dii.","הלא הדחתם את כהני יהוה את בני אהרן והלוים ותעשו לכם כהנים כעמי הארצות כל הבא למלא ידו בפר בן בקר ואילם שבעה והיה כהן ללא אלהים׃"],["14","13","10","그러나 우리는 주님만이 우리의 하느님이시기에 그분을 저버리지 않았다. 주님을 섬기는 사제들은 아론의 자손들이며, 레위인들이 그들을 돕는다.","그러나 우리는 그렇지 않다. 우리 하느님은 야훼시다. 우리는 그를 저버리지 않았다. 야훼를 섬기는 사제들은 아론의 후손들이며, 레위인들도 함께 일을 하고 있다.","우리에게는 여호와께서 우리 하나님이 되시니 우리가 그를 배반하지 아니하였고 여호와를 섬기는 제사장들이 있으니 아론의 자손이요 또 레위 사람들이 수종 들어","우리에게는 여호와께서 우리 하나님이 되시니 그를 우리가 배반치 아니하였고 여호와를 섬기는 제사장들이 있으니 아론의 자손이요 또 레위 사람이 수종을 들어","그러나 우리는 변함없이 우리의 하나님 여호와만 섬기고 있다. 우리는 여호와를 버리지 않았다! 아론의 후손들은 여전히 제사장으로 여호와를 섬기며, 레위 사람들은 그들이 맡은 임무를 수행하고 있다.","But as for us, the LORD is our God, and we have not abandoned him. The priests ministering to the LORD are sons of Aaron, and the Levites also have their offices.","But as for us, the LORD is our God, and we have not forsaken him; and the priests, which minister unto the LORD, are the sons of Aaron, and the Levites wait upon their business:","\"As for us, the LORD is our God, and we have not forsaken him. The priests who serve the LORD are sons of Aaron, and the Levites assist them.","Noster autem Deus Dominus est, quem non reliquimus; sacerdotesque ministrant Domino de filiis Aaron, et Levitae sunt in ordine suo.","ואנחנו יהוה אלהינו ולא עזבנהו וכהנים משרתים ליהוה בני אהרן והלוים במלאכת׃"],["14","13","11","그들은 날마다 아침저녁으로 주님께 번제물을 살라 바치고 향기로운 향을 피우며, 정결한 상 위에 빵을 차려 놓는다. 금 등잔대에는 저녁마다 등불을 켜 놓는다. 우리는 이렇게 주 우리 하느님의 명령을 지키지만, 너희는 그분을 저버렸다.","이들은 아침 저녁으로 우리 하느님 야훼께 번제를 드린다. 또 아름다운 향기가 나는 향을 피우고 정한 제사 상에 떡을 차려놓으며, 저녁마다 금등에 불을 켠다. 우리는 우리 하느님 야훼께서 정해 주신 법도를 그대로 지키고 있는데 너희는 그를 배반하였다.","매일 아침 저녁으로 여호와 앞에 번제를 드리며 분향하며 또 깨끗한 상에 진설병을 놓고 또 금 등잔대가 있어 그 등에 저녁마다 불을 켜나니 우리는 우리 하나님 여호와의 계명을 지키나 너희는 그를 배반하였느니라","조석으로 여호와 앞에 번제를 드리며 분향하며 또 깨끗한 상에 진설병을 놓고 또 금 등대가 있어 그 등에 저녁마다 불을 켜나니 우리는 우리 하나님 여호와의 계명을 지키나 너희는 그를 배반하였느니라","우리는 매일 아침 저녁으로 여호와께 번제와 분향을 드린다. 제물의 식탁에도 언제나 규칙적으로 열두 덩이의 거룩한 떡을 두 줄로 진열하고, 저녁마다 금등잔에 불을 켜놓는다. 우리는 우리의 하나님 여호와를 한마음으로 섬기고 있으나 너희는 그분을 버린 지 오래이다.","They sacrifice burnt offerings to the LORD and fragrant incense morning after morning and evening after evening; they set out the showbread on the pure table, and the lamps of the golden menorah burn evening after evening; for we observe our duties to the LORD, our God, but you have abandoned him.","And they burn unto the LORD every morning and every evening burnt sacrifices and sweet incense: the shewbread also set they in order upon the pure table; and the candlestick of gold with the lamps thereof, to burn every evening: for we keep the charge of the LORD our God; but ye have forsaken him.","Every morning and evening they present burnt offerings and fragrant incense to the LORD. They set out the bread on the ceremonially clean table and light the lamps on the gold lampstand every evening. We are observing the requirements of the LORD our God. But you have forsaken him.","Holocausta quoque offerunt Domino per singulos dies, mane et vespere, et thymiama aromatum, et proponuntur panes in mensa mundissima. Estque apud nos candelabrum aureum et lucernae eius, ut accendantur semper ad vesperam; nos quippe custodimus praecepta Domini Dei nostri, quem vos reliquistis.","ומקטרים ליהוה עלות בבקר בבקר ובערב בערב וקטרת סמים ומערכת לחם על השלחן הטהור ומנורת הזהב ונרתיה לבער בערב בערב כי שמרים אנחנו את משמרת יהוה אלהינו ואתם עזבתם אתו׃"],["14","13","12","보라, 우리 선두에는 하느님께서 우리와 함께 계시다. 그분의 사제들이 너희를 공격하라는 전투 나팔을 불려고 서 있다. 이스라엘 자손들아, 주 너희 조상들의 하느님과 싸우려 하지 마라. 너희는 이기지 못한다.”","들어라. 우리 선두에는 하느님께서 함께 하신다. 그의 사제들은 너희를 공격하라는 나팔을 불기 위해 서 있다. 이스라엘 백성들아, 너희 선조들의 하느님 야훼와 싸울 생각을 마라. 될 일이 아니다.\"","하나님이 우리와 함께 하사 우리의 머리가 되시고 그의 제사장들도 우리와 함께 하여 전쟁의 나팔을 불어 너희를 공격하느니라 이스라엘 자손들아 너희 조상들의 하나님 여호와와 싸우지 말라 너희가 형통하지 못하리라","하나님이 우리와 함께 하사 우리의 머리가 되시고 그 제사장들도 우리와 함께하여 경고의 나팔을 불어 너희를 공격하느니라 이스라엘 자손들아 너희 열조의 하나님 여호와와 싸우지 말라 너희가 형통치 못하리라","자, 보아라! 하나님께서 친히 우리 편에 서서 우리를 인도해 주신다! 여호와의 제사장들도 너희를 치도록 이곳에 와서 나팔을 불 준비를 하고 있다. 이스라엘 백성들아, 너희 조상의 하나님 여호와와 싸우지 말라! 너희가 결코 당해 내지 못할 것이다.\"","See, God is with us, at our head, and his priests are here with trumpets to sound the attack against you. Israelites, do not fight against the LORD, the God of your ancestors, for you will not succeed!”","And, behold, God himself is with us for our captain, and his priests with sounding trumpets to cry alarm against you. O children of Israel, fight ye not against the LORD God of your fathers; for ye shall not prosper.","God is with us; he is our leader. His priests with their trumpets will sound the battle cry against you. Men of Israel, do not fight against the LORD, the God of your fathers, for you will not succeed.\"","Ergo in exercitu nostro dux Deus est et sacerdotes eius, qui clangunt tubis et resonant contra vos, filii Israel; nolite pugnare contra Dominum, Deum patrum vestrorum, quia non vobis expedit “.","והנה עמנו בראש האלהים וכהניו וחצצרות התרועה להריע עליכם בני ישראל אל תלחמו עם יהוה אלהי אבתיכם כי לא תצליחו׃"],["14","13","13","그러나 예로보암은 이미 복병을 유다군 뒤로 돌아가게 하였다. 이렇게 이스라엘군은 유다군 뒤에 복병을 숨겨 두고 그들과 정면에서 맞섰다.","여로보암은 복병을 유다 군 뒤로 돌아가게 하였다. 이스라엘 군은 복병을 적의 뒤에 숨겨두고 정면에서 대결하려고 하였던 것이다.","여로보암이 유다의 뒤를 둘러 복병하였으므로 그 앞에는 이스라엘 사람들이 있고 그 뒤에는 복병이 있는지라","여로보암이 유다의 뒤를 둘러 복병하였으므로 그 앞에는 이스라엘 사람이 있고 그 뒤에는 복병이 있는지라","그러는 동안에 여로보암은 이미 유다 군대의 뒤로 복병을 보내 유다군을 앞뒤로 포위하였다.","But Jeroboam had an ambush go around them to come at them from the rear; so that while his army faced Judah, his ambush lay behind them.","But Jeroboam caused an ambushment to come about behind them: so they were before Judah, and the ambushment was behind them.","Now Jeroboam had sent troops around to the rear, so that while he was in front of Judah the ambush was behind them.","Ieroboam autem retro moliebatur insidias, ut venirent post eos, et erant ante Iudam, et insidiae post eos.","וירבעם הסב את המארב לבוא מאחריהם ויהיו לפני יהודה והמארב מאחריהם׃"],["14","13","14","유다군이 돌아보니, 전투가 앞뒤에서 벌어지고 있었다. 그래서 그들은 주님께 부르짖었다. 사제들이 쇠 나팔을 불자,","유다 군이 둘러보니, 적에게 앞뒤로 공격을 받고 있는 것이 아닌가? 그러나 야훼께 부르짖으며 사제들이 나팔을 불자,","유다 사람이 뒤를 돌아보고 자기 앞 뒤의 적병으로 말미암아 여호와께 부르짖고 제사장들은 나팔을 부니라","유다 사람이 돌이켜 보고 자기 앞 뒤의 적병을 인하여 여호와께 부르짖고 제사장은 나팔을 부니라","유다군은 적에게 포위된 것을 보자 일제히 여호와께 부르짖었다. 제사장들은 나팔을 불고","When Judah turned and saw that they had to battle on both fronts, they cried out to the LORD and the priests sounded the trumpets.","And when Judah looked back, behold, the battle was before and behind: and they cried unto the LORD, and the priests sounded with the trumpets.","Judah turned and saw that they were being attacked at both front and rear. Then they cried out to the LORD. The priests blew their trumpets","Respiciensque Iuda vidit instare bellum ex adverso et post tergum et clamavit ad Dominum, ac sacerdotes tubis canere coeperunt,","ויפנו יהודה והנה להם המלחמה פנים ואחור ויצעקו ליהוה והכהנים מחצצרים בחצצרות׃"],["14","13","15","유다군은 함성을 올렸다. 유다군이 함성을 올릴 때, 하느님께서 아비야와 유다 앞에서 예로보암과 온 이스라엘을 치시니,","유다 군은 고함을 질렀다. 유다 군이 고함을 지르자 하느님께서 여로보암이 거느린 이스라엘 전군을 아비야와 유다 군 앞에서 치시니,","유다 사람이 소리 지르매 유다 사람이 소리 지를 때에 하나님이 여로보암과 온 이스라엘을 아비야와 유다 앞에서 치시니","유다 사람이 소리 지르매 유다 사람의 소리 지를 때에 하나님이 여로보암과 온 이스라엘을 아비야와 유다 앞에서 쳐서 패하게 하시니","군인들은 모두 전쟁의 함성을 질렀다. 그러자 여호와께서 직접 여로보암과 이스라엘 모든 군대를 큰 혼란에 빠뜨려 패주시키셨다.","Then the Judahites shouted; and when they shouted, God struck down Jeroboam and all Israel before Abijah and Judah.","Then the men of Judah gave a shout: and as the men of Judah shouted, it came to pass, that God smote Jeroboam and all Israel before Abijah and Judah.","and the men of Judah raised the battle cry. At the sound of their battle cry, God routed Jeroboam and all Israel before Abijah and Judah.","omnesque viri Iudae vociferati sunt; et ecce, illis clamantibus, perterruit Deus Ieroboam et omnem Israel coram Abia et Iuda.","ויריעו איש יהודה ויהי בהריע איש יהודה והאלהים נגף את ירבעם וכל ישראל לפני אביה ויהודה׃"],["14","13","16","이스라엘 자손들이 유다 앞에서 도망쳤다. 하느님께서 이렇게 이스라엘군을 유다군의 손에 넘겨주시어,","이스라엘 군은 유다 군 앞에서 도망치게 되었다. 이렇게 하여 하느님께서 이스라엘 군을 유다 군의 손에 부치시니,","이스라엘 자손이 유다 앞에서 도망하는지라 하나님이 그들의 손에 넘기셨으므로","이스라엘 자손이 유다 앞에서 도망하는지라 하나님이 그 손에 붙이신고로","이리하여 이스라엘 군인들이 다투어 유다군을 피하여 도망치자 하나님은 그들을 유다인들의 손에 넘겨 주어 잡혀 죽게 하셨다.","The Israelites fled before Judah, and God delivered them into their power.","And the children of Israel fled before Judah: and God delivered them into their hand.","The Israelites fled before Judah, and God delivered them into their hands.","Fugeruntque filii Israel Iudam, et tradidit eos Deus in manu eorum.","וינוסו בני ישראל מפני יהודה ויתנם אלהים בידם׃"],["14","13","17","아비야와 그의 군대가 적들을 크게 무찔렀다. 이스라엘에서 쓰러져 죽은 정예 군사는 오십만이나 되었다.","아비야는 휘하 군대를 거느리고 그들을 무찔렀다. 그 때 쓰러진 이스라엘 병사는 오십만이나 되었다.","아비야와 그의 백성이 크게 무찌르니 이스라엘이 택한 병사들이 죽임을 당하고 엎드러진 자들이 오십만 명이었더라","아비야와 그 백성이 크게 도륙하니 이스라엘의 택한 병정이 죽임을 입고 엎드러진 자가 오십만이었더라","아비야가 군인들을 거느리고 나가 패주하는 이스라엘 군대를 창으로 찌르고 칼로 쳐죽이니 그 수가 50만 명에 이르렀다.","Abijah and his people inflicted a severe defeat upon them; five hundred thousand picked men of Israel fell slain.","And Abijah and his people slew them with a great slaughter: so there fell down slain of Israel five hundred thousand chosen men.","Abijah and his men inflicted heavy losses on them, so that there were five hundred thousand casualties among Israel's able men.","Percussit ergo eos Abia et populus eius plaga magna; et corruerunt vulnerati ex Israel quingenta milia virorum fortium.","ויכו בהם אביה ועמו מכה רבה ויפלו חללים מישראל חמש מאות אלף איש בחור׃"],["14","13","18","그때에 이스라엘 자손들이 굴욕을 당하고 유다 자손들이 이기게 된 것은, 유다 자손들이 주 저희 조상들의 하느님께 의지하였기 때문이다.","이리하여 이스라엘 군은 굴복하고 말았다. 유다 백성은 선조들의 하느님 야훼를 믿은 덕으로 승리하게 되었던 것이다.","그 때에 이스라엘 자손이 항복하고 유다 자손이 이겼으니 이는 그들이 그들의 조상들의 하나님 여호와를 의지하였음이라","그 때에 이스라엘 자손이 항복하고 유다 자손이 이기었으니 이는 저희가 그 열조의 하나님 여호와를 의지하였음이라","이렇게 이스라엘 군대가 지고 유다 군대가 승리하게 된 것은 유다 백성이 그들의 하나님 여호와를 의지하였기 때문이다.","The Israelites were humbled on that occasion, while the Judahites were victorious because they relied on the LORD, the God of their ancestors.","Thus the children of Israel were brought under at that time, and the children of Judah prevailed, because they relied upon the LORD God of their fathers.","The men of Israel were subdued on that occasion, and the men of Judah were victorious because they relied on the LORD, the God of their fathers.","Humiliatique sunt filii Israel in tempore illo, et confortati filii Iudae, eo quod sperassent in Domino, Deo patrum suorum.","ויכנעו בני ישראל בעת ההיא ויאמצו בני יהודה כי נשענו על יהוה אלהי אבותיהם׃"],["14","13","19","아비야는 예로보암을 뒤쫓아 가서, 그의 성읍들, 곧 베텔과 거기에 딸린 마을들, 여사나와 거기에 딸린 마을들, 에프론과 거기에 딸린 마을들을 점령하였다.","아비야는 여로보암을 추격하여 베델과 주변 마을들, 여사나와 주변 마을들, 에브론과 주변 마을들을 정복하였다.","아비야가 여로보암을 쫓아가서 그의 성읍들을 빼앗았으니 곧 벧엘과 그 동네들과 여사나와 그 동네들과 에브론과 그 동네들이라","아비야가 여로보암을 쫓아가서 그 성읍들을 빼앗았으니 곧 벧엘과 그 동네와 여사나와 그 동네와 에브론과 그 동네라","아비야는 여로보암을 계속 추격하여 벧엘과 여사나와 에브론과 그 성읍들에 딸린 주변 마을들을 점령하였다.","Abijah pursued Jeroboam and seized cities from him: Bethel and its dependencies, Jeshanah and its dependencies, and Ephron and its dependencies.","And Abijah pursued after Jeroboam, and took cities from him, Bethel with the towns thereof, and Jeshanah with the towns thereof, and Ephraim with the towns thereof.","Abijah pursued Jeroboam and took from him the towns of Bethel, Jeshanah and Ephron, with their surrounding villages.","Persecutus est autem Abia fugientem Ieroboam et cepit civitates eius Bethel et filias eius et Iesana cum filiabus suis, Ephron quoque et filias eius.","וירדף אביה אחרי ירבעם וילכד ממנו ערים את בית אל ואת בנותיה ואת ישנה ואת בנותיה ואת עפרון ובנתיה׃"],["14","13","20","예로보암은 아비야 생전에 힘을 회복하지 못하였으며, 주님께서 그를 치시니 그가 죽고 말았다.","여로보암은 아비야 생전에 다시 힘을 쓰지 못했으며 야훼께 벌을 받아 죽고 말았다.","아비야 때에 여로보암이 다시 강성하지 못하고 여호와의 치심을 입어 죽었고","아비야 때에 여로보암이 다시 강성하지 못하고 여호와의 치심을 입어 죽었고","그리하여 아비야의 생전에는 여로보암이 세력을 전처럼 다시 회복하지 못하다가 마침내 여호와의 벌을 받고 즉사하였다.","Jeroboam did not regain power during Abijah’s time; the LORD struck him down and he died,","Neither did Jeroboam recover strength again in the days of Abijah: and the LORD struck him, and he died.","Jeroboam did not regain power during the time of Abijah. And the LORD struck him down and he died.","Nec invaluit ultra Ieroboam in diebus Abiae. Quem percussit Dominus, et mortuus est.","ולא עצר כח ירבעם עוד בימי אביהו ויגפהו יהוה וימת׃"],["14","13","21","그러나 아비야는 세력이 커졌다. 그는 아내 열넷을 거느리고 아들 스물둘과 딸 열여섯을 두었다.","그러나 아비야는 세력을 뻗쳐 아내 열넷을 거느렸으며 아들 스물둘과 딸 열여섯을 두었다.","아비야는 점점 강성하며 아내 열넷을 거느려 아들 스물둘과 딸 열여섯을 낳았더라","아비야는 점점 강성하며 아내 열 넷을 취하여 아들 스물 둘과 딸 열 여섯을 낳았더라","그러나 아비야는 여호와의 복을 받아 세력이 강해지고 집안도 융성하여 열네 명의 아내에게서 스물두 명의 아들과 열여섯 명의 딸을 낳았다.","while Abijah continued to grow stronger. He married fourteen wives and fathered twenty-two sons and sixteen daughters.","But Abijah waxed mighty, and married fourteen wives, and begat twenty and two sons, and sixteen daughters.","But Abijah grew in strength. He married fourteen wives and had twenty-two sons and sixteen daughters.","Abia autem confortatus est et accepit sibi uxores quattuordecim procreavitque viginti duos filios et sedecim filias.","ויתחזק אביהו וישא לו נשים ארבע עשרה ויולד עשרים ושנים בנים ושש עשרה בנות׃"],["14","13","22","아비야의 나머지 행적과 그가 걸어간 길과 그의 언행은 이또 예언자의 주석서에 쓰여 있다.","아비야의 나머지 행적과 치적 그리고 역사는 예언자 이또의 주해서에 기록되어 있다.","아비야의 남은 사적과 그의 행위와 그의 말은 선지자 잇도의 주석 책에 기록되니라","아비야의 남은 사적과 그 행위와 그 말은 선지자 잇도의 주석 책에 기록되니라","아비야의 업적과 그가 한 말에 대하여 더 이야기할 수 있는 것은 선견자 잇도의 해석책에서 읽을 수 있다.","The rest of the acts of Abijah, his deeds and his words, are recorded in the midrash of the prophet Iddo.","And the rest of the acts of Abijah, and his ways, and his sayings, are written in the story of the prophet Iddo.","The other events of Abijah's reign, what he did and what he said, are written in the annotations of the prophet Iddo.","Reliqua autem gestorum Abiae viarumque et sermonum eius scripta sunt in enarratione prophetae Addo.","ויתר דברי אביה ודרכיו ודבריו כתובים במדרש הנביא עדו׃"],["14","13","23","아비야는 자기 조상들과 함께 잠들어 다윗 성에 묻히고, 그의 아들 아사가 그 뒤를 이어 임금이 되었다. 아사 시대 십 년 동안 나라는 평온하였다.","1)아비야는 세상을 떠나 다윗 성에 안장되었다. 그의 아들 아사가 뒤를 이어 왕위에 올랐는데, 그가 다스리던 십 년 동안 나라는 태평하였다.라틴어 성서는 여기에서 14장이 시작된다.",null,null,null,"Abijah rested with his ancestors; they buried him in the City of David and his son Asa succeeded him as king. During his time, the land had ten years of peace.",null,null,"Dormivit autem Abia cum patribus suis, et sepelierunt eum in civitate David; regnavitque Asa filius eius pro eo. In cuius diebus quievit terra annis decem.",null],["14","14","1","아사는 주 자기 하느님의 눈에 드는 좋은 일과 옳은 일을 하였다.","아사는 그의 하느님 야훼께서 보시기에 좋은 일, 바른 일을 하였다.","아비야가 그의 조상들과 함께 누우매 다윗 성에 장사되고 그의 아들 아사가 대신하여 왕이 되니 그의 시대에 그의 땅이 십 년 동안 평안하니라","아비야가 그 열조와 함께 자매 다윗성에 장사되고 그 아들 아사가 대신하여 왕이 되니 그 시대에 그 땅이 십년을 평안하니라","아비야가 죽어 다윗성에 안장되자 그의 아들 아사가 왕위에 올랐다.  아사의 40년에 이르는 통치기간 중 10년 동안은 나라가 평화를 누렸다.","Asa did what was good and right in the sight of the LORD, his God.","So Abijah slept with his fathers, and they buried him in the city of David: and Asa his son reigned in his stead. In his days the land was quiet ten years.","And Abijah rested with his fathers and was buried in the City of David. Asa his son succeeded him as king, and in his days the country was at peace for ten years.","Fecit autem Asa, quod bo num et placitum erat in con spectu Domini Dei sui, et subvertit altaria peregrini cultus et excelsa","וישכב אביה עם אבתיו ויקברו אתו בעיר דויד וימלך אסא בנו תחתיו בימיו שקטה הארץ עשר שנים׃"],["14","14","2","그는 이교 제단들과 산당들을 없애 버리고 기념 기둥들을 깨뜨렸으며, 아세라 목상들을 토막 냈다.","다른 나라 제단을 본뜬 제단들과 산당들을 제거하고 석상을 깨뜨리고 아세라 목상을 부수었다.","아사가 그의 하나님 여호와 보시기에 선과 정의를 행하여","아사가 그 하나님 여호와 보시기에 선과 정의를 행하여","아사는 그의 하나님 여호와의 마음에 드실 선하고 의로운 일들을 하였다.","He removed the illicit altars and the high places, smashed the sacred pillars, and cut down the asherahs.","And Asa did that which was good and right in the eyes of the LORD his God:","Asa did what was good and right in the eyes of the LORD his God.","et confregit lapides palosque succidit","ויעש אסא הטוב והישר בעיני יהוה אלהיו׃"],["14","14","3","그리고 유다 백성에게 주 자기 조상들의 하느님을 찾으며 율법과 계명을 지키라고 말하였다.","그는 선조들의 하느님 야훼를 찾고 법과 계명을 실천하라고 유다 백성들에게 명령을 내렸으며,","이방 제단과 산당을 없애고 주상을 깨뜨리며 아세라 상을 찍고","이방 제단과 산당을 없이하고 주상을 훼파하며 아세라 상을 찍고","그는 이방신들의 제단과 제사처들을 허물어 없애고, 신상으로 섬기던 돌기둥들을 산산히 부수어 버렸으며 나무를 깎아 만든 여신상들을 토막 쳐 버렸다.","He told Judah to seek the LORD, the God of their ancestors, and to observe the law and the commandment.","For he took away the altars of the strange gods, and the high places, and brake down the images, and cut down the groves:","He removed the foreign altars and the high places, smashed the sacred stones and cut down the Asherah poles.","ac praecepit Iudae, ut quaereret Dominum, Deum patrum suorum, et faceret legem et universa mandata,","ויסר את מזבחות הנכר והבמות וישבר את המצבות ויגדע את האשרים׃"],["14","14","4","또한 유다의 모든 성읍에서 산당들과 분향 제단들을 없애 버렸다. 그리하여 그가 다스리는 동안 왕국이 평온하였다.","유다 모든 성읍들에서 산당과 분향단을 제거하였다. 그의 통치 아래 나라는 평온하였다.","유다 사람에게 명하여 그 조상들의 하나님 여호와를 찾게 하며 그의 율법과 명령을 행하게 하고","유다 사람을 명하여 그 열조의 하나님 여호와를 구하게 하며 그 율법과 명령을 행하게 하고","아사는 유다 백성에게 오직 그들 조상의 하나님 여호와께만 순종하고, 율법과 모든 계명을 따르라고 명령하였다.","He removed the high places and incense stands from all the cities of Judah, and under him the kingdom had peace.","And commanded Judah to seek the LORD God of their fathers, and to do the law and the commandment.","He commanded Judah to seek the LORD, the God of their fathers, and to obey his laws and commands.","et abstulit e cunctis urbibus Iudae excelsa et thymiateria et regnavit in pace.","ויאמר ליהודה לדרוש את יהוה אלהי אבותיהם ולעשות התורה והמצוה׃"],["14","14","5","나라가 이렇게 평온해지자, 그는 유다에 요새 성읍들을 지었다. 또 주님께서 그에게 안정을 주시어, 그는 여러 해 동안 전쟁을 겪지 않았다.","나라가 평온하였기 때문에 그는 유다 성읍들을 요새로 만들 수 있었다. 야훼께서 평화를 주셔서 여러 해 동안 전쟁이 없었다.","또 유다 모든 성읍에서 산당과 태양상을 없애매 나라가 그 앞에서 평안함을 누리니라","또 유다 모든 성읍에서 산당과 태양상을 없이하매 나라가 그 앞에서 평안함을 얻으니라","그는 이방신들의 제사처와 분향 제단들도 유다의 모든 성읍에서 없애 버렸다. 아사가 이토록 철저한 종교개혁을 하는 동안에 온 나라가 평안하였다.","He built fortified cities in Judah, for the land had peace and no war was waged against him during these years, because the LORD had given him rest.","Also he took away out of all the cities of Judah the high places and the images: and the kingdom was quiet before him.","He removed the high places and incense altars in every town in Judah, and the kingdom was at peace under him.","Aedificavit quoque urbes munitas in Iuda, quia quievit terra, et nulla temporibus eius bella surrexerant, pacem Domino ei largiente.","ויסר מכל ערי יהודה את הבמות ואת החמנים ותשקט הממלכה לפניו׃"],["14","14","6","그는 유다 백성에게 말하였다. “이 성읍들을 다시 세웁시다. 성벽과 탑으로 둘러쌓고 성문과 빗장을 만들어 답시다. 우리가 주 우리 하느님을 찾았으므로 이 나라가 아직도 우리 앞에 남아 있는 것이오. 우리가 그분을 찾자 그분께서 사방으로부터 우리를 평온하게 해 주셨소.” 그래서 그들은 성읍들을 세우기 시작하여 일을 잘 마쳤다.","그는 유다 백성에게 명령을 내렸다. \"우리가 우리 하느님 야훼를 찾았더니 하느님께서는 우리에게 평화를 주셨다. 우리가 당신을 찾았으므로 이 땅을 우리 마음대로 할 수 있게 해주셨다. 이런 때를 놓치지 말고 성읍들을 다시 세우자. 성벽을 둘러쌓고 성문을 만들어 달고 빗장을 만들어 꽂자.\" 그들은 성 쌓는 일을 잘 마치게 되었다.","여호와께서 아사에게 평안을 주셨으므로 그 땅이 평안하여 여러 해 싸움이 없은지라 그가 견고한 성읍들을 유다에 건축하니라","여호와께서 아사에게 평안을 주셨으므로 그 땅이 평안하여 여러해 싸움이 없은지라 저가 견고한 성읍들을 유다에 건축하니라","이 기간 동안에는 여호와께서 아사에게 평화를 주셔서 아무도 그에게 전쟁을 걸어오지 않았다. 나라가 평안하자 그는 유다 안에 많은 성읍들을 튼튼히 세워 요새화하였다.","He said to Judah: “Let us build these cities and surround them with walls, towers, gates and bars. The land is still ours, for we have sought the LORD, our God; we sought him, and he has given us rest on every side.” So they built and prospered.","And he built fenced cities in Judah: for the land had rest, and he had no war in those years; because the LORD had given him rest.","He built up the fortified cities of Judah, since the land was at peace. No one was at war with him during those years, for the LORD gave him rest.","Dixit autem Iudae:  “Aedificemus civitates istas et vallemus muris et roboremus turribus et portis et seris, donec a bellis quieta sunt omnia; quia quaesivimus Dominum Deum nostrum, quaesivit nos et dedit nobis pacem per gyrum “. Aedificaverunt igitur et prosperati sunt.","ויבן ערי מצורה ביהודה כי שקטה הארץ ואין עמו מלחמה בשנים האלה כי הניח יהוה לו׃"],["14","14","7","아사에게는 큰 방패와 창을 든 유다 출신 군사 삼십만이 있었고, 작은 방패를 들고 활로 무장한 벤야민 출신 군사 이십팔만이 있었다. 그들은 모두 힘센 용사였다.","또 아사에게는 방패와 창을 들 수 있는 유다 부대 삼십만이 있었고 방패를 잡고 활을 쏠 수 있는 베냐민 부대 이십팔만이 있었다. 이들은 모두 날쌘 군인이었다.","아사가 일찍이 유다 사람에게 이르되 우리가 우리 하나님 여호와를 찾았으므로 이 땅이 아직 우리 앞에 있나니 우리가 이 성읍들을 건축하고 그 주위에 성곽과 망대와 문과 빗장을 만들자 우리가 주를 찾았으므로 주께서 우리 사방에 평안을 주셨느니라 하고 이에 그들이 성읍을 형통하게 건축하였더라","아사가 일찌기 유다 사람에게 이르되 우리가 우리 하나님 여호와를 찾았으므로 이 땅이 아직 우리 앞에 있나니 우리가 이 성읍들을 건축하고 그 주위에 성곽과 망대와 문과 빗장을 만들자 우리가 주를 찾았으므로 주께서 우리에게 사방의 평안을 주셨느니라 하고 이에 저희가 성읍을 형통하게 건축 하였더라","일찍이 아사가 유다 백성에게 이와 같이 말하였다. \"나라가 평안할 때에 전국의 성읍들을 확장하여 건설하고 성벽을 쌓고, 안전하게 성문을 세워 빗장을 질러라! 우리가 오직 하나님 여호와의 뜻에 따라 살려고 힘쓰는 것을 보시고 주께서 우리의 모든 국경선에 평화를 주셨다\" 이렇게 하여 그들은 공사를 성공적으로 완성시켰다.","Asa had an army of three hundred thousand shield- and lance-bearers from Judah, and from Benjamin two hundred and eighty thousand who carried bucklers and were archers, all of them valiant warriors.","Therefore he said unto Judah, Let us build these cities, and make about them walls, and towers, gates, and bars, while the land is yet before us; because we have sought the LORD our God, we have sought him, and he hath given us rest on every side. So they built and prospered.","\"Let us build up these towns,\" he said to Judah, \"and put walls around them, with towers, gates and bars. The land is still ours, because we have sought the LORD our God; we sought him and he has given us rest on every side.\" So they built and prospered.","Habuit autem Asa exercitum portantium scuta et hastas de Iuda trecenta milia, de Beniamin vero scutariorum et sagittariorum ducenta octoginta milia; omnes isti viri fortissimi.","ויאמר ליהודה נבנה את הערים האלה ונסב חומה ומגדלים דלתים ובריחים עודנו הארץ לפנינו כי דרשנו את יהוה אלהינו דרשנו וינח לנו מסביב ויבנו ויצליחו׃"],["14","14","8","그즈음에 에티오피아 사람 제라가 군사 백만과 병거 삼백 대를 이끌고 그들을 치러 나와 마레사까지 다다랐다.","때마침 구스 사람 제라가 병거 삼천 대에 백만 대군을 이끌고 쳐들어와, 마레사에 이르렀다.","아사의 군대는 유다 중에서 큰 방패와 창을 잡는 자가 삼십만 명이요 베냐민 중에서 작은 방패를 잡으며 활을 당기는 자가 이십팔만 명이라 그들은 다 큰 용사였더라","아사의 군대는 유다 중에서 큰 방패와 창을 잡는 자가 삼십만이요 베냐민 중에서 작은 방패를 잡으며 활을 당기는 자가 이십 팔만이라 다 큰 용사더라","아사는 군대도 육성하여 유다 지파에서만 창과 큰 방패로 무장한 군인이 30만 명이고, 둥근 방패와 활로 무장한 군인이 베냐민 지파에서만 28만 명이나 되었다. 이들이 모두 용맹스러운 군인들이었다.","Zerah the Ethiopian advanced against them with a force of one million men and three hundred chariots, and he came as far as Mareshah.","And Asa had an army of men that bare targets and spears, out of Judah three hundred thousand; and out of Benjamin, that bare shields and drew bows, two hundred and fourscore thousand: all these were mighty men of valour.","Asa had an army of three hundred thousand men from Judah, equipped with large shields and with spears, and two hundred and eighty thousand from Benjamin, armed with small shields and with bows. All these were brave fighting men.","Egressus est autem contra eos Zara Aethiops cum exercitu, decies centena milia et curribus trecentis, et venit usque Maresa.","ויהי לאסא חיל נשא צנה ורמח מיהודה שלש מאות אלף ומבנימן נשאי מגן ודרכי קשת מאתים ושמונים אלף כל אלה גבורי חיל׃"],["14","14","9","아사도 그에게 맞서려고 나가 마레사의 츠파타 골짜기에서 전열을 갖추었다.","아사는 그를 맞아 싸우려고 출동하여 마레사 북쪽 골짜기에 진을 치고","구스 사람 세라가 그들을 치려 하여 군사 백만 명과 병거 삼백 대를 거느리고 마레사에 이르매","구스 사람 세라가 저희를 치려하여 군사 백만과 병거 삼백승을 거느리고 마레사에 이르매","그런데 그때 구스 사람 세라가 남쪽에서 100만 명의 대군과 300대의 전차를 몰고 유다로 침공하여 마레사에까지 이르렀다.","Asa went out to meet him and they drew up for battle in the valley of Zephathah, near Mareshah.","And there came out against them Zerah the Ethiopian with an host of a thousand thousand, and three hundred chariots; and came unto Mareshah.","Zerah the Cushite marched out against them with a vast army and three hundred chariots, and came as far as Mareshah.","Porro Asa perrexit obviam ei, et instruxerunt aciem ad bellum in valle, quae est ad septentrionem Maresa,","ויצא אליהם זרח הכושי בחיל אלף אלפים ומרכבות שלש מאות ויבא עד מרשה׃"],["14","14","10","아사가 주 자기 하느님께 말씀드렸다. “주님, 강자와 약자 사이에 싸움이 일어났을 때 당신처럼 도와줄 이 아무도 없습니다. 주 저희 하느님, 저희가 당신께 의지하여 당신의 이름으로 이 무리를 치러 나왔으니, 저희를 도와주십시오. 주님, 당신께서 저희의 하느님이시니, 아무도 당신을 당해 내지 못하게 해 주십시오.”","그의 하느님 야훼께 부르짖었다. \"야훼여, 주님처럼 강자를 물리치시고 약자의 편을 들어주시는 신이 어디 또 있습니까? 야훼 우리 하느님이여, 우리를 도와주십시오. 우리는 주님만 믿습니다. 주님의 이름만 믿고 저 많은 무리와 싸우러 왔습니다. 우리 하느님은 야훼밖에 없습니다. 누가 감히 주의 앞길을 가로막겠습니까?\"","아사가 마주 나가서 마레사의 스바다 골짜기에 전열을 갖추고","아사가 마주 나아가서 마레사의 스바다 골짜기에 진 치고","아사왕이 전군을 거느리고 나아가 마레사의 북쪽에 있는 스바다 골짜기에서 전투 태세로 대치하였다.","Asa called upon the LORD, his God: “LORD, there is none like you to help the powerless against the strong. Help us, LORD, our God, for we rely on you, and in your name we have come against this multitude. You are the LORD, our God; do not let men prevail against you.”","Then Asa went out against him, and they set the battle in array in the valley of Zephathah at Mareshah.","Asa went out to meet him, and they took up battle positions in the Valley of Zephathah near Mareshah.","et invocavit Asa Dominum Deum suum et ait:  “Domine, non est apud te ulla distantia, utrum paucis auxilieris an pluribus; adiuva nos, Domine Deus noster. In te enim et in tuo nomine habentes fiduciam venimus contra hanc multitudinem. Domine, Deus noster tu es, non praevaleat contra te homo “.","ויצא אסא לפניו ויערכו מלחמה בגיא צפתה למרשה׃"],["14","14","11","주님께서 아사와 유다 백성 앞에서 에티오피아인들을 치시니, 에티오피아인들이 도망쳤다.","야훼께서 구스 군을 아사와 유다 군 앞에서 치셨다. 구스 군이 도망치게 되자,","아사가 그의 하나님 여호와께 부르짖어 이르되 여호와여 힘이 강한 자와 약한 자 사이에는 주밖에 도와 줄 이가 없사오니 우리 하나님 여호와여 우리를 도우소서 우리가 주를 의지하오며 주의 이름을 의탁하옵고 이 많은 무리를 치러 왔나이다 여호와여 주는 우리 하나님이시오니 원하건대 사람이 주를 이기지 못하게 하옵소서 하였더니","그 하나님 여호와께 부르짖어 가로되 여호와여 강한 자와 약한 자 사이에는 주 밖에 도와줄 이가 없사오니 우리 하나님 여호와여 우리를 도우소서 우리가 주를 의지하오며 주의 이름을 의탁하옵고 이 많은 무리를 치러 왔나이다 여호와여 주는 우리 하나님이시오니 원컨대 사람으로 주를 이기지 못하게 하옵소서 하였더니","그는 하나님 여호와께 호소하였다. \"여호와여, 주께서 우리의 편이 되어 주시면 우리가 아무리 허약해도 두려울 것이 없습니다. 우리의 하나님 여호와여, 우리는 주님만을 의지하고 있으니 도와주소서! 우리는 주님만을 의지하고 저 엄청난 대군에 맞서려고 출전하였습니다. 여호와여, 주님은 우리 하나님이시니 어느 누구도 주님을 당해낼 수 없다는 것을 오늘 보여주소서!\"","And so the LORD defeated the Ethiopians before Asa and Judah, and the Ethiopians fled.","And Asa cried unto the LORD his God, and said, LORD, it is nothing with thee to help, whether with many, or with them that have no power: help us, O LORD our God; for we rest on thee, and in thy name we go against this multitude. O LORD, thou art our God; let no man prevail against thee.","Then Asa called to the LORD his God and said, \"LORD, there is no one like you to help the powerless against the mighty. Help us, O LORD our God, for we rely on you, and in your name we have come against this vast army. O LORD, you are our God; do not let man prevail against you.\"","Exterruit itaque Dominus Aethiopes coram Asa et Iuda; fugeruntque Aethiopes.","ויקרא אסא אל יהוה אלהיו ויאמר יהוה אין עמך לעזור בין רב לאין כח עזרנו יהוה אלהינו כי עליך נשענו ובשמך באנו על ההמון הזה יהוה אלהינו אתה אל יעצר עמך אנוש׃"],["14","14","12","아사와 그의 군대는 그라르까지 에티오피아인들을 쫓아갔다. 에티오피아인들은 쓰러져 아무도 살아남지 못하였다. 이렇게 그들은 주님과 그분의 군대 앞에서 패배하였고, 유다군은 아주 많은 전리품을 거두었다.","아사와 그의 군대는 그랄에 이르기까지 추?奮玖?무찔렀다. 구스 군은 하나도 살아 남지 못하였다. 구스 군은 야훼 앞에서, 야훼의 군대 앞에서 패하고 말았다. 유다 군은 굉장히 많은 전리품을 얻었다.","여호와께서 구스 사람들을 아사와 유다 사람들 앞에서 치시니 구스 사람들이 도망하는지라","여호와께서 구스 사람을 아사와 유다 사람 앞에서 쳐서 패하게 하시니 구스 사람이 도망하는지라","주께서 아사의 기도를 들으시고 유다군의 편에 서서 구스 군대를 치시니, 그들이 모두 패하여 도망쳤다.","Asa and those with him pursued them as far as Gerar, and the Ethiopians fell until there were no survivors, for they were crushed before the LORD and his army, which carried away enormous spoils.","So the LORD smote the Ethiopians before Asa, and before Judah; and the Ethiopians fled.","The LORD struck down the Cushites before Asa and Judah. The Cushites fled,","Et persecutus est eos Asa et populus, qui cum eo erat, usque Gerar; et ruerunt Aethiopes usque ad internecionem, quia Domino caedente contriti sunt et exercitu illius proeliante. Tulerunt ergo spolia multa","ויגף יהוה את הכושים לפני אסא ולפני יהודה וינסו הכושים׃"],["14","14","13","그리고 그라르 주변의 모든 성읍 주민들이 주님에 대한 두려움에 사로잡히자, 유다군은 그 모든 성읍을 치고 노획하였다. 그곳에는 노획거리가 많았던 것이다.","그러자 사람들은 야훼를 몹시 두려워하게 되었다. 유다 군은 그랄 주변 모든 성읍들을 치고 그 성읍들을 털었다. 거기에서도 많은 전리품을 얻었다.","아사와 그와 함께 한 백성이 구스 사람들을 추격하여 그랄까지 이르매 이에 구스 사람들이 엎드러지고 살아 남은 자가 없었으니 이는 여호와 앞에서와 그의 군대 앞에서 패망하였음이라 노략한 물건이 매우 많았더라","아사와 그 좇는 자가 구스 사람을 쫓아 그랄까지 이르매 이에 구스 사람이 엎드러지고 살아 남은 자가 없었으니 이는 여호와 앞에서와 그 군대 앞에서 패망하였음이라 노략한 물건이 심히 많았더라","아사는 군대를 이끌고 유다 남단의 그랄까지 추격하여 그들을 쳐죽였다. 구스군은 몰살을 당하여 살아 남은 자가 거의 없었다. 주께서 하늘의 군대를 거느리고 그들을 전멸시키신 것이다. 유다 군인들은 이 전투에서 많은 전리품을 얻었다.","Then the Judahites conquered all the cities around Gerar, for the fear of the LORD was upon them; they plundered all the cities, for there was much plunder in them.","And Asa and the people that were with him pursued them unto Gerar: and the Ethiopians were overthrown, that they could not recover themselves; for they were destroyed before the LORD, and before his host; and they carried away very much spoil.","and Asa and his army pursued them as far as Gerar. Such a great number of Cushites fell that they could not recover; they were crushed before the LORD and his forces. The men of Judah carried off a large amount of plunder.","et percusserunt omnes civitates per circuitum Gerarae; terror quippe Domini eos invaserat. Et diripuerunt omnes urbes et multam praedam asportaverunt.","וירדפם אסא והעם אשר עמו עד לגרר ויפל מכושים לאין להם מחיה כי נשברו לפני יהוה ולפני מחנהו וישאו שלל הרבה מאד׃"],["14","14","14","그들은 가축 치는 자들의 천막도 쳐서 많은 양과 낙타를 끌고 나왔다. 그런 다음에 그들은 예루살렘으로 돌아왔다.","또 목자들의 천막들을 덮쳐 낙타와 많은 양을 빼앗아 가지고 예루살렘으로 돌아왔다.","여호와께서 그랄 사면 모든 성읍 백성을 두렵게 하시니 무리가 그의 모든 성읍을 치고 그 가운데에 있는 많은 물건을 노략하고","여호와께서 그랄 사면 모든 성읍 백성을 두렵게 하시니 무리가 그 모든 성읍을 치고 그 가운데 있는 많은 물건을 노략하고","주께서는 당시 적진의 본거지였던 그랄 지역 주변의 성읍 주민들까지 엄청난 공포에 떨게 하셨다. 그래서 유다 군대가 그 성읍들까지 정복하고 거기서도 엄청난 전리품을 얻었다.","They also attacked the tents of the cattle-herders and carried off a great number of sheep and camels. Then they returned to Jerusalem.","And they smote all the cities round about Gerar; for the fear of the LORD came upon them: and they spoiled all the cities; for there was exceeding much spoil in them.","They destroyed all the villages around Gerar, for the terror of the LORD had fallen upon them. They plundered all these villages- since there was much booty there.","Sed et caulas ovium destruentes tulerunt pecorum infinitam multitudinem et camelorum reversique sunt Ierusalem.","ויכו את כל הערים סביבות גרר כי היה פחד יהוה עליהם ויבזו את כל הערים כי בזה רבה היתה בהם׃"],["14","14","15",null,null,"또 짐승 지키는 천막을 치고 양과 낙타를 많이 이끌고 예루살렘으로 돌아왔더라","또 짐승 지키는 천막을 치고 양과 약대를 많이 이끌고 예루살렘으로 돌아왔더라","그들은 또 그 지역에 천막생활을 하면서 짐승을 치는 유목민들도 습격하여 양떼와 낙타를 빼앗아 몰고 예루살렘으로 돌아왔다.",null,"They smote also the tents of cattle, and carried away sheep and camels in abundance, and returned to Jerusalem.","They also attacked the camps of the herdsmen and carried off droves of sheep and goats and camels. Then they returned to Jerusalem.",null,"וגם אהלי מקנה הכו וישבו צאן לרב וגמלים וישבו ירושלם׃"],["14","15","1","그때에 하느님의 영이 오뎃의 아들 아자르야에게 내리니,","그 때 오뎃의 아들로서 아자리야라는 사람이 있었다. 그가 하느님의 영을 받아","하나님의 영이 오뎃의 아들 아사랴에게 임하시매","하나님의 신이 오뎃의 아들 아사랴에게 임하시매","하나님의 영이 오뎃의 아들 아사랴에게 임하자","The spirit of God came upon Azariah, son of Oded.","And the Spirit of God came upon Azariah the son of Oded:","The Spirit of God came upon Azariah son of Oded.","Azarias autem filius Oded, facto in se spiritu Dei,","ועזריהו בן עודד היתה עליו רוח אלהים׃"],["14","15","2","아자르야가 아사 앞에 나아가 말하였다. “아사 임금님과 온 유다와 벤야민은 제 말씀을 들으십시오. 여러분이 주님과 함께 있으면 그분께서도 여러분과 함께 계시고, 여러분이 그분을 찾으면 그분께서도 여러분을 만나 주실 것입니다. 그러나 여러분이 그분을 버리면 그분께서도 여러분을 버리실 것입니다.","나가서 아사를 만나 말하였다. \"임금님이여, 들으시오. 온 유다 군대와 베냐민 군대도 들으시오. 여러분이 야훼를 떠나지 않아야 야훼께서도 여러분 곁을 떠나지 않으실 것이오. 그를 찾으시오. 그리하면 만나주실 것이오. 그러나 그를 저버리면, 그도 여러분을 저버리실 것이오.","그가 나가서 아사를 맞아 이르되 아사와 및 유다와 베냐민의 무리들아 내 말을 들으라 너희가 여호와와 함께 하면 여호와께서 너희와 함께 하실지라 너희가 만일 그를 찾으면 그가 너희와 만나게 되시려니와 너희가 만일 그를 버리면 그도 너희를 버리시리라","저가 나가서 아사를 맞아 이르되 아사와 및 유다와 베냐민의 무리들아 내 말을 들으라 너희가 여호와와 함께하면 여호와께서 너희와 함께하실찌라 너희가 만일 저를 찾으면 저가 너희의 만난바 되시려니와 너희가 만일 저를 버리면 저도 너희를 버리시리라","그가 전쟁에서 돌아오는 아사왕을 맞이하며 이렇게 말하였다. \"임금님도 들으시고 유다와 베냐민 사람들도 모두 들으시오! 여러분이 여호와와 함께 있어야 여호와께서도 여러분과 함께 계십니다. 여러분이 주님을 찾으면 주께서 여러분을 만나 주시겠지만 여러분이 주님을 버리고 떠나면 주께서도 여러분을 버리고 떠나실 것입니다.","He went forth to meet Asa and said to him: “Hear me, Asa and all Judah and Benjamin! The LORD is with you when you are with him, and if you seek him he will be found; but if you abandon him, he will abandon you.","And he went out to meet Asa, and said unto him, Hear ye me, Asa, and all Judah and Benjamin; The LORD is with you, while ye be with him; and if ye seek him, he will be found of you; but if ye forsake him, he will forsake you.","He went out to meet Asa and said to him, \"Listen to me, Asa and all Judah and Benjamin. The LORD is with you when you are with him. If you seek him, he will be found by you, but if you forsake him, he will forsake you.","egressus est in occursum Asa et dixit ei:  “Audite me, Asa et omnis Iuda et Beniamin! Dominus vobiscum, quia fuistis cum eo. Si quaesieritis eum, invenietur a vobis; si autem dereliqueritis eum, derelinquet vos.","ויצא לפני אסא ויאמר לו שמעוני אסא וכל יהודה ובנימן יהוה עמכם בהיותכם עמו ואם תדרשהו ימצא לכם ואם תעזבהו יעזב אתכם׃"],["14","15","3","이스라엘은 오랫동안 참하느님도, 가르치는 사제도, 율법도 없이 지내 왔습니다.","오랫동안 이스라엘은 참 하느님 없이 지내왔소. 법도 없었고 법을 가르쳐주는 사제도 없었소.","이스라엘에는 참 신이 없고 가르치는 제사장도 없고 율법도 없은 지가 오래 되었으나","이스라엘에는 참 신이 없고 가르치는 제사장도 없고 율법도 없은지가 이제 오래였으나","옛날에 이스라엘은 오랫동안 참 하나님을 모시지 못하고 살았습니다. 그들을 지도하는 제사장도 없었고, 하나님의 율법도 잊어버린 체 살았습니다.","For a long time Israel was without a true God, without a priest-teacher, without instruction,","Now for a long season Israel hath been without the true God, and without a teaching priest, and without law.","For a long time Israel was without the true God, without a priest to teach and without the law.","Transierunt autem multi dies in Israel absque Deo veritatis et absque sacerdote doctore et absque lege.","וימים רבים לישראל ללא אלהי אמת וללא כהן מורה וללא תורה׃"],["14","15","4","그런데도 그들이 곤경 가운데에서 주 이스라엘의 하느님께 돌아와 그분을 찾으면, 그분께서는 그들을 만나 주셨습니다.","다만 어려운 일이 생겨야 이스라엘의 하느님 야훼께 돌아오곤 하였소. 그렇게라도 당신을 찾으면, 그는 만나주셨소.","그들이 그 환난 때에 이스라엘 하나님 여호와께로 돌아가서 찾으매 그가 그들과 만나게 되셨나니","그 환난 때에 이스라엘 하나님 여호와께 돌아가서 찾으매 저가 그들의 만난바가 되셨나니","그러나 그들이 환난을 당하여 이스라엘의 하나님 여호와께로 돌아가 그분을 찾자 주께서 그들을 만나 주셨습니다.","but when in their distress they turned to the LORD, the God of Israel, and sought him, he was found by them.","But when they in their trouble did turn unto the LORD God of Israel, and sought him, he was found of them.","But in their distress they turned to the LORD, the God of Israel, and sought him, and he was found by them.","Cumque reversi essent in angustia sua ad Dominum, Deum Israel, et quaesivissent eum, inventus est ab eis.","וישב בצר לו על יהוה אלהי ישראל ויבקשהו וימצא להם׃"],["14","15","5","그때에는 온 땅에 큰 소동이 벌어져, 사람들이 평안히 나들이도 못 하였습니다.","그 때에는 세상이 하도 어지러워서 그 나라 백성 어느 한 사람도 마음 편할 날이 없었소.","그 때에 온 땅의 모든 주민이 크게 요란하여 사람의 출입이 평안하지 못하며","그 때에 열국에 거한 모든 백성이 크게 요란하여 사람의 출입이 평안치 못하며","그 당시에는 여행하기가 두려울 지경이었습니다. 온 세상이 불안하고 혼란에 빠져 있었습니다.","At that time there was no peace for anyone to go or come; rather, there were many terrors upon the inhabitants of the lands.","And in those times there was no peace to him that went out, nor to him that came in, but great vexations were upon all the inhabitants of the countries.","In those days it was not safe to travel about, for all the inhabitants of the lands were in great turmoil.","In temporibus illis non erat pax egredienti et ingredienti sed perturbatio magna multa in cunctis habitatoribus terrarum;","ובעתים ההם אין שלום ליוצא ולבא כי מהומת רבות על כל יושבי הארצות׃"],["14","15","6","민족이 민족을, 성읍이 성읍을 쳐부수었습니다. 하느님께서 온갖 재난으로 그들을 혼란에 빠뜨리셨기 때문입니다.","이 민족 저 민족, 이 성읍 저 성읍이 서로 치고 받는 형편이었소. 하느님께서 온갖 고난으로 괴롭히셨던 것이오.","이 나라와 저 나라가 서로 치고 이 성읍이 저 성읍과 또한 그러하여 피차 상한 바 되었나니 이는 하나님이 여러 가지 고난으로 요란하게 하셨음이라","이 나라가 저 나라와 서로 치고 이 성읍이 저 성읍과 또한 그러하여 피차 상한바 되었나니 이는 하나님이 모든 고난으로 요란케 하셨음이니라","모든 민족들이 서로 싸워서 망해 갔습니다. 전쟁을 벌이지 않은 성읍이 하나도 없었습니다. 하나님께서 온갖 재앙과 환난으로 그들을 혼란과 불안에 빠뜨리셨기 때문입니다.","Nation crushed nation and city crushed city, for God overwhelmed them with every kind of distress.","And nation was destroyed of nation, and city of city: for God did vex them with all adversity.","One nation was being crushed by another and one city by another, because God was troubling them with every kind of distress.","contundebatur enim gens contra gentem, et civitas contra civitatem, quia Dominus conturbabat eos in omni angustia.","וכתתו גוי בגוי ועיר בעיר כי אלהים הממם בכל צרה׃"],["14","15","7","그러나 여러분은 용기를 내시고 여러분의 손에 힘을 잃지 마십시오. 여러분이 하는 일에 보상이 따를 것입니다.”","그러나 여러분이 하는 일에는 상급이 내릴 것이니, 기를 꺾지 말고 용기를 내시오.\"","그런즉 너희는 강하게 하라 너희의 손이 약하지 않게 하라 너희 행위에는 상급이 있음이라 하니라","그런즉 너희는 강하게 하라 손이 약하지 않게 하라 너희 행위에는 상급이 있음이니라","그러나 이제 여러분은 강하고 담대하십시오! 여러분이 하는 일에는 주님의 상이 따를 것입니다.\"","But as for you, be strong and do not slack off, for there shall be a reward for what you do.”","Be ye strong therefore, and let not your hands be weak: for your work shall be rewarded.","But as for you, be strong and do not give up, for your work will be rewarded.\"","Vos autem confortamini, et non dissolvantur manus vestrae; erit enim merces operi vestro “.","ואתם חזקו ואל ירפו ידיכם כי יש שכר לפעלתכם׃"],["14","15","8","아사는 이 말, 곧 오뎃 예언자의 예언을 듣고 용기를 내어 유다와 벤야민 온 지방에서, 그리고 에프라임 산악 지방에서 점령한 성읍들의 혐오스러운 것들을 없애 버렸다. 그런 다음, 주님의 집 현관에 있는 주님의 제단을 보수하였다.","아사는 오뎃의 아들 예언자 아자리야가 전해 주는 이 말을 듣고 용감하게 유다와 베냐민 온 지방과 에브라임 산악 지대에서 빼앗은 성읍들에 있던 우상들을 모조리 없애버리고 야훼의 성전 현관 앞에 서 있는 제단을 보수하였다.","아사가 이 말 곧 선지자 오뎃의 예언을 듣고 마음을 강하게 하여 가증한 물건들을 유다와 베냐민 온 땅에서 없애고 또 에브라임 산지에서 빼앗은 성읍들에서도 없애고 또 여호와의 낭실 앞에 있는 여호와의 제단을 재건하고","아사가 이 말 곧 선지자 오뎃의 예언을 듣고 마음을 강하게 하여 가증한 물건을 유다와 베냐민 온 땅에서 제하고 또 에브라임 산지에서 빼앗은 성읍들에서 제하고 또 여호와의 낭실 앞 여호와의 단을 중수하고","아사왕은 예언자 아사랴의 말을 듣고 그대로 개혁에 착수하여 유다와 베냐민 전역에서 가증스런 우상들을 모조리 없애고, 에브라임 산지의 정복한 성읍들에서도 더러운 우상들을 모조리 제거하였다. 이와 동시에 그는 예루살렘 성전의 낭실 앞에 있는 여호와의 제단을 보수하였다. 또 남녀 성창들도 쓸어 없애고, 성전을 모독하는 더러운 제물들도 걷어 버렸다.","When Asa heard these words and the prophecy (Oded the prophet), he was encouraged to remove the detestable idols from the whole land of Judah and Benjamin and from the cities he had taken in the highlands of Ephraim, and to restore the altar of the LORD which was before the vestibule of the LORD.","And when Asa heard these words, and the prophecy of Oded the prophet, he took courage, and put away the abominable idols out of all the land of Judah and Benjamin, and out of the cities which he had taken from mount Ephraim, and renewed the altar of the LORD, that was before the porch of the LORD.","When Asa heard these words and the prophecy of Azariah son of Oded the prophet, he took courage. He removed the detestable idols from the whole land of Judah and Benjamin and from the towns he had captured in the hills of Ephraim. He repaired the altar of the LORD that was in front of the portico of the LORD'S temple.","Cum audisset Asa verba haec et prophetiam, confortatus est et abstulit idola de omni terra Iudae et Beniamin et ex urbibus, quas ceperat montis Ephraim, et dedicavit altare Domini, quod erat ante porticum Domini.","וכשמע אסא הדברים האלה והנבואה עדד הנביא התחזק ויעבר השקוצים מכל ארץ יהודה ובנימן ומן הערים אשר לכד מהר אפרים ויחדש את מזבח יהוה אשר לפני אולם יהוה׃"],["14","15","9","그는 또 온 유다와 벤야민 백성, 그리고 에프라임과 므나쎄와 시메온에서 넘어와 그들 곁에서 나그네살이하는 이들을 불러 모았다. 주 아사의 하느님께서 그와 함께 계시는 것을 보고 많은 사람이 이스라엘에서 떨어져 나와 그에게 넘어왔던 것이다.","그리고 온 유다와 베냐민과 에브라임과 더부살이하는 므나쎄와 시므온 사람들을 불러모았다. 아사의 하느님 야훼께서 그와 함께 계시는 것을 보고 많은 사람이 이스라엘에서 떨어져 나와 그의 편에 붙었던 것이다.","또 유다와 베냐민의 무리를 모으고 에브라임과 므낫세와 시므온 가운데에서 나와서 저희 중에 머물러 사는 자들을 모았으니 이는 이스라엘 사람들이 아사의 하나님 여호와께서 그와 함께 하심을 보고 아사에게로 돌아오는 자가 많았음이더라","또 유다와 베냐민의 무리를 모으고 에브라임과 므낫세와 시므온 가운데서 나와서 저희 중에 우거하는 자를 모았으니 이는 이스라엘 사람들이 아사의 하나님 여호와께서 그와 함께하심을 보고 아사에게로 돌아오는 자가 많았음이더라","그런 다음에 아사는 거국적으로 제사를 드리기 위하여 유다와 베냐민 사람뿐 아니라 에브라임과 므낫세와 시므온 지역에서 탈출하여 유다에 머물러 사는 이들을 다 불러모았다. 이스라엘의 하나님 여호와께서 아사와 함께 계시는 것을 보고 북쪽에서 많은 사람들이 남쪽으로 그에게 넘어와 있었고, 남쪽의 시므온 지파에서도 에돔 족속에게 밀려 많은 사람이 유다로 올라왔다.","Then he gathered all Judah and Benjamin, together with those of Ephraim, Manasseh, and Simeon who were resident with them; for many had defected to him from Israel when they saw that the LORD, his God, was with him.","And he gathered all Judah and Benjamin, and the strangers with them out of Ephraim and Manasseh, and out of Simeon: for they fell to him out of Israel in abundance, when they saw that the LORD his God was with him.","Then he assembled all Judah and Benjamin and the people from Ephraim, Manasseh and Simeon who had settled among them, for large numbers had come over to him from Israel when they saw that the LORD his God was with him.","Congregavitque universum Iudam et Beniamin et advenas cum eis de Ephraim et de Manasse et de Simeon; plures enim ad eum confugerant ex Israel videntes quod Dominus Deus illius esset cum eo.","ויקבץ את כל יהודה ובנימן והגרים עמהם מאפרים ומנשה ומשמעון כי נפלו עליו מישראל לרב בראתם כי יהוה אלהיו עמו׃"],["14","15","10","그들은 아사 통치 제십오년 셋째 달에 예루살렘으로 모여들었다.","그들이 모두 예루살렘으로 모여온 것은 아사 왕 제십오년 삼월이었다.","아사 왕 제십오년 셋째 달에 그들이 예루살렘에 모이고","아사왕 십 오년 삼월에 저희가 예루살렘에 모이고","이리하여 아사왕 15년 3월에 온 백성이 예루살렘에 모였다.","They gathered at Jerusalem in the third month of the fifteenth year of Asa’s reign,","So they gathered themselves together at Jerusalem in the third month, in the fifteenth year of the reign of Asa.","They assembled at Jerusalem in the third month of the fifteenth year of Asa's reign.","Cumque convenissent in Ierusalem mense tertio anno quinto decimo regni Asa,","ויקבצו ירושלם בחדש השלישי לשנת חמש עשרה למלכות אסא׃"],["14","15","11","그날에 그들은 자기들이 가져온 전리품 가운데 소 칠백 마리와 양 칠천 마리를 주님께 희생 제물로 잡아 바치며,","그들은 그 날 전리품 가운데서 소 칠백 마리, 양 칠천 마리를 야훼께 잡아 바치며","그 날에 노략하여 온 물건 중에서 소 칠백 마리와 양 칠천 마리로 여호와께 제사를 지내고","그 날에 노략하여 온 물건 중에서 소 칠백과 양 칠천으로 여호와께 제사를 드리고","그날 그들은 적에게서 빼앗아 가져온 짐승들 가운데 소 700마리와 양 7천 마리를 제물로 여호와께 바쳤다.","and sacrificed to the LORD on that day seven hundred oxen and seven thousand sheep from the spoils they had brought.","And they offered unto the LORD the same time, of the spoil which they had brought, seven hundred oxen and seven thousand sheep.","At that time they sacrificed to the LORD seven hundred head of cattle and seven thousand sheep and goats from the plunder they had brought back.","immolaverunt Domino in die illa de manubiis, quas adduxerant: boves septingentos et oves septem milia.","ויזבחו ליהוה ביום ההוא מן השלל הביאו בקר שבע מאות וצאן שבעת אלפים׃"],["14","15","12","마음을 다하고 목숨을 다하여 주 저희 조상들의 하느님을 찾겠다는 계약을 맺었다.","마음을 다 기울이고 정성을 다 쏟아 선조들의 하느님 야훼만 찾겠다는 계약을 맺었다.","또 마음을 다하고 목숨을 다하여 조상들의 하나님 여호와를 찾기로 언약하고","또 마음을 다하고 성품을 다하여 열조의 하나님 여호와를 찾기로 언약하고","그리고 하나님이 그들의 조상과 맺으셨던 계약을 다시 확인하고, 마음과 힘을 다하여 주님을 섬기기로 약속하였다.","They entered into a covenant to seek the LORD, the God of their ancestors, with all their heart and soul;","And they entered into a covenant to seek the LORD God of their fathers with all their heart and with all their soul;","They entered into a covenant to seek the LORD, the God of their fathers, with all their heart and soul.","Et inierunt foedus, ut quaererent Dominum, Deum patrum suorum, in toto corde et in tota anima sua:","ויבאו בברית לדרוש את יהוה אלהי אבותיהם בכל לבבם ובכל נפשם׃"],["14","15","13","그리고 주 이스라엘의 하느님을 찾지 않는 자는 낮은 사람 높은 사람, 남자 여자 할 것 없이 다 죽이기로 하였다.","또 이스라엘의 하느님 야훼를 찾지 않는 자는 누구든지, 낮은 사람 높은 사람, 남자 여자 할 것 없이 다 죽이기로 하였다.","이스라엘 하나님 여호와를 찾지 아니하는 자는 대소 남녀를 막론하고 죽이는 것이 마땅하다 하고","무릇 이스라엘 하나님 여호와를 찾지 아니하는 자는 대소 남녀를 무론하고 죽이는 것이 마땅하다 하고","누구든지 주님의 뜻에 따라 살지 않으면 남자거나 여자거나, 높은 사람이거나 낮은 사람이거나 다 죽이기로 결정하였다.","and everyone who would not seek the LORD, the God of Israel, was to be put to death, from least to greatest, man or woman.","That whosoever would not seek the LORD God of Israel should be put to death, whether small or great, whether man or woman.","All who would not seek the LORD, the God of Israel, were to be put to death, whether small or great, man or woman.","si quis autem non quaesierit Dominum, Deum Israel, moriatur a minimo usque ad maximum, a viro usque ad mulierem.","וכל אשר לא ידרש ליהוה אלהי ישראל יומת למן קטן ועד גדול למאיש ועד אשה׃"],["14","15","14","그들은 고함 소리와 함성과 쇠 나팔과 뿔 나팔 소리가 울리는 가운데 주님께 맹세하였다.","그리고 쇠나팔, 뿔나팔 소리 울려퍼지는 가운데 모두 큰소리로 외치며 야훼께 맹세하였다.","무리가 큰 소리로 외치며 피리와 나팔을 불어 여호와께 맹세하매","무리가 큰 소리로 부르며 피리와 나팔을 불어 여호와께 맹세하매","그들은 기뻐 환호성을 지르고 온갖 피리와 나팔을 불면서 그 모든 것을 여호와께 맹세하였다.","They swore an oath to the LORD with a loud voice, with shouting and with trumpets and horns.","And they sware unto the LORD with a loud voice, and with shouting, and with trumpets, and with cornets.","They took an oath to the LORD with loud acclamation, with shouting and with trumpets and horns.","Iuraveruntque Domino voce magna in iubilo et in clangore tubarum et in sonitu bucinarum.","וישבעו ליהוה בקול גדול ובתרועה ובחצצרות ובשופרות׃"],["14","15","15","온 유다 백성이 마음을 다하여 맹세하고 정성을 다하여 그분을 찾자 그분께서 그들을 만나 주셨으므로, 그들은 자기들의 맹세를 두고 기뻐하였다. 그리고 주님께서는 사방으로부터 그들을 평온하게 해 주셨다.","온 유다 백성은 마음을 다 기울였기 때문에 그 일이 기뻤다. 그들은 열렬한 마음으로 하느님을 찾았다. 그래서 야훼께서는 그들을 만나주셨고 사방에 평화를 주셨다.","온 유다가 이 맹세를 기뻐한지라 무리가 마음을 다하여 맹세하고 뜻을 다하여 여호와를 찾았으므로 여호와께서도 그들을 만나 주시고 그들의 사방에 평안을 주셨더라","온 유다가 이 맹세를 기뻐한지라 무리가 마음을 다하여 맹세하고 뜻을 다하여 여호와를 찾았으므로 여호와께서도 저희의 만난바가 되시고 그 사방에 평안을 주셨더라","온 유다 백성들은 이렇게 그들이 확고한 신념을 가지고 맹세한 일을 두고 모두 기뻐하였다. 그들이 온 마음을 다 바쳐 기쁨으로 여호와를 찾았기 때문에 여호와께서도 그들에게 찾아오셔서 모든 국경선에 평화를 주셨다.","All Judah rejoiced over the oath, for they had sworn it with their whole heart and sought him with complete desire. The LORD was found by them, and gave them rest on every side.","And all Judah rejoiced at the oath: for they had sworn with all their heart, and sought him with their whole desire; and he was found of them: and the LORD gave them rest round about.","All Judah rejoiced about the oath because they had sworn it wholeheartedly. They sought God eagerly, and he was found by them. So the LORD gave them rest on every side.","Omnes, qui erant in Iuda, gavisi sunt de iuramento; in omni enim corde suo iuraverant et in tota voluntate quaesierant eum, et inventus fuerat ab eis. Praestititque eis Dominus requiem per circuitum.","וישמחו כל יהודה על השבועה כי בכל לבבם נשבעו ובכל רצונם בקשהו וימצא להם וינח יהוה להם מסביב׃"],["14","15","16","아사 임금은 자기 어머니 마아카마저 아세라를 위하여 역겨운 상을 만들었기 때문에, 모후 자리에서 물러나게 하였다. 그는 그 역겨운 상을 잘라 내고 조각내어 ‘키드론 골짜기’에서 불살라 버렸다.","1)아사 왕은 어머니 마아가를 태후의 자리에서 폐하기까지 하였다. 마아가는 아세라 여신에게 바치려고 망측한 것을 만들었던 것이다. 아사는 키드론 냇가에서 그 망측한 것을 토막내어 불살라 버렸다.15:16-16:6에 대해서는 1열왕 15:13-22 참조.","아사 왕의 어머니 마아가가 아세라의 가증한 목상을 만들었으므로 아사가 그의 태후의 자리를 폐하고 그의 우상을 찍고 빻아 기드론 시냇가에서 불살랐으니","아사왕의 모친 마아가가 아세라의 가증한 목상을 만들었으므로 아사가 그 태후의 위를 폐하고 그 우상을 찍고 빻아 기드론 시냇가에서 불살랐으니","아사왕은 두로의 여신 아세라의 목상들을 이스라엘에 들여온 할머니 마아가를 태후의 자리에서 폐하였다. 태후의 자리는 궁중에서 영향력이 크고 명령하는 위치였는데도 아사왕은 태후를 폐한 다음, 태후가 세웠던 목상들을 모조리 부수어 기드론 시냇가에서 불살랐다.","He also deposed Maacah, the mother of King Asa, from her position as queen mother because she had made an obscene object for Asherah; Asa cut down this object, smashed it, and burnt it in the Wadi Kidron.","And also concerning Maachah the mother of Asa the king, he removed her from being queen, because she had made an idol in a grove: and Asa cut down her idol, and stamped it, and burnt it at the brook Kidron.","King Asa also deposed his grandmother Maacah from her position as queen mother, because she had made a repulsive Asherah pole. Asa cut the pole down, broke it up and burned it in the Kidron Valley.","Sed et Maacham matrem Asa rex amovit, ne esset domina, eo quod fecisset simulacrum Aserae; quod contrivit Asa et in frusta comminuens combussit in torrente Cedron.","וגם מעכה אם אסא המלך הסירה מגבירה אשר עשתה לאשרה מפלצת ויכרת אסא את מפלצתה וידק וישרף בנחל קדרון׃"],["14","15","17","산당들은 이스라엘에서 없애 버리지 않았지만, 아사의 마음은 살아 있는 동안 내내 주님께 한결같았다.","그는 이스라엘에서 산당들을 없애버리지 않았지만, 마음만은 평생 한결같았다.","산당은 이스라엘 중에서 제하지 아니하였으나 아사의 마음이 일평생 온전하였더라","산당은 이스라엘 중에서 제하지 아니하였으나 아사의 마음이 일평생 온전하였더라","비록 모든 산당이 이스라엘에서 사라지지는 않았지만 아사의 마음은 일평생 온전히 주께 순종하였다.","The high places did not disappear from Israel, yet Asa’s heart was undivided as long as he lived.","But the high places were not taken away out of Israel: nevertheless the heart of Asa was perfect all his days.","Although he did not remove the high places from Israel, Asa's heart was fully committed to the LORD all his life.","Excelsa autem derelicta sunt in Israel; attamen cor Asa erat perfectum cunctis diebus eius.","והבמות לא סרו מישראל רק לבב אסא היה שלם כל ימיו׃"],["14","15","18","그는 아버지와 자기가 봉헌한 예물, 곧 은과 금과 기물들을 하느님의 집에 들여놓았다.","그는 선왕과 자기가 거룩하게 바친 금은 기물을 하느님의 성전으로 옮겨왔다.","그가 또 그의 아버지가 구별한 물건과 자기가 구별한 물건 곧 은과 금과 그릇들을 하나님의 전에 드렸더니","저가 또 그 부친의 구별한 물건과 자기의 구별한 물건 곧 은과 금과 기명들을 하나님의 전에 드렸더니","아사는 아버지 아비야가 주께 바쳤던 금그릇과 은그릇들을 성전에 가져다 놓고, 자기도 주께 더 많은 금그릇과 은그릇들을 성별하여 바쳤다.","He brought into the house of God his father’s and his own votive offerings: silver, gold, and vessels.","And he brought into the house of God the things that his father had dedicated, and that he himself had dedicated, silver, and gold, and vessels.","He brought into the temple of God the silver and gold and the articles that he and his father had dedicated.","Ea quae voverat pater suus et ipse, intulit in domum Dei, argentum et aurum vasorumque diversam supellectilem.","ויבא את קדשי אביו וקדשיו בית האלהים כסף וזהב וכלים׃"],["14","15","19","그 뒤에 아사 통치 제삼십오년까지 전쟁이 없었다.","이후 아사 왕 제삼십오년까지 전쟁이 없었다.","이 때부터 아사 왕 제삼십오년까지 다시는 전쟁이 없으니라","이 때부터 아사왕 삼십 오년까지 다시는 전쟁이 없으니라","이리하여 구스 사람 세라가 침공한 것 이외에는 아사왕 35년에 이르기까지 더 이상 전쟁이 없었다.","There was no war until the thirty-fifth year of Asa’s reign.","And there was no more war unto the five and thirtieth year of the reign of Asa.","There was no more war until the thirty-fifth year of Asa's reign.","Bellum vero non fuit usque ad tricesimum quintum annum regni Asa.","ומלחמה לא היתה עד שנת שלשים וחמש למלכות אסא׃"],["14","16","1","아사 통치 제삼십육년에 이스라엘 임금 바아사가 유다를 치러 올라와서, 아무도 유다 임금 아사와 왕래하지 못하게 하려고 라마를 세웠다.","아사 왕 제삼십육년에 이스라엘 왕 바아사가 유다로 쳐들어와 라마 성을 보수하였다. 유다 왕 아사로 하여금 군대를 출동시키지 못하게 하려는 속셈이었다.","아사 왕 제삼십육년에 이스라엘 왕 바아사가 유다를 치러 올라와서 라마를 건축하여 사람을 유다 왕 아사에게 왕래하지 못하게 하려 한지라","아사왕 삼십 륙년에 이스라엘 왕 바아사가 유다를 치러 올라와서 라마를 건축하여 사람을 유다 왕 아사에게 왕래하지 못하게 하려 한지라","ㄱ) 아사왕 36년에 이스라엘 왕 바아사가 남쪽 유다의 국경선 안으로 밀고 내려와 예루살렘 북방 16킬로미터 지점에 있는 라마 성읍을 요새화하기 시작하였다. 이는 남북으로 통하는 간선 도로를 통제하여 유다 백성의 자유로운 왕래를 막고 모든 교통과 무역로를 끊으며, 또 북쪽 사람들의 탈출과 예루살렘을 순례하려는 사람들의 발길을 막으려는 속셈이었다. (ㄱ. BC 879년)","In the thirty-sixth year of Asa’s reign, Baasha, king of Israel, attacked Judah and fortified Ramah to block all movement for Asa, king of Judah.","In the six and thirtieth year of the reign of Asa Baasha king of Israel came up against Judah, and built Ramah, to the intent that he might let none go out or come in to Asa king of Judah.","In the thirty-sixth year of Asa's reign Baasha king of Israel went up against Judah and fortified Ramah to prevent anyone from leaving or entering the territory of Asa king of Judah.","Anno autem tricesimo sexto regni eius ascendit Baasa rex Israel in Iudam; et muro circumdabat Rama, ut nullus tute posset egredi et ingredi de regno Asa.","בשנת שלשים ושש למלכות אסא עלה בעשא מלך ישראל על יהודה ויבן את הרמה לבלתי תת יוצא ובא לאסא מלך יהודה׃"],["14","16","2","그러자 아사는 주님의 집과 왕궁 창고에서 은과 금을 꺼내어, 다마스쿠스에 있는 아람 임금 벤 하닷에게 보내며 이렇게 말하였다.","그러자 아사는 야훼의 성전 창고와 왕실 창고에 남아 있던 은과 금을 모조리 거두어서 다마스쿠스에 자리잡고 있는 아람 왕 벤하닷에게 보내며 청하였다.","아사가 여호와의 전 곳간과 왕궁 곳간의 은금을 내어다가 다메섹에 사는 아람 왕 벤하닷에게 보내며 이르되","아사가 여호와의 전 곳간과 왕궁 곳간의 은금을 취하여 다메섹에 거한 아람 왕 벤하닷에게 보내며 가로되","그러나 남쪽의 아사왕은 군사적으로 이스라엘과 대결할 힘이 모자랐다. 그래서 외세를 끌어들이기 위해 북쪽 다메섹으로 특사를 보내어 아랍 왕 벤하닷에게 군사개입을 요청하였다. 그때에 그는 왕궁 곳간에 있는 은과 금은 물론 성전의 보물창고에 있던 금과 은도 모조리 특사 편에 보내면서 아람 왕에게 이렇게 간청하였다.","Asa then brought out silver and gold from the treasuries of the house of the LORD and the house of the king and sent them to Ben-hadad, king of Aram, who ruled in Damascus. He said:","Then Asa brought out silver and gold out of the treasures of the house of the LORD and of the king's house, and sent to Benhadad king of Syria, that dwelt at Damascus, saying,","Asa then took the silver and gold out of the treasuries of the LORD'S temple and of his own palace and sent it to Ben-Hadad king of Aram, who was ruling in Damascus.",null,"ויצא אסא כסף וזהב מאצרות בית יהוה ובית המלך וישלח אל בן הדד מלך ארם היושב בדרמשק לאמר׃"],["14","16","3","“나와 임금님 사이에, 나의 아버지와 임금님의 아버지 사이에 맺은 계약이 있습니다. 보십시오, 임금님에게 은과 금을 보냅니다. 이제, 이스라엘 임금 바아사와 맺으신 계약을 파기하시어, 그를 나에게서 물러가게 해 주십시오.”","\"나의 부친과 당신의 부친이 맺으신 동맹은 나와 당신의 사이에도 그대로 살아 있습니다. 나는 당신에게 은과 금을 예물로 보냅니다. 부디 이스라엘 왕 바아사와 맺으신 동맹을 파기하시고 바아사로 하여금 우리 영토에서 물러가게 해주십시오.\"","내 아버지와 당신의 아버지 사이에와 같이 나와 당신 사이에 약조하자 내가 당신에게 은금을 보내노니 와서 이스라엘 왕 바아사와 세운 약조를 깨뜨려 그가 나를 떠나게 하라 하매","내 부친과 당신의 부친 사이에와 같이 나와 당신 사이에 약조하자 내가 당신에게 은금을 보내노니 와서 이스라엘 왕 바아사와 세운 약조를 깨뜨려서 저로 나를 떠나게 하라 하매","\"우리의 선친들이 일찍이 군사 동맹을 맺었던 것처럼 우리도 서로 동맹을 맺읍시다. 내가 특사들 편에 은과 금을 보내니 왕은 이제 이스라엘 왕 바아사와 맺었던 동맹을 끊고 이스라엘을 쳐들어가 바아사가 유다 국경선에서 철수하게 해주십시오.\"","“There is a treaty between you and me, as there was between your father and my father. I am sending you silver and gold. Go, break your treaty with Baasha, king of Israel, that he may withdraw from me.”","There is a league between me and thee, as there was between my father and thy father: behold, I have sent thee silver and gold; go, break thy league with Baasha king of Israel, that he may depart from me.","\"Let there be a treaty between me and you,\" he said, \"as there was between my father and your father. See, I am sending you silver and gold. Now break your treaty with Baasha king of Israel so he will withdraw from me.\"","Foedus inter me et te est et inter patrem meum et patrem tuum; quam ob rem misi tibi argentum et aurum, ut, rupto foedere, quod habes cum Baasa rege Israel, facias eum a me recedere.","ברית ביני ובינך ובין אבי ובין אביך הנה שלחתי לך כסף וזהב לך הפר בריתך את בעשא מלך ישראל ויעלה מעלי׃"],["14","16","4","벤 하닷은 아사 임금의 말을 듣고, 군대의 장수들을 그에게 보내어 이스라엘의 성읍들을 치게 하였다. 그들은 이욘, 단, 아벨 마임, 납탈리의 모든 양곡 저장 성읍을 쳐부수었다.","벤하닷은 아사 왕의 청을 받아들여 군사령관들을 보내어 이스라엘 성읍들을 치게 하여, 이욘, 단, 아벨마임, 납달리의 곡식 저장성들을 모두 부수었다.","벤하닷이 아사 왕의 말을 듣고 그의 군대 지휘관들을 보내어 이스라엘 성읍들을 치되 이욘과 단과 아벨마임과 납달리의 모든 국고성들을 쳤더니","벤하닷이 아사왕의 말을 듣고 그 군대 장관들을 보내어 이스라엘 두어 성읍을 치되 이욘과 단과 아벨마임과 납달리의 모든 국고성을 쳤더니","벤하닷이 아사왕의 말을 듣고 이스라엘과 국교를 끊었다. 그리고 군대를 보내어 이스라엘 북쪽에 있는 성읍 이욘과 단과 아벨마임을 잿더미로 만들고, 납달리 지파의 곡식 저장 성읍들을 모조리 파괴하였다.","Ben-hadad agreed with King Asa and sent the leaders of his troops against the cities of Israel. They attacked Ijon, Dan, Abel-maim, besides all the store cities of Naphtali.","And Benhadad hearkened unto king Asa, and sent the captains of his armies against the cities of Israel; and they smote Ijon, and Dan, and Abelmaim, and all the store cities of Naphtali.","Ben-Hadad agreed with King Asa and sent the commanders of his forces against the towns of Israel. They conquered Ijon, Dan, Abel Maim and all the store cities of Naphtali.","Acquiescens Benadad regi Asa misit principes exercituum suorum ad urbes Israel, qui percusserunt Ahion et Dan et Abelmaim et universa horrea urbium Nephthali.","וישמע בן הדד אל המלך אסא וישלח את שרי החילים אשר לו אל ערי ישראל ויכו את עיון ואת דן ואת אבל מים ואת כל מסכנות ערי נפתלי׃"],["14","16","5","이 소식을 들은 바아사는 라마를 세우다 말고 공사를 그만두었다.","바아사는 이 소식을 듣고 라마 성의 보수를 중단하였다.","바아사가 듣고 라마 건축하는 일을 포기하고 그 공사를 그친지라","바아사가 듣고 라마 건축하는 일을 파하여 그 공역을 그친지라","그 소식을 들은 바아사는 곧 라마의 요새 건축 공사를 중단하였다.","When Baasha heard of it, he left off fortifying Ramah, putting an end to his work.","And it came to pass, when Baasha heard it, that he left off building of Ramah, and let his work cease.","When Baasha heard this, he stopped building Ramah and abandoned his work.","Quod cum audisset Baasa, desivit aedificare Rama et intermisit opus suum.","ויהי כשמע בעשא ויחדל מבנות את הרמה וישבת את מלאכתו׃"],["14","16","6","그러자 아사 임금은 유다인을 모두 데려다가, 바아사가 라마를 세우는 데에 쓰던 돌과 목재를 옮기게 하였다. 그러고 나서 그것들로 게바와 미츠파를 세웠다.","그러자 아사 왕은 온 유다인을 불러내어 바아사가 라마 성을 보수하는 데 쓰던 돌과 목재를 가져다가 게바와 미스바를 보수하였다.","아사 왕이 온 유다 무리를 거느리고 바아사가 라마를 건축하던 돌과 재목을 운반하여다가 게바와 미스바를 건축하였더라","아사왕이 온 유다 무리를 거느리고 바아사가 라마를 건축하던 돌과 재목을 수운하여다가 게바와 미스바를 건축하였더라","그러자 아사왕이 유다의 군대를 이끌고 가서, 바아사가 라마 건축을 위하여 준비해 놓았던 돌과 목재를 가져다가 예루살렘 북쪽에 있는 성읍 게바와 미스바를 요새화하는데 썼다.","Then King Asa commandeered all Judah and they carried away the stones and beams with which Baasha was fortifying Ramah. With them he fortified Geba and Mizpah.","Then Asa the king took all Judah; and they carried away the stones of Ramah, and the timber thereof, wherewith Baasha was building; and he built therewith Geba and Mizpah.","Then King Asa brought all the men of Judah, and they carried away from Ramah the stones and timber Baasha had been using. With them he built up Geba and Mizpah.","Porro Asa rex assumpsit universum Iudam, et tulerunt lapides Rama et ligna, quibus aedificaverat Baasa, aedificavitque ex eis Gabaa et Maspha.","ואסא המלך לקח את כל יהודה וישאו את אבני הרמה ואת עציה אשר בנה בעשא ויבן בהם את גבע ואת המצפה׃"],["14","16","7","그때에 하나니 선견자가 유다 임금 아사에게 와서 말하였다. “임금님께서 아람 임금에게 의지하시고 주 임금님의 하느님께 의지하지 않으셨으므로, 아람 임금의 군대가 임금님의 손에서 벗어나 버렸습니다.","그 때에 선견자 하나니가 유다 왕 아사에게 와서 말하였다. \"임금님께서는 임금님의 하느님 야훼를 믿지 아니하고 아람 왕을 믿으셨습니다. 그 까닭으로 해서 아람 군대는 임금님의 손에서 벗어날 것입니다.","그 때에 선견자 하나니가 유다 왕 아사에게 나와서 그에게 이르되 왕이 아람 왕을 의지하고 왕의 하나님 여호와를 의지하지 아니하였으므로 아람 왕의 군대가 왕의 손에서 벗어났나이다","때에 선견자 하나니가 유다 왕 아사에게 나아와서 이르되 왕이 아람 왕을 의지하고 왕의 하나님 여호와를 의지하지 아니한고로 아람 왕의 군대가 왕의 손에서 벗어났나이다","아사가 외세를 의지하여 평화를 이루었을 때에 선견자 하나니가 왕을 찾아가서 이렇게 책망하였다. \"왕께서 왕의 하나님 여호와의 도움 대신에 아람 왕의 도움을 의지하였으니 이제 다시는 아람 군대를 격파할 수 없을 것입니다.","At that time Hanani the seer came to Asa, king of Judah, and said to him: “Because you relied on the king of Aram and did not rely on the LORD, your God, the army of the king of Aram has escaped your power.","And at that time Hanani the seer came to Asa king of Judah, and said unto him, Because thou hast relied on the king of Syria, and not relied on the LORD thy God, therefore is the host of the king of Syria escaped out of thine hand.","At that time Hanani the seer came to Asa king of Judah and said to him: \"Because you relied on the king of Aram and not on the LORD your God, the army of the king of Aram has escaped from your hand.","In tempore illo venit Hanani videns ad Asa regem Iudae et dixit ei:  “Quia habuisti fiduciam in rege Syriae et non in Domino Deo tuo, idcirco evasit Syriae regis exercitus de manu tua.","ובעת ההיא בא חנני הראה אל אסא מלך יהודה ויאמר אליו בהשענך על מלך ארם ולא נשענת על יהוה אלהיך על כן נמלט חיל מלך ארם מידך׃"],["14","16","8","에티오피아인들과 리비아인들도 엄청나게 많은 병거와 군마를 갖춘 대군이 아니었습니까? 그러나 임금님께서 주님께 의지하셨으므로, 주님께서는 그들을 임금님의 손에 넘기셨습니다.","구스와 리비야 연합군이 어찌 그 수가 많지 않았겠습니까? 병거도 군마도 한없이 많았습니다. 그러나 임금님의 믿음을 보시고 야훼께서는 그들을 임금님의 손에 부치셨던 것입니다.","구스 사람과 룹 사람의 군대가 크지 아니하며 말과 병거가 심히 많지 아니하더이까 그러나 왕이 여호와를 의지하였으므로 여호와께서 왕의 손에 넘기셨나이다","구스 사람과 룹 사람의 군대가 크지 아니하며 말과 병거가 심히 많지 아니하더이까 그러나 왕이 여호와를 의지한고로 여호와께서 왕의 손에 붙이셨나이다","구스와 룹 군대가 얼마나 많은 전차와 기마병들을 거느린 막강한 군대였습니까? 그러나 왕께서 그 당시 여호와만을 의지하자 주께서 그들을 모조리 왕의 손에 넘겨 주셨습니다.","Were not the Ethiopians and Libyans a vast army, with great numbers of chariots and horses? And yet, because you relied on the LORD, he delivered them into your power.","Were not the Ethiopians and the Lubims a huge host, with very many chariots and horsemen? yet, because thou didst rely on the LORD, he delivered them into thine hand.","Were not the Cushites and Libyans a mighty army with great numbers of chariots and horsemen? Yet when you relied on the LORD, he delivered them into your hand.","Nonne Aethiopes et Libyes magnus exercitus erant quadrigis et equitibus et multitudine nimia, quos, cum Domino credidisses, tradidit in manu tua?","הלא הכושים והלובים היו לחיל לרב לרכב ולפרשים להרבה מאד ובהשענך על יהוה נתנם בידך׃"],["14","16","9","주님께서는 당신께 한결같은 마음을 지닌 사람들에게 용기를 주시려고, 온 세상을 두루 살펴보고 계십니다. 그런데 임금님께서 이번 일에서는 어리석게 행동하셨습니다. 이제부터 임금님께서는 전쟁을 치르셔야 합니다.”","야훼께서는 당신께 일편단심인 사람에게 용기를 주시려고 온 나라를 두루 살피고 계십니다. 그런데 임금님께서는 이렇듯이 어리석게 행동하셨습니다. 이제부터 임금님께서는 전쟁으로 시달리실 것입니다.\"","여호와의 눈은 온 땅을 두루 감찰하사 전심으로 자기에게 향하는 자들을 위하여 능력을 베푸시나니 이 일은 왕이 망령되이 행하였은즉 이 후부터는 왕에게 전쟁이 있으리이다 하매","여호와의 눈은 온 땅을 두루 감찰하사 전심으로 자기에게 향하는 자를 위하여 능력을 베푸시나니 이 일은 왕이 망령되이 행하였은즉 이 후부터는 왕에게 전쟁이 있으리이다 하매","여호와께서는 오직 한 마음으로 주님만 의지하는 이들을 도와주시려고 온 세상을 두루 살피고 계십니다. 그런데도 왕께서는 그 사실을 전혀 알지 못하는 사람처럼 처신하였으니 이제부터는 이 나라에 끊임없이 전쟁이 일어난 것입니다.\"","The eyes of the LORD roam over the whole earth, to encourage those who are devoted to him wholeheartedly. You have acted foolishly in this matter, for from now on you will have wars.”","For the eyes of the LORD run to and fro throughout the whole earth, to shew himself strong in the behalf of them whose heart is perfect toward him. Herein thou hast done foolishly: therefore from henceforth thou shalt have wars.","For the eyes of the LORD range throughout the earth to strengthen those whose hearts are fully committed to him. You have done a foolish thing, and from now on you will be at war.\"","Oculi enim Domini contemplantur universam terram et praebent fortitudinem his, qui corde perfecto credunt in eum. Stulte igitur egisti in hoc, quia ex praesenti tempore contra te bella consurgent “.","כי יהוה עיניו משטטות בכל הארץ להתחזק עם לבבם שלם אליו נסכלת על זאת כי מעתה יש עמך מלחמות׃"],["14","16","10","그러자 아사는 선견자에게 화가 나서 그를 감옥에 가두었다. 그 일로 그렇게 성이 났던 것이다. 그때에 아사는 백성 가운데에서 다른 이들도 괴롭혔다.","아사는 몹시 화가 나서 그 선견자를 옥에 가두어버렸다. 그 일로 하여 그렇게도 화가 났던 것이다. 그 무렵부터 아사는 백성을 학대하기 시작하였다.","아사가 노하여 선견자를 옥에 가두었으니 이는 그의 말에 크게 노하였음이며 그 때에 아사가 또 백성 중에서 몇 사람을 학대하였더라","아사가 노하여 선견자를 옥에 가두었으니 이는 그 말에 크게 노하였음이며 그 때에 아사가 또 몇 백성을 학대하였더라","그러자 아사가 노발대발하여 선견자 하나니를 당장 감옥에 처넣었다. 아사는 이때부터 하나니를 따르는 백성들도 잡아 가두고 괴롭히기 시작하였다.","But Asa became angry with the seer and imprisoned him in the stocks, so greatly was he enraged at him over this. Asa also oppressed some of his people at this time.","Then Asa was wroth with the seer, and put him in a prison house; for he was in a rage with him because of this thing. And Asa oppressed some of the people the same time.","Asa was angry with the seer because of this; he was so enraged that he put him in prison. At the same time Asa brutally oppressed some of the people.","Iratusque Asa adversus videntem iussit eum mitti in nervum, valde quippe super hoc fuerat indignatus; et vexavit Asa quosdam de populo in tempore illo.","ויכעס אסא אל הראה ויתנהו בית המהפכת כי בזעף עמו על זאת וירצץ אסא מן העם בעת ההיא׃"],["14","16","11","아사의 행적은 처음부터 끝까지 유다와 이스라엘 임금들의 실록에 쓰여 있다.","1)아사의 역사는 처음부터 끝까지 유다 왕조실록과 이스라엘 왕조실록에 기록되어 있다.11-14절에 대해서는 1열왕 15:23-24 참조.","아사의 처음부터 끝까지의 행적은 유다와 이스라엘 열왕기에 기록되니라","아사의 시종 행적은 유다와 이스라엘 열왕기에 기록되니라","아사에 대하여 더 말할 수 있는 것은 처음부터 끝까지 유다와 이스라엘 역대 왕들의 행적을 기록한 열왕기에서 읽을 수 있다.","Now the acts of Asa, first and last, are recorded in the book of the kings of Judah and Israel.","And, behold, the acts of Asa, first and last, lo, they are written in the book of the kings of Judah and Israel.","The events of Asa's reign, from beginning to end, are written in the book of the kings of Judah and Israel.","Opera autem Asa prima et novissima scripta sunt in libro regum Iudae et Israel.","והנה דברי אסא הראשונים והאחרונים הנם כתובים על ספר המלכים ליהודה וישראל׃"],["14","16","12","아사는 통치 제삼십구년에 발에 병이 났는데, 그 병이 매우 깊어졌다. 그렇게 아픈데도 그는 주님을 찾지 않고 의사들을 찾았다.","아사는 왕이 된 지 삼십구 년 되던 해에 다리를 크게 앓았다. 이렇게 병이 들었지마는 그는 야훼를 찾지 아니하고 의사들을 찾았다.","아사가 왕이 된 지 삼십구 년에 그의 발이 병들어 매우 위독했으나 병이 있을 때에 그가 여호와께 구하지 아니하고 의원들에게 구하였더라","아사가 왕이 된지 삼십 구년에 그 발이 병들어 심히 중하나 병이 있을 때에 저가 여호와께 구하지 아니하고 의원들에게 구하였더라","아사왕 통치 39년에 왕은 두 발이 부어서 움직일 수도 없게 되었다. 이렇게 앓으면서도 아사는 여호와를 찾지 않고 의사들만을 의지하였다.","In the thirty-ninth year of his reign, Asa contracted disease in his feet; it became worse, but even with this disease he did not seek the LORD, only physicians.","And Asa in the thirty and ninth year of his reign was diseased in his feet, until his disease was exceeding great: yet in his disease he sought not to the LORD, but to the physicians.","In the thirty-ninth year of his reign Asa was afflicted with a disease in his feet. Though his disease was severe, even in his illness he did not seek help from the LORD, but only from the physicians.","Aegrotavit etiam Asa anno tricesimo nono regni sui dolore pedum vehementissimo et nec in infirmitate sua quaesivit Dominum, sed magis in medicorum arte confisus est.","ויחלא אסא בשנת שלושים ותשע למלכותו ברגליו עד למעלה חליו וגם בחליו לא דרש את יהוה כי ברפאים׃"],["14","16","13","그리하여 아사는 자기 조상들과 함께 잠들었다. 임금이 된 지 사십일 년째 되던 해에 죽은 것이다.","아사가 숨을 거두고 세상을 떠난 것은 왕이 된 지 사십일 년 되던 해였다.","아사가 왕위에 있은 지 사십일 년 후에 죽어 그의 조상들과 함께 누우매","아사가 위에 있은지 사십 일년에 죽어 그 열조와 함께 자매","그는 왕위에 오른 지 41년 되던 해에 죽어 조상들의 묘실에 묻혔다.","Asa rested with his ancestors; he died in the forty-first year of his reign.","And Asa slept with his fathers, and died in the one and fortieth year of his reign.","Then in the forty-first year of his reign Asa died and rested with his fathers.","Dormivitque Asa cum patribus suis et mortuus est anno quadragesimo primo regni sui.","וישכב אסא עם אבתיו וימת בשנת ארבעים ואחת למלכו׃"],["14","16","14","사람들은 그가 자신을 위하여 다윗 성에 깎아 놓은 무덤에 그를 묻었다. 그들은 향 제조술에 따라 만든 온갖 향료로 가득 채운 침상에 그를 눕히고, 그를 위하여 아주 큰 불을 켜 놓았다.","사람들은 온갖 향료 제조술을 따라 만든 향료와 향유를 섞은 기름을 흠씬 뿌린 침대에 그를 눕혀서 다윗 성에 미리 마련해 두었던 무덤에 안장하고 그 앞에 큰 불을 켜놓았다.","다윗 성에 자기를 위하여 파 두었던 묘실에 무리가 장사하되 그의 시체를 법대로 만든 각양 향 재료를 가득히 채운 상에 두고 또 그것을 위하여 많이 분향하였더라","다윗성에 자기를 위하여 파 두었던 묘실에 무리가 장사하되 그 시체를 법대로 만든 각양 향재료를 가득히 채운 상에 두고 또 위하여 많이 분향하였더라","사람들은 그가 직접 다윗성에 파놓았던 바위굴 속에 놓인 침대 위에 그를 눕힌 뒤 그의 시신 위에 온갖 종류의 향유와 향기로운 물건을 뿌렸다. 그리고 온 백성은 왕의 죽음을 슬퍼하며 거대한 화톳불을 피워 놓았다.","They buried him in the tomb he had hewn for himself in the City of David, after laying him on a couch that was filled with spices and various kinds of aromatics compounded into an ointment; and they kindled a huge fire for him.","And they buried him in his own sepulchres, which he had made for himself in the city of David, and laid him in the bed which was filled with sweet odours and divers kinds of spices prepared by the apothecaries' art: and they made a very great burning for him.","They buried him in the tomb that he had cut out for himself in the City of David. They laid him on a bier covered with spices and various blended perfumes, and they made a huge fire in his honor.","Et sepelierunt eum in sepulcro suo, quod foderat sibi in civitate David; posueruntque eum super lectum plenum aromatibus et variis unguentis, quae erant pigmentariorum arte confecta, et fecerunt in exsequiis eius combustionem splendidam valde.","ויקברהו בקברתיו אשר כרה לו בעיר דויד וישכיבהו במשכב אשר מלא בשמים וזנים מרקחים במרקחת מעשה וישרפו לו שרפה גדולה עד למאד׃"],["14","17","1","아사의 아들 여호사팟이 그 뒤를 이어 임금이 되었다. 여호사팟은 이스라엘에 맞서 자신을 튼튼하게 하였다.","그의 아들 여호사밧이 뒤를 이어 왕위에 올라 이스라엘에 강경 정책을 폈다.","아사의 아들 여호사밧이 대신하여 왕이 되어 스스로 강하게 하여 이스라엘을 방어하되","아사의 아들 여호사밧이 대신하여 왕이 되어 스스로 강하게 하여 이스라엘을 방비하되","아사의 아들 여호사밧이 그 아버지를 이어 왕위에 올랐다. 그는 이스라엘을 대비해 유다를 아주 강력한 나라로 만들었다.","His son Jehoshaphat succeeded him as king and strengthened his position against Israel.","And Jehoshaphat his son reigned in his stead, and strengthened himself against Israel.","Jehoshaphat his son succeeded him as king and strengthened himself against Israel.","Regnavit autem Iosaphat filius eius pro eo et invaluit contra Israel.","וימלך יהושפט בנו תחתיו ויתחזק על ישראל׃"],["14","17","2","그는 유다의 모든 요새 성읍에 군대를 배치하고, 유다 땅과, 자기 아버지 아사가 점령한 에프라임의 성읍들에 수비대를 두었다.","그는 요새화된 유다 성읍들에 군대를 배치하고 유다 전국과 선왕 아사가 정복한 에브라임 성읍들에도 수비대를 배치하였다.","유다 모든 견고한 성읍에 군대를 주둔시키고 또 유다 땅과 그의 아버지 아사가 정복한 에브라임 성읍들에 영문을 두었더라","유다 모든 견고한 성읍에 군대를 주둔하고 또 유다 땅과 그 아비 아사의 취한바 에브라임 성읍들에 영문을 두었더라","그는 유다의 모든 요새 성읍에 군대를 배치하고, 유다 전역뿐 아니라 아버지 아사가 정복한 에브라임의 성읍들에도 수비대들을 주둔시켰다.","He placed armed forces in all the fortified cities of Judah, and set garrisons in the land of Judah and in the cities of Ephraim which Asa his father had taken.","And he placed forces in all the fenced cities of Judah, and set garrisons in the land of Judah, and in the cities of Ephraim, which Asa his father had taken.","He stationed troops in all the fortified cities of Judah and put garrisons in Judah and in the towns of Ephraim that his father Asa had captured.","Constituitque militum numeros in cunctis urbibus Iudae, quae erant vallatae muris; praesidiaque disposuit in terra Iudae et in civitatibus Ephraim, quas ceperat Asa pater eius.","ויתן חיל בכל ערי יהודה הבצרות ויתן נציבים בארץ יהודה ובערי אפרים אשר לכד אסא אביו׃"],["14","17","3","여호사팟이 자기 조상 다윗이 처음에 걷던 길을 따라 걷고 바알을 찾지 않았으므로, 주님께서는 그와 함께 계셨다.","여호사밧은 선왕이 처음에 살던 본을 따라 살았으며 바알신들을 찾지 않았다. 이것을 보시고 야훼께서는 그와 함께 하셨다.","여호와께서 여호사밧과 함께 하셨으니 이는 그가 그의 조상 다윗의 처음 길로 행하여 바알들에게 구하지 아니하고","여호와께서 여호사밧과 함께하셨으니 이는 저가 그 조상 다윗의 처음 길로 행하여 바알들에게 구하지 아니하고","여호사밧이 아버지 아사의 초기 행적과 같이 여호와만을 섬기며 살아가자, 주께서 늘 그와 함께 계시며 도와주셨다. 여호사밧은 가나안 원주민의 바알신을 섬기지 않고, 유다의 종교개혁을 지속적으로 계승하였다.","The LORD was with Jehoshaphat, for he walked in the earlier ways of David his father, and did not seek the Baals.","And the LORD was with Jehoshaphat, because he walked in the first ways of his father David, and sought not unto Baalim;","The LORD was with Jehoshaphat because in his early years he walked in the ways his father David had followed. He did not consult the Baals","Et fuit Dominus cum Iosaphat, quia ambulavit in viis patris sui primis et non speravit in Baalim","ויהי יהוה עם יהושפט כי הלך בדרכי דויד אביו הראשנים ולא דרש לבעלים׃"],["14","17","4","그는 자기 아버지의 하느님을 찾고 그분의 계명에 따라 걸었으며, 이스라엘의 행동을 따르지 않았던 것이다.","그가 선왕의 하느님을 찾고 그의 계명을 따라 살면서 이스라엘 사람들의 행동을 따르지 않았으므로","오직 그의 아버지의 하나님께 구하며 그의 계명을 행하고 이스라엘의 행위를 따르지 아니하였음이라","오직 그 부친의 하나님께 구하며 그 계명을 행하고 이스라엘의 행위를 좇지 아니하였음이라","그는 오직 자기 아버지의 하나님을 의지하여 하나님의 계명들을 지키고, 북쪽의 이스라엘 왕들처럼 우상을 섬기지 않았다.","Rather, he sought the God of his father and walked in his commands, and not the practices of Israel.","But sought to the Lord God of his father, and walked in his commandments, and not after the doings of Israel.","but sought the God of his father and followed his commands rather than the practices of Israel.","sed in Deo patris sui et perrexit in praeceptis illius et non iuxta peccata Israel.","כי לאלהי אביו דרש ובמצותיו הלך ולא כמעשה ישראל׃"],["14","17","5","그리하여 주님께서는 그의 손에서 나라를 튼튼하게 해 주셨다. 온 유다가 여호사팟에게 선물을 바치니, 그의 부와 영광이 대단하였다.","야훼께서 그의 통치를 굳건하게 하셨고 온 유다 백성이 선물을 바치니 그의 부귀는 대단하였다.","그러므로 여호와께서 나라를 그의 손에서 견고하게 하시매 유다 무리가 여호사밧에게 예물을 드렸으므로 그가 부귀와 영광을 크게 떨쳤더라","그러므로 여호와께서 나라를 그 손에서 견고하게 하시매 유다 무리가 여호사밧에게 예물을 드렸으므로 저가 부귀와 영광이 극하였더라","이렇게 그가 폭력과 음행을 멀리하고 깨끗한 손으로 주님만 섬기자 주께서 그의 권세를 조금도 흔들리지 않게 세워주셨다. 그러자 온 유다 백성이 그를 존경하며 예물을 바쳤으므로 그는 더없는 부귀와 영화를 누렸다.","Through him, the LORD made the kingdom secure, and all Judah gave Jehoshaphat gifts, so that great wealth and glory was his.","Therefore the LORD stablished the kingdom in his hand; and all Judah brought to Jehoshaphat presents; and he had riches and honour in abundance.","The LORD established the kingdom under his control; and all Judah brought gifts to Jehoshaphat, so that he had great wealth and honor.","Confirmavitque Dominus regnum in manu eius, et dedit omnis Iuda munera Iosaphat; factaeque sunt ei infinitae divitiae et multa gloria.","ויכן יהוה את הממלכה בידו ויתנו כל יהודה מנחה ליהושפט ויהי לו עשר וכבוד לרב׃"],["14","17","6","그는 용기를 내어 주님의 길을 걸으며 산당들과 아세라 목상들을 유다에서 없애 버렸다.","그는 야훼께서 가르쳐주신 대로 살기로 단단히 결심하고 산당들과 아세라 목상들을 유다에서 쓸어 없애버렸다.","그가 전심으로 여호와의 길을 걸어 산당들과 아세라 목상들도 유다에서 제거하였더라","저가 전심으로 여호와의 도를 행하여 산당과 아세라 목상들도 유다에서 제하였더라","그는 주님을 따르는 일에 더욱 용기를 얻고 그때까지도 아직 유다에 남아있는 이방신들의 제사처들과 아세라 목상들을 모조리 없애 버렸다.","Thus he was encouraged to follow the LORD’s ways, and once again he removed the high places and the asherahs from Judah.","And his heart was lifted up in the ways of the LORD: moreover he took away the high places and groves out of Judah.","His heart was devoted to the ways of the LORD; furthermore, he removed the high places and the Asherah poles from Judah.","Cumque sumpsisset cor eius audaciam propter vias Domini, etiam excelsa et palos de Iuda abstulit.","ויגבה לבו בדרכי יהוה ועוד הסיר את הבמות ואת האשרים מיהודה׃"],["14","17","7","그는 임금이 된 지 삼 년째 되던 해에 대신들, 곧 벤 하일, 오바드야, 즈카르야, 느탄엘, 미카야를 유다 성읍들에 보내어 백성을 가르치게 하였다.","또 그는 왕이 된 지 삼 년 되던 해에 백성들을 가르치려고 벤하일, 오바디야, 즈가리야, 느다넬, 미가야 등 대신들을 유다 성읍들로 보냈다.","그가 왕위에 있은 지 삼 년에 그의 방백들 벤하일과 오바댜와 스가랴와 느다넬과 미가야를 보내어 유다 여러 성읍에 가서 가르치게 하고","저가 위에 있은지 삼년에 그 방백 벤하일과 오바댜와 스가랴와 느다넬과 미가야를 보내어 유다 여러 성읍에 가서 가르치게 하고","여호사밧은 왕위에 오른지 3년째 되는 해에 유다 온 백성에게 여호와의 율법을 바르게 가르치기 위하여 거국적인 운동을 폈다. 그리하여 다음과 같이 유능한 고관들을 전국에 파견하였다. 벤하일, 오바댜, 스가랴, 느다넬, 미가야 이들은 전국을 돌아다니며 백성들에게 우상과 음행의 더러운 행실에서 떠나라고 가르쳤다.","In the third year of his reign he sent his officials, Ben-hail, Obadiah, Zechariah, Nethanel, and Micaiah, to teach in the cities of Judah.","Also in the third year of his reign he sent to his princes, even to Benhail, and to Obadiah, and to Zechariah, and to Nethaneel, and to Michaiah, to teach in the cities of Judah.","In the third year of his reign he sent his officials Ben-Hail, Obadiah, Zechariah, Nethanel and Micaiah to teach in the towns of Judah.","Tertio autem anno regni sui misit principes suos Benhail et Abdiam et Zachariam et Nathanael et Michaiam, ut docerent in civitatibus Iudae,","ובשנת שלוש למלכו שלח לשריו לבן חיל ולעבדיה ולזכריה ולנתנאל ולמיכיהו ללמד בערי יהודה׃"],["14","17","8","또 그들과 함께 레위인들, 곧 스마야, 느탄야, 즈바드야, 아사엘, 스미라못, 요나탄, 아도니야, 토비야, 톱 아도니야를 엘리사마 사제와 여호람 사제와 더불어 보냈다.","또 그들과 더불어 스마야, 느다니야, 즈바디야, 아사헬, 스미라못, 여호나단, 아도니야, 토비야 등 레위인들을 사제 엘리사마, 여호람과 함께 파송하였다.","또 그들과 함께 레위 사람 스마야와 느다냐와 스바댜와 아사헬과 스미라못과 여호나단과 아도니야와 도비야와 도바도니야 등 레위 사람들을 보내고 또 저희와 함께 제사장 엘리사마와 여호람을 보내었더니","또 저희와 함께 레위 사람 스마야와 느다냐와 스바댜와 아사헬과 스미라못과 여호나단과 아도니야와 도비야와 도바도니야등 레위 사람을 보내고 또 저희와 함께 제사장 엘리사마와 여호람을 보내었더니","왕은 또 스마야와 느다냐와 스바댜와 아사헬과 스미라못과 여호나단과 아도니야와 도비야와 도바도니야 같은 레위 사람들과 함께 제사장 엘리사마와 여호람을 동행시켜 백성에게 율법을 가르치게 하였다.","With them he sent the Levites Shemaiah, Nethaniah, Zebadiah, Asahel, Shemiramoth, Jehonathan, Adonijah, and Tobijah, together with Elishama and Jehoram the priests.","And with them he sent Levites, even Shemaiah, and Nethaniah, and Zebadiah, and Asahel, and Shemiramoth, and Jehonathan, and Adonijah, and Tobijah, and Tobadonijah, Levites; and with them Elishama and Jehoram, priests.","With them were certain Levites--Shemaiah, Nethaniah, Zebadiah, Asahel, Shemiramoth, Jehonathan, Adonijah, Tobijah and Tob-Adonijah--and the priests Elishama and Jehoram.","et cum eis Levitas Semeiam et Nathaniam et Zabadiam, Asael quoque et Semiramoth et Ionathan Adoniamque et Thobiam Levitas et cum eis Elisama et Ioram sacerdotes.","ועמהם הלוים שמעיהו ונתניהו וזבדיהו ועשהאל ושמרימות ויהונתן ואדניהו וטוביהו וטוב אדוניה הלוים ועמהם אלישמע ויהורם הכהנים׃"],["14","17","9","그들은 주님의 율법서를 가지고 유다에서 백성을 가르쳤다. 유다의 모든 성읍을 돌며 백성들을 가르친 것이다.","그들은 야훼의 법전을 가지고 유다 전국을 돌며 가르쳤다. 유다 성읍들을 하나도 빼놓지 않고 돌며 백성을 가르쳤다.","그들이 여호와의 율법책을 가지고 유다에서 가르치되 그 모든 유다 성읍들로 두루 다니며 백성들을 가르쳤더라","저희가 여호와의 율법책을 가지고 유다에서 가르치되 그 모든 성읍으로 순행하며 인민을 가르쳤더라","이들은 모두 전국의 성읍을 순회하며 여호와의 율법을 온 백성에게 가르쳤다.","They taught in Judah, having with them the book of the law of the LORD; they traveled through all the cities of Judah and taught among the people.","And they taught in Judah, and had the book of the law of the LORD with them, and went about throughout all the cities of Judah, and taught the people.","They taught throughout Judah, taking with them the Book of the Law of the LORD; they went around to all the towns of Judah and taught the people.","Docebantque in Iuda habentes librum legis Domini et circuibant cunctas urbes Iudae atque erudiebant populum.","וילמדו ביהודה ועמהם ספר תורת יהוה ויסבו בכל ערי יהודה וילמדו בעם׃"],["14","17","10","유다 주변에 있는 모든 나라가 주님에 대한 두려움에 사로잡혀, 여호사팟에게 싸움을 걸지 못하였다.","유다 주위에 있는 모든 나라들은 야훼를 두려워하여 감히 여호사밧에게 싸움을 걸지 못하였다.","여호와께서 유다 사방의 모든 나라에 두려움을 주사 여호사밧과 싸우지 못하게 하시매","여호와께서 유다 사면 열국에 두려움을 주사 여호사밧과 싸우지 못하게 하시매","여호와께서 유다와 인접한 모든 이웃 나라들에게 두려운 마음을 일으켜 어느 누구도 감히 여호사밧을 공격하지 못하게 하시니","Now the fear of the LORD was upon all the kingdoms of the countries surrounding Judah, so that they did not war against Jehoshaphat.","And the fear of the LORD fell upon all the kingdoms of the lands that were round about Judah, so that they made no war against Jehoshaphat.","The fear of the LORD fell on all the kingdoms of the lands surrounding Judah, so that they did not make war with Jehoshaphat.","Itaque factus est pavor Domini super omnia regna terrarum, quae erant per gyrum Iudae, nec audebant bellare contra Iosaphat.","ויהי פחד יהוה על כל ממלכות הארצות אשר סביבות יהודה ולא נלחמו עם יהושפט׃"],["14","17","11","필리스티아 사람들은 여호사팟에게 선물을 가져오기도 하고 은을 예물로 가져오기도 하였다. 아라비아인들도 그에게 작은 가축들을 끌고 왔는데, 숫양 칠천칠백 마리와 숫염소 칠천칠백 마리였다.","불레셋에서 여호사밧에게 선물로 은을 가져다 바치는 사람들이 있는가 하면 아랍인들은 숫양 칠천칠백 마리와 숫염소 칠천칠백 마리를 바쳤다.","블레셋 사람들 중에서는 여호사밧에게 예물을 드리며 은으로 조공을 바쳤고 아라비아 사람들도 짐승 떼 곧 숫양 칠천칠백 마리와 숫염소 칠천칠백 마리를 드렸더라","블레셋 중에서는 여호사밧에게 예물을 드리며 은으로 공을 바쳤고 아라비아 사람도 짐승떼 곧 수양 칠천 칠백과 수염소 칠천 칠백을 드렸더라","남서쪽의 블레셋 족속들은 여호사밧에게 온갖 예물과 조공으로 은을 바쳤으며, 유다 남부의 사막지대에 올라와 살던 아라비아 사람들은 숫양과 숫염소를 각각 7700마리씩이나 가져왔다. 다른 민족과 족속들도 모두 이렇게 하였다.","Some of the Philistines brought Jehoshaphat gifts and a tribute of silver; the Arabians also brought him a flock of seven thousand seven hundred rams and seven thousand seven hundred he-goats.","Also some of the Philistines brought Jehoshaphat presents, and tribute silver; and the Arabians brought him flocks, seven thousand and seven hundred rams, and seven thousand and seven hundred he goats.","Some Philistines brought Jehoshaphat gifts and silver as tribute, and the Arabs brought him flocks: seven thousand seven hundred rams and seven thousand seven hundred goats.","Sed et de Philisthim Iosaphat munera deferebant et vectigal argenti; Arabes quoque adducebant pecora arietum septem milia septingenta et hircos totidem.","ומן פלשתים מביאים ליהושפט מנחה וכסף משא גם הערביאים מביאים לו צאן אילים שבעת אלפים ושבע מאות ותישים שבעת אלפים ושבע מאות׃"],["14","17","12","여호사팟은 세력이 점점 커졌다. 그는 유다에 요새와 양곡 저장 성읍들을 세웠다.","이렇게 하여 여호사밧은 점점 강대해졌다. 그는 유다 나라 안에 요새들을 세우고 군수물자 보급성들을 세웠다.","여호사밧이 점점 강대하여 유다에 견고한 요새와 국고성을 건축하고","여호사밧이 점점 강대하여 유다에 견고한 채와 국고성을 건축하고","여호사밧은 점점 더 세력이 강해져서 유다 전역에 요새들과 국고성들을 건축하였다.","Jehoshaphat grew ever greater. He built strongholds and store cities in Judah.","And Jehoshaphat waxed great exceedingly; and he built in Judah castles, and cities of store.","Jehoshaphat became more and more powerful; he built forts and store cities in Judah","Crevit ergo Iosaphat et magnificatus est usque in sublime atque aedificavit in Iuda castella urbesque horreorum.","ויהי יהושפט הלך וגדל עד למעלה ויבן ביהודה בירניות וערי מסכנות׃"],["14","17","13","이렇게 그는 유다의 성읍들에 많은 일을 하고, 예루살렘에는 전사들, 그것도 용사들을 배치하였다.","이렇게 그는 유다 성읍들에 많은 일을 해놓았으며 예루살렘에는 정예부대를 배치해 두었다.","유다 여러 성에 공사를 많이 하고 또 예루살렘에 크게 용맹스러운 군사를 두었으니","유다 각 성에 역사를 많이 하고 또 예루살렘에 크게 용맹한 군사를 두었으니","전국의 각 성읍들에도 식량을 대량으로 비축해 놓았다.  여호사밧은 예루살렘에 가장 훈련이 잘된 정예 부대를 배치하였다.","He carried out many works in the cities of Judah, and he had soldiers, valiant warriors, in Jerusalem.","And he had much business in the cities of Judah: and the men of war, mighty men of valour, were in Jerusalem.","and had large supplies in the towns of Judah. He also kept experienced fighting men in Jerusalem.","Et multae copiae praesto erant ei in urbibus Iudae; viri quoque bellatores et robusti erant in Ierusalem,","ומלאכה רבה היה לו בערי יהודה ואנשי מלחמה גבורי חיל בירושלם׃"],["14","17","14","그들을 집안별로 사열한 수는 이러하다. 유다 집안에서는 천인대장 아드나 장수와 그의 용사 삼십만,","가문별로 병적에 오른 부대는 아래와 같다. 유다 가문의 천인부대 사령관들로서 아드나 사령관 밑에 삼십만,","군사의 수효가 그들의 족속대로 이러하니라 유다에 속한 천부장 중에는 아드나가 으뜸이 되어 큰 용사 삼십만 명을 거느렸고","군사의 수효가 그 족속대로 이러하니라 유다에 속한 천부장 중에는 아드나가 으뜸이 되어 큰 용사 삼십만을 거느렸고","그가 유다를 지키기 위하여 조직한 군대는 씨족별로 분류되어 있었는데 유다 지파의 지휘관들은 다음과 같았다. 최고 사령관은 아드나로서 용사 30만 명을 거느렸다.","This was their mustering according to their ancestral houses. From Judah, the commanders of thousands: Adnah the commander, and with him three hundred thousand valiant warriors.","And these are the numbers of them according to the house of their fathers: Of Judah, the captains of thousands; Adnah the chief, and with him mighty men of valour three hundred thousand.","Their enrollment by families was as follows: From Judah, commanders of units of 1,000: Adnah the commander, with 300,000 fighting men;","quorum iste numerus per familias singulorum: in Iuda principes exercitus, Ednas dux, et cum eo robustissimorum trecenta milia;","ואלה פקדתם לבית אבותיהם ליהודה שרי אלפים עדנה השר ועמו גבורי חיל שלש מאות אלף׃"],["14","17","15","그 밑에 천인대장 여호하난 장수와 그의 부하 이십팔만,","그 다음으로 여호하난 밑에 이십팔만,","그 다음은 지휘관 여호하난이니 이십팔만 명을 거느렸고","그 다음은 장관 여호하난이니 이십 팔만을 거느렸고","그 다음 부대의 최고 사령관은 여호하난으로 용사 28만명을 거느렸다.","Next to him, Jehohanan the commander, and with him two hundred eighty thousand.","And next to him was Jehohanan the captain, and with him two hundred and fourscore thousand.","next, Jehohanan the commander, with 280,000;","et ad latus eius Iohanan princeps et cum eo ducenta octoginta milia;","ועל ידו יהוחנן השר ועמו מאתים ושמונים אלף׃"],["14","17","16","그 밑에 주님을 위하여 자원한 지크리의 아들 아미스야와 그의 용사 이십만,","그 다음으로 야훼를 위해 자원해 나선 지그리의 아들 아마시야 밑에 이십만,","그 다음은 시그리의 아들 아마시야니 그는 자기를 여호와께 즐거이 드린 자라 큰 용사 이십만 명을 거느렸고","그 다음은 시그리의 아들 아마시야니 저는 자기를 여호와께 즐거이 드린 자라 큰 용사 이십만을 거느렸고","또 그 다음가는 부대의 최고 사령관은 시그리의 아들 아마시야로 20만 명을 거느렸다. 그는 여호와를 위하여 싸우겠다고 자원하여 군대에 들어온 사람이었다.","Next to him, Amasiah, son of Zichri, who offered himself to the LORD, and with him two hundred thousand valiant warriors.","And next him was Amasiah the son of Zichri, who willingly offered himself unto the LORD; and with him two hundred thousand mighty men of valour.","next, Amasiah son of Zicri, who volunteered himself for the service of the LORD, with 200,000.","ad latus quoque istius Amasias filius Zechri consecratus Domino et cum eo ducenta milia virorum fortium;","ועל ידו עמסיה בן זכרי המתנדב ליהוה ועמו מאתים אלף גבור חיל׃"],["14","17","17","벤야민 집안에서는 용사 엘야다와 그가 거느린, 활과 작은 방패로 무장한 그의 부하 이십만,","베냐민 가문에서는 용장 엘리아다 밑에 방패를 들고 활을 쏘는 병사 이십만,","베냐민에 속한 자 중에 큰 용사 엘리아다는 활과 방패를 잡은 자 이십만 명을 거느렸고","베냐민에 속한 자 중에 큰 용사 엘리아다는 활과 방패를 잡은 자 이십만을 거느렸고","베냐민 지파의 지휘관들은 다음과 같았다. 엘리아다는 그 휘하에 20만 명을 거느린 용감한 장군이었다. 그의 부하들은 모두 방패와 활로 무장하고 있었다.","From Benjamin: Eliada, a valiant warrior, and with him two hundred thousand armed with bow and buckler.","And of Benjamin; Eliada a mighty man of valour, and with him armed men with bow and shield two hundred thousand.","From Benjamin: Eliada, a valiant soldier, with 200,000 men armed with bows and shields;","de Beniamin autem robustus ad proelia Eliada et cum eo tenentium arcum et clipeum ducenta milia;","ומן בנימן גבור חיל אלידע ועמו נשקי קשת ומגן מאתים אלף׃"],["14","17","18","그 밑에 여호사팟과 그의 무장 군사 십팔만이었다.","그 다음으로 여호사밧 밑에 무장한 병사 십팔만이 있었다.","그 다음은 여호사밧이라 싸움을 준비한 자 십팔만 명을 거느렸으니","그 다음은 여호사밧이라 싸움을 예비한 자 십 팔만을 거느렸으니","그 다음가는 부대의 최고 사령관은 여호사밧으로서 전투태세를 갖춘 18만 명의 용사를 거느렸다.","Next to him, Jehozabad, and with him one hundred and eighty thousand equipped for war.","And next him was Jehozabad, and with him an hundred and fourscore thousand ready prepared for the war.","next, Jehozabad, with 180,000 men armed for battle.","et ad latus eius Iozabad et cum eo centum octoginta milia expeditorum militum.","ועל ידו יהוזבד ועמו מאה ושמונים אלף חלוצי צבא׃"],["14","17","19","이들이 임금을 모시는 군사였다. 임금은 그 밖에도 온 유다의 요새 성읍들에 군사들을 배치하였다.","이들이 왕을 모시는 병사들이었다. 그 밖에도 왕이 유다 전국의 요새화된 성읍들에 배치한 병사들이 있었다.","이는 다 왕을 모시는 자요 이 외에 또 온 유다 견고한 성읍들에 왕이 군사를 두었더라","이는 다 왕을 섬기는 자요 이 외에 또 온 유다 견고한 성에 왕이 군사를 두었더라","이들은 모두 유사시에 왕을 위하여 싸우기로 작정한 용사들이었다. 유다 전역의 요새에는 따로 정규 부대들이 항상 배치되어 있었다.","These attended the king; in addition to those whom the king had stationed in the fortified cities throughout all Judah.","These waited on the king, beside those whom the king put in the fenced cities throughout all Judah.","These were the men who served the king, besides those he stationed in the fortified cities throughout Judah.","Hi omnes erant ad manum regis, exceptis aliis, quos posuerat in urbibus muratis in universo Iuda.","אלה המשרתים את המלך מלבד אשר נתן המלך בערי המבצר בכל יהודה׃"],["14","18","1","여호사팟은 큰 부와 영광을 얻었다. 그리고 아합과 혼인 관계를 맺었다.","여호사밧은 남다른 부귀를 누렸다. 그는 아합의 사돈이 되었다.","여호사밧이 부귀와 영광을 크게 떨쳤고 아합 가문과 혼인함으로 인척 관계를 맺었더라","여호사밧이 부귀와 영광이 극하였고 아합으로 더불어 연혼하였더라","유다 왕 여호사밧은 이미 부귀와 영화를 크게 누리고 있었으나, 그는 또 이스라엘 왕 아합의 딸을 며느리로 맞이하여 북왕국과도 결혼 동맹을 맺게 되었다.","Jehoshaphat therefore had wealth and glory in abundance; but he became related to Ahab by marriage.","Now Jehoshaphat had riches and honour in abundance, and joined affinity with Ahab.","Now Jehoshaphat had great wealth and honor, and he allied himself with Ahab by marriage.","Fuit ergo Iosaphat dives et inclitus multum et affinitate coniunctus est Achab.","ויהי ליהושפט עשר וכבוד לרב ויתחתן לאחאב׃"],["14","18","2","몇 해가 지나서 여호사팟이 사마리아에 있는 아합에게 내려가니, 아합이 그와 그의 수행원들을 대접하려고 많은 양과 소를 잡았다. 아합은 그를 부추겨 라못 길앗을 치러 올라가려고 하였던 것이다.","1)여러 해 지나서 그는 아합을 찾아 사마리아로 내려간 일이 있었다. 아합은 그를 이용하여 라못길르앗을 칠 셈으로 양과 소를 많이 잡아 여호사밧 일행을 대접하였다.2-34절에 대해서는 1열왕 22:2-35 참조.","이 년 후에 그가 사마리아의 아합에게 내려갔더니 아합이 그와 시종을 위하여 양과 소를 많이 잡고 함께 가서 길르앗 라못 치기를 권하였더라","두어해 후에 저가 사마리아에 내려가서 아합에게 나아갔더니 아합이 저와 종자를 위하여 우양을 많이 잡고 함께 가서 길르앗 라못 치기를 권하더라","몇해가 지나서 여호사밧이 북왕국의 수도 사마리아로 아합왕을 방문하였다. 아합은 유다왕과 그의 수행원들을 맞이하여 많은 양과 소를 잡아 잔치를 베풀어 주었다. 그러고 나서 아합이 여호사밧에게 두 나라의 군대를 일으켜 길르앗 지방의 라못 성읍을 아람 족속의 손에서 빼앗아 오자고 설득하였다.","After some years he went down to Ahab at Samaria; Ahab slaughtered numerous sheep and oxen for him and for the people with him, and incited him to go up against Ramoth-gilead.","And after certain years he went down to Ahab to Samaria. And Ahab killed sheep and oxen for him in abundance, and for the people that he had with him, and persuaded him to go up with him to Ramothgilead.","Some years later he went down to visit Ahab in Samaria. Ahab slaughtered many sheep and cattle for him and the people with him and urged him to attack Ramoth Gilead.","Descenditque post annos ad eum in Samariam, ad cuius adventum mactavit Achab oves et boves plurimos ipsi et populo, qui venerat cum eo; persuasitque illi, ut ascenderet in Ramoth Galaad.","וירד לקץ שנים אל אחאב לשמרון ויזבח לו אחאב צאן ובקר לרב ולעם אשר עמו ויסיתהו לעלות אל רמות גלעד׃"],["14","18","3","이스라엘 임금 아합이 유다 임금 여호사팟에게 물었다. “나와 함께 라못 길앗으로 가시겠습니까?” 여호사팟이 그에게 대답하였다. “나나 임금님이나, 내 백성이나 임금님 백성이나 다 한편이니, 전쟁에서도 우리는 임금님과 함께할 것입니다.”","이스라엘 왕 아합은 유다 왕 여호사밧에게 라못길르앗을 함께 치러 가지 않겠느냐고 물었다. 여호사밧은 이렇게 대답하였다. \"우리가 네 것 내 것 찾을 사이입니까? 네 군대니 내 군대니 따질 사이입니까? 물론 함께 나가 싸워야지요.\"","이스라엘 왕 아합이 유다 왕 여호사밧에게 이르되 당신이 나와 함께 길르앗 라못으로 가시겠느냐 하니 여호사밧이 대답하되 나는 당신과 다름이 없고 내 백성은 당신의 백성과 다름이 없으니 당신과 함께 싸우리이다 하는지라","이스라엘 왕 아합이 유다 왕 여호사밧에게 이르되 당신은 나와 함께 길르앗 라못으로 가시겠느뇨 대답하되 나는 당신과 일반이요 내 백성은 당신의 백성과 일반이니 당신과 함께 싸우리이다","이스라엘 왕 아합이 빼앗긴 자기 나라의 성읍을 되찾는 싸움에 유다의 군대를 끌어들이려고 여호사밧왕에게 말하였다. \"임금께서는 나와 함께 라못 성읍을 치러 나가지 않겠습니까?\" 그러자 이미 결혼 동맹을 맺었으니 군사 동맹을 맺는 것도 당연하다고 여기고 여호사밧이 이렇게 대답하였다. \"임금님의 소원이 바로 나의 소원입니다. 나는 임금님과 함께 싸우러 나가고, 나의 백성은 임금님의 백성과 함께 싸우러 나가겠습니다.","Ahab, king of Israel, asked Jehoshaphat, king of Judah, “Will you come with me to Ramoth-gilead?” He answered, “You and I are as one, and your people and my people as well. We will be with you in the battle.”","And Ahab king of Israel said unto Jehoshaphat king of Judah, Wilt thou go with me to Ramothgilead? And he answered him, I am as thou art, and my people as thy people; and we will be with thee in the war.","Ahab king of Israel asked Jehoshaphat king of Judah, \"Will you go with me against Ramoth Gilead?\" Jehoshaphat replied, \"I am as you are, and my people as your people; we will join you in the war.\"","Dixitque Achab rex Israel ad Iosaphat regem Iudae:  “Veni mecum in Ramoth Galaad “. Cui ille respondit:  “Ut ego, et tu; sicut populus tuus, sic et populus meus, tecumque erimus in bello “.","ויאמר אחאב מלך ישראל אל יהושפט מלך יהודה התלך עמי רמת גלעד ויאמר לו כמוני כמוך וכעמך עמי ועמך במלחמה׃"],["14","18","4","그러고 나서 여호사팟은, “그러나 먼저 주님의 뜻을 문의하시지요.” 하고 이스라엘 임금에게 말하였다.","그러나 여호사밧은 \"먼저 야훼께 여쭈어보도록 합시다.\" 하고 이스라엘 왕에게 말하였다.","여호사밧이 또 이스라엘 왕에게 이르되 청하건대 먼저 여호와의 말씀이 어떠하신지 오늘 물어 보소서 하더라","여호사밧이 또 이스라엘 왕에게 이르되 청컨대 먼저 여호와의 말씀이 어떠하신지 물어 보소서","그러나 여호와께서 어떻게 생각하시는지를 먼저 물어 보십시오.\"","Jehoshaphat also said to the king of Israel, “Seek the word of the LORD at once.”","And Jehoshaphat said unto the king of Israel, Enquire, I pray thee, at the word of the LORD to day.","But Jehoshaphat also said to the king of Israel, \"First seek the counsel of the LORD.\"","Dixitque Iosaphat ad regem Israel:  “Consule, obsecro, impraesentiarum sermonem Domini “.","ויאמר יהושפט אל מלך ישראל דרש נא כיום את דבר יהוה׃"],["14","18","5","그러자 이스라엘 임금은 예언자 사백 명을 모아 놓고 물었다. “우리가 라못 길앗으로 싸우러 가는 것이 좋겠소? 아니면 그만두는 것이 좋겠소?” 그들이 임금에게 대답하였다. “올라가십시오. 하느님께서 그곳을 임금님 손에 넘겨주실 것입니다.”","그리하여 이스라엘 왕은 예언자 사백 명을 불러들여 물었다. \"우리가 라못길르앗을 치러 가도 좋겠는가? 아니면 그만두어야 하겠는가?\" 그들이 대답하였다. \"쳐 올라가십시오. 야훼께서 라못길르앗을 임금님의 손에 부치실 것입니다.\"","이스라엘 왕이 이에 선지자 사백 명을 모으고 그들에게 이르되 우리가 길르앗 라못에 가서 싸우랴 말랴 하니 그들이 이르되 올라가소서 하나님이 그 성읍을 왕의 손에 붙이시리이다 하더라","이스라엘 왕이 이에 선지자 사백인을 모으고 저희에게 이르되 우리가 길르앗 라못에 가서 싸우랴 말랴 저희가 가로되 올라 가소서 하나님이 그 성을 왕의 손에 붙이시리이다","그러자 이스라엘 왕이 북왕국의 모든 궁중 예언자 400명을 불러모아 놓고 물었다. \"우리가 길르앗의 라못 성읍을 공격하는 것이 좋겠소, 그만 두는 것이 좋겠소?\" 이미 여호와 종교의 정통성을 상실한 북왕국의 어용 예언자들은 왕을 기쁘게 하려고 한결같이 이렇게 대답하였다. \"공격하십시오! 여호와께서 틀림없이 그 성읍을 임금님의 손에 넘겨 주실 것입니다.\"","The king of Israel assembled the prophets, four hundred of them, and asked, “Shall we go to fight against Ramoth-gilead, or shall I refrain?” They said, “Attack. God will give it into the power of the king.”","Therefore the king of Israel gathered together of prophets four hundred men, and said unto them, Shall we go to Ramothgilead to battle, or shall I forbear? And they said, Go up; for God will deliver it into the king's hand.","So the king of Israel brought together the prophets--four hundred men--and asked them, \"Shall we go to war against Ramoth Gilead, or shall I refrain?\" \"Go,\" they answered, \"for God will give it into the king's hand.\"","Congregavitque rex Israel prophetarum quadringentos viros et dixit ad eos:  “In Ramoth Galaad ad bellandum ire debemus an quiescere? “. At illi:  “Ascende, inquiunt, et tradet Deus in manu regis “.","ויקבץ מלך ישראל את הנבאים ארבע מאות איש ויאמר אלהם הנלך אל רמת גלעד למלחמה אם אחדל ויאמרו עלה ויתן האלהים ביד המלך׃"],["14","18","6","그러나 여호사팟이 물었다. “우리가 문의할 만한 주님의 다른 예언자는 더 없습니까?”","그러나 여호사밧은 다시 물었다. \"이들 외에 우리가 물어볼 만한 다른 야훼의 예언자는 없습니까?\"","여호사밧이 이르되 이 외에 우리가 물을 만한 여호와의 선지자가 여기 있지 아니하니이까 하니","여호사밧이 가로되 이 외에 우리가 물을만한 여호와의 선지자가 여기 있지 아니하니이까","그러나 남왕국의 여호사밧왕은 결정을 내리기 전에 좀더 알아보려고 이렇게 물었다. \"우리가 여호와의 뜻을 물어 볼 수 있는 예언자가 이곳에는 더 없습니까?\"","But Jehoshaphat said, “Is there no other prophet of the LORD here we might consult?”","But Jehoshaphat said, Is there not here a prophet of the LORD besides, that we might enquire of him?","But Jehoshaphat asked, \"Is there not a prophet of the LORD here whom we can inquire of?\"","Dixitque Iosaphat:  “Numquid non est hic et alius propheta Domini, ut ab illo etiam requiramus? “.","ויאמר יהושפט האין פה נביא ליהוה עוד ונדרשה מאתו׃"],["14","18","7","이스라엘 임금이 여호사팟에게 대답하였다. “주님의 뜻을 문의해 줄 이가 한 사람 더 있기는 합니다. 이믈라의 아들 미카야인데, 나는 그를 싫어합니다. 그는 내 일을 두고 좋게 예언하지 않고 언제나 나쁘게만 예언합니다.” 여호사팟이 말하였다. “임금으로서 그렇게 말씀하시면 안 됩니다.”","이스라엘 왕이 여호사밧에게 대답하였다. \"야훼께 뜻을 여쭈어줄 자가 하나 더 있기는 합니다. 이믈라의 아들 미가야라는 자인데, 나는 그를 싫어합니다. 그는 내가 하겠다는 일이면 사사건건 잘되지 않으리라고 하는 자입니다. 한 번도 잘되리라고 한 적이 없습니다.\" 여호사밧이 말하였다. \"한 나라의 왕으로서 그런 말씀을 하시는 게 아닙니다.\"","이스라엘 왕이 여호사밧에게 이르되 아직도 이믈라의 아들 미가야 한 사람이 있으니 그로 말미암아 여호와께 물을 수 있으나 그는 내게 대하여 좋은 일로는 예언하지 아니하고 항상 나쁜 일로만 예언하기로 내가 그를 미워하나이다 하더라 여호사밧이 이르되 왕은 그런 말씀을 마소서 하니","이스라엘 왕이 여호사밧에게 이르되 오히려 이믈라의 아들 미가야 한 사람이 있으니 저로 말미암아 여호와께 물을 수 있으나 저는 내게 대하여 길한 일은 예언하지 아니하고 항상 흉한 일만 예언하기로 내가 저를 미워하나이다 여호사밧이 가로되 왕은 그런 말씀을 마소서","아합이 대답하였다. \"이믈라의 아들 미가야라는 예언자가 또 한 사람 있기는 합니다. 그러나 그는 내게 항상 나쁜 말만 들려주고 있습니다. 참으로 참을 수 없는 사람입니다.\" 여호사밧은 \"임금께서 그렇게만 말씀하시면 안됩니다.\" 하고 반대하면서 그 여호와의 예언자에게 묻도록 하였다.","The king of Israel answered, “There is one other man through whom we may consult the LORD; but I hate him, because he prophesies not good but always evil about me. He is Micaiah, son of Imlah.” Jeshoshaphat said, “Let not the king say that.”","And the king of Israel said unto Jehoshaphat, There is yet one man, by whom we may enquire of the LORD: but I hate him; for he never prophesied good unto me, but always evil: the same is Micaiah the son of Imla. And Jehoshaphat said, Let not the king say so.","The king of Israel answered Jehoshaphat, \"There is still one man through whom we can inquire of the LORD, but I hate him because he never prophesies anything good about me, but always bad. He is Micaiah son of Imlah.\" \"The king should not say that,\" Jehoshaphat replied.","Et ait rex Israel ad Iosaphat:  “Adhuc est vir unus, a quo possumus quaerere Domini voluntatem; sed ego odi eum, quia non prophetat mihi bonum sed malum omni tempore: est autem Michaeas filius Iemla “. Dixitque Iosaphat:  “Ne loquaris, rex, hoc modo “.","ויאמר מלך ישראל אל יהושפט עוד איש אחד לדרוש את יהוה מאתו ואני שנאתיהו כי איננו מתנבא עלי לטובה כי כל ימיו לרעה הוא מיכיהו בן ימלא ויאמר יהושפט אל יאמר המלך כן׃"],["14","18","8","그러자 이스라엘 임금은 내시 하나를 불러, “이믈라의 아들 미카야를 빨리 데려오너라.” 하고 일렀다.","이스라엘 왕은 내시를 불러 이믈라의 아들 미가야를 급히 데려오라고 명령하였다.","이스라엘 왕이 한 내시를 불러 이르되 이믈라의 아들 미가야를 속히 오게 하라 하니라","이스라엘 왕이 한 내시를 불러 이르되 이믈라의 아들 미가야로 속히 오게 하라 하니라","아합이 신하를 불러 \"어서 미가야를 데려오너라\" 하고 명령하였다.","So the king of Israel called an official, and said to him, “Get Micaiah, son of Imlah, at once.”","And the king of Israel called for one of his officers, and said, Fetch quickly Micaiah the son of Imla.","So the king of Israel called one of his officials and said, \"Bring Micaiah son of Imlah at once.\"","Vocavit ergo rex Israel unum de eunuchis et dixit ei:  “Voca cito Michaeam filium Iemla “.","ויקרא מלך ישראל אל סריס אחד ויאמר מהר מיכהו בן ימלא׃"],["14","18","9","그때에 정장을 한 이스라엘 임금과 유다 임금 여호사팟은 사마리아 성문 어귀의 타작마당에 마련된 왕좌에 앉아 있었고, 그들 앞에서는 모든 예언자가 예언하고 있었다.","그 때 이스라엘 왕과 유다 왕 여호사밧은 사마리아 성문 밖 타작 마당에 마련해 놓은 왕좌에 정장을 하고 나란히 앉아 있었고, 모든 예언자들이 그 두 왕 앞에서 예언하고 있었다.","이스라엘 왕과 유다 왕 여호사밧이 왕복을 입고 사마리아 성문 어귀 광장에서 각기 보좌에 앉았고 여러 선지자들이 그 앞에서 예언을 하는데","이스라엘 왕과 유다 왕 여호사밧이 왕복을 입고 사마리아 성문 어귀 광장에서 각기 보좌에 앉았고 모든 선지자가 그 앞에서 예언을 하는데","이스라엘 왕 아합과 유다 왕 여호사밧이 사마리아 성문 밖 광장에 설치된 두 개의 왕좌 위에 화려하게 왕복을 차려 입고 앉아 있는 가운데 이스라엘의 예언자들은 두 왕 앞에 앉아 모두 황홀한 상태에서 영감을 받아 예언을 하고 있었다.","The king of Israel and Jehoshaphat, king of Judah, were seated, each on his throne, clothed in their robes of state in the square at the entrance of the gate of Samaria, and all the prophets were prophesying before them.","And the king of Israel and Jehoshaphat king of Judah sat either of them on his throne, clothed in their robes, and they sat in a void place at the entering in of the gate of Samaria; and all the prophets prophesied before them.","Dressed in their royal robes, the king of Israel and Jehoshaphat king of Judah were sitting on their thrones at the threshing floor by the entrance to the gate of Samaria, with all the prophets prophesying before them.","Porro rex Israel et Iosaphat rex Iudae uterque sedebant in solio suo vestiti cultu regio; sedebant autem in area iuxta portam Samariae, omnesque prophetae vaticinabantur coram eis.","ומלך ישראל ויהושפט מלך יהודה יושבים איש על כסאו מלבשים בגדים וישבים בגרן פתח שער שמרון וכל הנביאים מתנבאים לפניהם׃"],["14","18","10","크나아나의 아들 치드키야는 쇠로 뿔들을 직접 만들어 가지고 와서 말하였다. “주님께서 이렇게 말씀하십니다. ‘네가 이 뿔들로 아람인들을 들이받아 마침내 전멸시킬 것이다.’”","그나아나의 아들 시드키야는 쇠로 만든 뿔을 몇 개 가지고 나와서 말하였다. \"야훼께서 이렇게 말씀하십니다. '네가 이 뿔들로 시리아 군을 들이받아 전멸시키리라.'\"","그나아나의 아들 시드기야는 철로 뿔들을 만들어 가지고 말하되 여호와께서 이같이 말씀하시기를 왕이 이것들로 아람 사람을 찔러 진멸하리라 하셨다 하고","그나아나의 아들 시드기야는 철로 뿔들을 만들어 가지고 말하되 여호와의 말씀이 왕이 이것들로 아람 사람을 찔러 진멸하리라 하셨다하고","그나아나의 아들 시드기야가 쇠로 된 뿔을 두개 만들어 철모에 달아 쓰고 황홀한 영감에 빠져 이렇게 외쳤다. \"여호와께서 말씀하십니다. \"왕은 이렇게 쇠뿔이 난 황소처럼 무적의 용사가 되어 아람 군대로 달려가서 그들을 모조리 받아 죽일 것이다. 적진은 온통 피의 바다를 이룰 것이다.\"","Zedekiah, son of Chenaanah, made himself two horns of iron and said: “The LORD says: With these you shall gore Aram until you have destroyed them.”","And Zedekiah the son of Chenaanah had made him horns of iron, and said, Thus saith the LORD, With these thou shalt push Syria until they be consumed.","Now Zedekiah son of Kenaanah had made iron horns, and he declared, \"This is what the LORD says: 'With these you will gore the Arameans until they are destroyed.'\"","Sedecias vero filius Chanaana fecit sibi cornua ferrea et ait:  “Haec dicit Dominus: His ventilabis Syriam, donec conteras eam “.","ויעש לו צדקיהו בן כנענה קרני ברזל ויאמר כה אמר יהוה באלה תנגח את ארם עד כלותם׃"],["14","18","11","그러자 다른 예언자들도 모두 같은 예언을 하며 말하였다. “라못 길앗으로 올라가 승리를 거두십시오. 주님께서 그곳을 임금님 손에 넘겨주실 것입니다.”","모든 예언자들이 같은 예언을 하며 말하였다. \"라못길르앗으로 쳐 올라가 정복하십시오. 야훼께서 그 곳을 임금님의 손에 부치실 것입니다.\"","여러 선지자들도 그와 같이 예언하여 이르기를 길르앗 라못으로 올라가서 승리를 거두소서 여호와께서 그 성읍을 왕의 손에 넘기시리이다 하더라","모든 선지자도 그와 같이 예언하여 이르기를 길르앗 라못으로 올라가서 승리를 얻으소서 여호와께서 그 성을 왕의 손에 붙이시리이다 하더라","그러자 다른 예언자들도 시드기야의 말을 받아 외쳐 댔다. \"길르앗라못을 어서 치러 가십시오. 승리하십니다! 여호와께서 그 성읍을 틀림없이 임금님의 손에 넘겨 주실 것입니다!\"","The other prophets prophesied in the same vein, saying: “Attack Ramoth-gilead, and conquer! The LORD will give it into the power of the king.”","And all the prophets prophesied so, saying, Go up to Ramothgilead, and prosper: for the LORD shall deliver it into the hand of the king.","All the other prophets were prophesying the same thing. \"Attack Ramoth Gilead and be victorious,\" they said, \"for the LORD will give it into the king's hand.\"","Omnesque prophetae similiter prophetabant atque dicebant:  “Ascende in Ramoth Galaad et prosperaberis; et tradet Dominus in manu regis “.","וכל הנבאים נבאים כן לאמר עלה רמת גלעד והצלח ונתן יהוה ביד המלך׃"],["14","18","12","미카야를 부르러 간 사자가 그에게 말하였다. “예언자들이 임금님께 한결같이 좋게 말하였습니다. 그러니 예언자께서도 그들처럼 좋게 말씀하십시오.”","미가야를 부르러 간 사람이 그를 만나 말하였다. \"모든 예언자들이 한결같이 입을 모아 만사가 왕의 뜻대로 되리라고 예언하였소. 그러니 당신도 그들과 같은 말로 일이 순조롭게 되리라고 예언하시오.\"","미가야를 부르러 간 사자가 그에게 말하여 이르되 선지자들의 말이 하나 같이 왕에게 좋게 말하니 청하건대 당신의 말도 그들 중 한 사람처럼 좋게 말하소서 하니","미가야를 부르러 간 사자가 일러 가로되 선지자들의 말이 여출일구하여 왕에게 길하게 하니 청컨대 당신의 말도 저희중 한 사람처럼 길하게 하소서","미가야를 데리러 간 신하가 그에게 타이르듯 말하였다. \"지금 전국에서 모인 예언자들이 한결같이 아합왕에게 승리를 예고해주었소. 그러니 당신도 시대를 똑바로 보고 헛소리를 하지 마시오. 그저 당신도 왕의 승리만 장담해 주시오.\"","Meanwhile the messenger who had gone to call Micaiah said to him: “Look now, the words of the prophets are as one in speaking good for the king. Let your word be at one with theirs; speak a good word.”","And the messenger that went to call Micaiah spake to him, saying, Behold, the words of the prophets declare good to the king with one assent; let thy word therefore, I pray thee, be like one of their's, and speak thou good.","The messenger who had gone to summon Micaiah said to him, \"Look, as one man the other prophets are predicting success for the king. Let your word agree with theirs, and speak favorably.\"","Nuntius autem, qui ierat ad vocandum Michaeam, ait illi:  “En verba omnium prophetarum uno ore bona regi annuntiant; quaeso ergo te, ut et sermo tuus ab eis non dissentiat, loquarisque prospera “.","והמלאך אשר הלך לקרא למיכיהו דבר אליו לאמר הנה דברי הנבאים פה אחד טוב אל המלך ויהי נא דברך כאחד מהם ודברת טוב׃"],["14","18","13","그러나 미카야는, “주님께서 살아 계시는 한, 나는 내 하느님께서 말씀하신 것을 전할 따름이오.” 하고 대답하였다.","미가야는 \"무슨 일이 있어도 나는 하느님께서 나에게 말씀하신 것을 그대로 전할 따름이오.\" 하고 대답하였다.","미가야가 이르되 여호와께서 살아 계심을 두고 맹세하노니 내 하나님께서 말씀하시는 것 곧 그것을 내가 말하리라 하고","미가야가 가로되 여호와의 사심을 가리켜 맹세하노니 내 하나님의 말씀하시는 것 곧 그것을 내가 말하리라하고","미가야가 대답하였다. \"살아 계시는 여호와 앞에서 분명히 말하지만, 여호와께서 나에게 맡겨 주시는 말씀 밖에는 내 마음대로 한마디도 할 수가 없소!\"","Micaiah said, “As the LORD lives, I shall speak whatever my God says.”","And Micaiah said, As the LORD liveth, even what my God saith, that will I speak.","But Micaiah said, \"As surely as the LORD lives, I can tell him only what my God says.\"","Cui respondit Michaeas:  “Vivit Dominus, quia, quodcumque dixerit Deus meus, hoc loquar! “.","ויאמר מיכיהו חי יהוה כי את אשר יאמר אלהי אתו אדבר׃"],["14","18","14","그가 임금 앞에 나아가자 임금이 물었다. “미카야, 우리가 라못 길앗으로 싸우러 가는 것이 좋겠소? 아니면 그만두는 것이 좋겠소?” 미카야가 대답하였다. “올라가서 승리를 거두십시오. 그곳이 두 분 손에 넘겨질 것입니다.”","그가 왕 앞에 나아가자 왕이 물었다. \"미가야, 우리가 라못길르앗을 치러 가도 좋겠는가? 아니면, 그만두어야 하는가?\" 미가야가 대답하였다. \"쳐 올라가 정복하십시오. 그 곳은 두 분의 수중에 떨어질 것입니다.\"","이에 왕에게 이르니 왕이 그에게 이르되 미가야야 우리가 길르앗 라못으로 싸우러 가랴 말랴 하는지라 이르되 올라가서 승리를 거두소서 그들이 왕의 손에 넘긴 바 되리이다 하니","이에 왕에게 이르니 왕이 저에게 이르되 미가야야 우리가 길르앗 라못으로 싸우러 가랴 말랴 가로되 올라가서 승리를 얻으소서 저희가 왕의 손에 붙인바 되리이다","미가야가 아합왕 앞에 나아가자 왕이 이렇게 물었다. \"미가야여, 우리가 라못을 공격하면 어떻게 되겠소?\" 미가야는 거짓 예언이나 듣기 좋아하는 왕의 어리석음을 비꼬아 이렇게 대답하였다. \"망설이지 말고 그 성을 치십시오! 틀림없이 승리하지 않겠습니까? 여호와께서 그 성을 임금님의 손에 넘겨 주실 겁니다.\"","When he came to the king, the king said to him, “Micah, shall we go to fight at Ramoth-gilead, or shall I refrain?” He said, “Attack and conquer! They will be delivered into your power.”","And when he was come to the king, the king said unto him, Micaiah, shall we go to Ramothgilead to battle, or shall I forbear? And he said, Go ye up, and prosper, and they shall be delivered into your hand.","When he arrived, the king asked him, \"Micaiah, shall we go to war against Ramoth Gilead, or shall I refrain?\" \"Attack and be victorious,\" he answered, \"for they will be given into your hand.\"","Venit ergo ad regem. Cui rex ait:  “Michaea, ire debemus in Ramoth Galaad ad bellandum an quiescere? “. Cui ille respondit:  “Ascendite et prosperamini, ut tradantur hostes in manus vestras “.","ויבא אל המלך ויאמר המלך אליו מיכה הנלך אל רמת גלעד למלחמה אם אחדל ויאמר עלו והצליחו וינתנו בידכם׃"],["14","18","15","그러나 임금은 그에게 “주님의 이름으로 나에게 진실만을 말하라고 몇 번이나 맹세를 시켜야 하겠소?” 하고 말하였다.","그러나 왕은 역정을 내었다. \"야훼의 이름으로 진실만을 말할 것을 몇 번이나 서약시켜야 하겠는가?\"","왕이 그에게 이르되 여호와의 이름으로 진실한 것 이외에는 아무것도 말하지 말라고 내가 몇 번이나 네게 맹세하게 하여야 하겠느냐 하니","왕이 저에게 이르되 여호와의 이름으로 진실한것만 말하라고 내가 몇번이나 너로 맹세케 하여야 하겠느냐","미가야의 대답이 자신의 어리석음을 비꼬고 있다는 것을 알자 왕이 화가나서 말하였다. \"나에게 진실한 것만을 말하겠다고 맹세하여라. 여호와께서 네게 하신 말씀을 그대로 전하지 못하겠느냐?\"","But the king answered him, “How many times must I adjure you to tell me nothing but the truth in the name of the LORD?”","And the king said to him, How many times shall I adjure thee that thou say nothing but the truth to me in the name of the LORD?","The king said to him, \"How many times must I make you swear to tell me nothing but the truth in the name of the LORD?\"","Dixitque rex:  “Iterum atque iterum te adiuro, ut non mihi loquaris nisi, quod verum est, in nomine Domini “.","ויאמר אליו המלך עד כמה פעמים אני משביעך אשר לא תדבר אלי רק אמת בשם יהוה׃"],["14","18","16","그러자 미카야는 이렇게 말하였다. “내가 보니, 온 이스라엘이 목자 없는 양 떼처럼 이 산 저 산에 흩어져 있었습니다. 그때에 주님께서는 ‘이들에게 주인이 없으니, 저마다 평안히 집으로 돌아가게 하여라.’ 하고 말씀하셨습니다.”","그러자 미가야는 이렇게 말하였다. \"내가 보니, 온 이스라엘이 이 산 저 산으로 흩어지는데 마치 목자 없는 양떼 같았습니다. 그런데 야훼께서는 '이것들을 돌볼 주인이 없으니, 모두들 집으로 고이 돌려보내라.' 하고 말씀하셨습니다.\"","그가 이르되 내가 보니 온 이스라엘이 목자 없는 양 같이 산에 흩어졌는데 여호와의 말씀이 이 무리가 주인이 없으니 각각 평안히 자기들의 집으로 돌아갈 것이니라 하셨나이다 하는지라","저가 가로되 내가 보니 온 이스라엘이 목자 없는 양 같이 산에 흩어졌는데 여호와의 말씀이 이 무리가 주인이 없으니 각각 평안히 그 집으로 돌아갈 것이니라 하셨나이다","마침내 미가야가 입을 열었다. \"제가 본 이스라엘 군대의 모습은 목자 없이 온 산에 흩어져 있는 양 떼와 같았습니다. 내가 이런 환상을 볼 때에 여호와께서 네게 말씀하셨습니다. \"이스라엘 군대에는 더 이상 지휘할만한 왕이나 장군이 없다. 전쟁은 이미 끝났다. 군인들은 저마다 뿔뿔이 흩어져 집으로 평안히 돌아갈 것이다.\"","So Micaiah said: “I see all Israel scattered on the mountains, like sheep without a shepherd, And the LORD saying, These have no masters! Let each of them go back home in peace.”","Then he said, I did see all Israel scattered upon the mountains, as sheep that have no shepherd: and the LORD said, These have no master; let them return therefore every man to his house in peace.","Then Micaiah answered, \"I saw all Israel scattered on the hills like sheep without a shepherd, and the LORD said, 'These people have no master. Let each one go home in peace.'\"","At ille ait:  “Vidi universum Israel dispersum in montibus sicut oves absque pastore. Et dixit Dominus: “Non habent isti dominum; revertatur unusquisque in domum suam in pace” “.","ויאמר ראיתי את כל ישראל נפוצים על ההרים כצאן אשר אין להן רעה ויאמר יהוה לא אדנים לאלה ישובו איש לביתו בשלום׃"],["14","18","17","이스라엘 임금이 여호사팟에게 말하였다. “내가 말하지 않았습니까? 저자는 내 일을 두고 좋게 예언하지 않고 나쁘게만 예언합니다.”","이스라엘 왕이 여호사밧에게 말하였다. \"보시오. 내가 뭐라고 합디까? 저자는 한 번도 내가 하겠다는 일이 잘되리라고 한 적이 없습니다. 만사가 되지 않는다고만 하는 자입니다.\"","이스라엘 왕이 여호사밧에게 이르되 저 사람이 내게 대하여 좋은 일로 예언하지 아니하고 나쁜 일로만 예언할 것이라고 당신에게 말씀하지 아니하였나이까 하더라","이스라엘 왕이 여호사밧에게 이르되 저 사람이 내게 대하여 길한 것을 예언하지 아니하고 흉한 것만 예언하겠다고 당신에게 말씀하지 아니하였나이까","아합이 여호사밧을 돌아보며 말하였다. \"내 말이 맞지 않습니까? 저 작자는 항상 이런 식으로 나에게 흉악한 소리만 떠들어댑니다!\"","The king of Israel said to Jehoshaphat, “Did I not tell you, he does not prophesy good about me, but only evil?”","And the king of Israel said to Jehoshaphat, Did I not tell thee that he would not prophesy good unto me, but evil?","The king of Israel said to Jehoshaphat, \"Didn't I tell you that he never prophesies anything good about me, but only bad?\"","Et ait rex Israel ad Iosaphat:  “Nonne dixi tibi quod non prophetaret iste mihi quidquam boni sed ea, quae mala sunt? “.","ויאמר מלך ישראל אל יהושפט הלא אמרתי אליך לא יתנבא עלי טוב כי אם לרע׃"],["14","18","18","미카야가 말하였다. “그러므로 주님의 말씀을 들으십시오. 내가 보니, 주님께서 어좌에 앉으시고 하늘의 온 군대가 그분의 오른쪽과 왼쪽에 서 있었습니다.","미가야가 말하였다. \"그러시다면 야훼의 말씀을 들어보십시오. 내가 보니 야훼께서 온 하늘 군대를 좌우에 거느리시고 당신의 옥좌에 앉으시어","미가야가 이르되 그런즉 왕은 여호와의 말씀을 들으소서 내가 보니 여호와께서 그의 보좌에 앉으셨고 하늘의 만군이 그의 좌우편에 모시고 섰는데","미가야가 가로되 그런즉 왕은 여호와의 말씀을 들으소서 내가 보니 여호와께서 그 보좌에 앉으셨고 하늘의 만군이 그 좌우편에 모시고 섰는데","그러나 미가야는 계속 말하였다. \"여호와께서 나에게 보여주신 것을 똑똑히 들으시오! 내가 보니, 여호와께서 하늘의 보좌에 앉아계셨습니다. 그분의 양편에는 천상의 궁중 관료 전원이 서 있었습니다.","Micaiah continued: “Therefore hear the word of the LORD. I saw the LORD seated on his throne, with the whole host of heaven standing to his right and to his left.","Again he said, Therefore hear the word of the LORD; I saw the LORD sitting upon his throne, and all the host of heaven standing on his right hand and on his left.","Micaiah continued, \"Therefore hear the word of the LORD: I saw the LORD sitting on his throne with all the host of heaven standing on his right and on his left.","At ille idcirco ait:  “Audite verbum Domini: Vidi Dominum sedentem in solio suo et omnem exercitum caeli assistentem ei a dextris et sinistris.","ויאמר לכן שמעו דבר יהוה ראיתי את יהוה יושב על כסאו וכל צבא השמים עמדים על ימינו ושמאלו׃"],["14","18","19","그런데 주님께서 ‘누가 이스라엘 임금 아합을 꾀어내어, 그를 라못 길앗으로 올라가서 쓰러지게 하겠느냐?’ 하고 물으셨습니다. 그러자 저마다 이런 의견 저런 의견을 내놓는데,","이스라엘 왕 아합을 꾀어내어 라못길르앗을 치러 올라갔다가 죽게 할 자가 없느냐고 물으셨습니다. 그러자 여럿이서 제각기 자기 의견을 말하는데,","여호와께서 말씀하시기를 누가 이스라엘 왕 아합을 꾀어 그에게 길르앗 라못에 올라가서 죽게 할까 하시니 하나는 이렇게 하겠다 하고 하나는 저렇게 하겠다 하였는데","여호와께서 말씀하시기를 누가 이스라엘 왕 아합을 꾀어 저로 길르앗 라못에 올라가서 죽게 할꼬 하시니 하나는 이렇게 하겠다 하고 하나는 저렇게 하겠다 하였는데","그때 여호와께서 물으셨습니다. \"누가 이스라엘 왕 아합을 꾀어 길르앗 지역으로 가서 라못을 공격하다가 전사하도록 하겠느냐?\" 이때에 어떤 이는 이렇게 제안하고, 또 어떤 이는 저렇게 제안하였습니다.","The LORD asked: Who will deceive Ahab, king of Israel, so that he will go up and fall on Ramoth-gilead? And one said this, another that,","And the LORD said, Who shall entice Ahab king of Israel, that he may go up and fall at Ramothgilead? And one spake saying after this manner, and another saying after that manner.","And the LORD said, 'Who will entice Ahab king of Israel into attacking Ramoth Gilead and going to his death there?' \"One suggested this, and another that.","Et dixit Dominus: “Quis decipiet Achab regem Israel, ut ascendat et corruat in Ramoth Galaad?”. Cumque diceret unus hoc modo et alter alio,","ויאמר יהוה מי יפתה את אחאב מלך ישראל ויעל ויפל ברמות גלעד ויאמר זה אמר ככה וזה אמר ככה׃"],["14","18","20","어떤 영이 주님 앞에 나서서 '제가 아합을 꾀어내겠습니다.' 하고 말하였습니다. 주님께서 그 영에게 '어떻게 그를 꾀어내겠느냐?' 하고 물으시자,","한 영이 야훼 앞에 나와서 '제가 그를 꾀어내겠습니다.' 하는 것이었습니다. 야훼께서 그 영에게 '어떻게 그를 꾀어내겠느냐?' 하고 물으시자","한 영이 나와서 여호와 앞에 서서 말하되 내가 그를 꾀겠나이다 하니 여호와께서 그에게 이르시되 어떻게 하겠느냐 하시니","한 영이 나아와 여호와 앞에 서서 말하되 내가 저를 꾀이겠나이다 여호와께서 저에게 이르시되 어떻게 하겠느냐","그러다가 마침내 한 영이 여호와 앞으로 나와 아뢰기를 제게 \"아합을 꾀어다 죽일 방법이 있습니다.\" 하니 여호와께서 물으셨습니다. \"네가 무슨 방법으로 그를 꾀어다 죽이겠느냐?\"","until this spirit came forth and stood before the LORD, saying, ‘I will deceive him.’ The LORD asked: How?","Then there came out a spirit, and stood before the LORD, and said, I will entice him. And the LORD said unto him, Wherewith?","Finally, a spirit came forward, stood before the LORD and said, 'I will entice him.' \"'By what means?' the LORD asked.","processit spiritus et stetit coram Domino et ait: “Ego decipiam eum”. Cui Dominus: “In quo, inquit, decipies?”.","ויצא הרוח ויעמד לפני יהוה ויאמר אני אפתנו ויאמר יהוה אליו במה׃"],["14","18","21","그는 ‘제가 나가 아합의 모든 예언자의 입에서 거짓말하는 영이 되겠습니다.’ 하고 대답하였습니다. 주님께서 ‘네가 그를 꾀어내어라. 성공할 것이다. 가서 그렇게 하여라.’ 하고 말씀하셨습니다.","그는 '제가 거짓말하는 영이 되어 내려가서 아합의 모든 예언자들의 입에 들어가겠습니다.' 하고 대답하였습니다. 그러니까 야훼께서 '그렇게 꾀어내면 되겠군. 가서 그대로 하여라.' 하고 명령하셨습니다.","그가 이르되 내가 나가서 거짓말하는 영이 되어 그의 모든 선지자들의 입에 있겠나이다 하니 여호와께서 이르시되 너는 꾀겠고 또 이루리라 나가서 그리하라 하셨은즉","가로되 내가 나가서 거짓말 하는 영이 되어 그 모든 선지자의 입에 있겠나이다 여호와께서 가라사대 너는 꾀이겠고 또 이루리라 나가서 그리하라 하셨은즉","그 영이 이렇게 대답하였습니다. \"제가 세상에 내려가 아합의 모든 예언자들에게 속이는 영으로 들어가서, 그들의 입에서 속이는 말만 나오도록 하겠습니다.\" 여호와께서 말씀하셨습니다. \"그런 방법으로 아합을 꾀어다가 죽인다면 성공할 것이다. 어서 내려가 그대로 하라!\"","He answered, ‘I will go forth and become a lying spirit in the mouths of all his prophets.’ The LORD replied: You shall succeed in deceiving him. Go forth and do this.","And he said, I will go out, and be a lying spirit in the mouth of all his prophets. And the Lord said, Thou shalt entice him, and thou shalt also prevail: go out, and do even so.","\"'I will go and be a lying spirit in the mouths of all his prophets,' he said. \"'You will succeed in enticing him,' said the LORD. 'Go and do it.'","At ille respondit: “Egrediar et ero spiritus mendax in ore omnium prophetarum eius”. Dixitque Dominus: “Decipies et praevalebis; egredere et fac ita”.","ויאמר אצא והייתי לרוח שקר בפי כל נביאיו ויאמר תפתה וגם תוכל צא ועשה כן׃"],["14","18","22","그러니 이제 보십시오, 주님께서는 임금님의 이 예언자들 입에 거짓말하는 영을 넣으셨습니다. 주님께서 임금님께 재앙을 선언하신 것입니다.”","이제 아셔야 합니다. 야훼께서는 거짓말하는 영을 여기에 서 있는 임금님의 예언자들 입에 넣으셨습니다. 야훼께서는 임금님에게 재앙을 내리시기로 결정하셨습니다.\"","이제 보소서 여호와께서 거짓말하는 영을 왕의 이 모든 선지자들의 입에 넣으셨고 또 여호와께서 왕에게 대하여 재앙을 말씀하셨나이다 하니","이제 여호와께서 거짓말 하는 영을 왕의 이 모든 선지자의 입에 넣으셨고 또 여호와께서 왕에게 대하여 화를 말씀하셨나이다","여호와께서 왕의 예언자들에게 거짓말을 가득히 담아 주셨으므로 임금께서 보신 대로 지금 저 수백 명 예언자들이 거짓말을 지껄이고 있는 것입니다. 사실은 여호와께서 임금께 화를 내리시기로 작정하셨습니다\"","So now the LORD has put a lying spirit in the mouths of these prophets of yours; but the LORD himself has decreed evil against you.”","Now therefore, behold, the LORD hath put a lying spirit in the mouth of these thy prophets, and the LORD hath spoken evil against thee.","\"So now the LORD has put a lying spirit in the mouths of these prophets of yours. The LORD has decreed disaster for you.\"","Nunc igitur, ecce dedit Dominus spiritum mendacii in ore omnium prophetarum tuorum et Dominus locutus est de te mala “.","ועתה הנה נתן יהוה רוח שקר בפי נביאיך אלה ויהוה דבר עליך רעה׃"],["14","18","23","그러자 크나아나의 아들 치드키야가 미카야에게 다가가서 뺨을 치며 말하였다. “주님의 영이 나를 떠나 어느 길로 너에게 건너가서 말씀하셨다는 것이냐?”","그러자 그나아나의 아들 시드키야가 미가야에게 다가와서 뺨을 때리며 호통쳤다. \"야훼의 영이 나를 떠나서 어느 길로 건너가 너에게 말씀하셨단 말이냐?\"","그나아나의 아들 시드기야가 가까이 와서 미가야의 뺨을 치며 이르되 여호와의 영이 나를 떠나 어디로 가서 네게 말씀하더냐 하는지라","그나아나의 아들 시드기야가 가까이 와서 미가야의 뺨을 치며 이르되 여호와의 영이 나를 떠나 어디로 말미암아 가서 네게 말씀하더냐","그러자 그나아나의 아들 시드기야가 다가가서 미가야의 뺨을 때리며 말하였다. \"여호와의 영이 언제부터 내게서 떠나가 너에게 그런 이야기를 하셨느냐? 네가 그것을 증명할 수 있느냐?\"","Thereupon Zedekiah, son of Chenaanah, came up and struck Micaiah on the cheek, saying, “Has the spirit of the LORD, then, passed from me to speak with you?”","Then Zedekiah the son of Chenaanah came near, and smote Micaiah upon the cheek, and said, Which way went the Spirit of the LORD from me to speak unto thee?","Then Zedekiah son of Kenaanah went up and slapped Micaiah in the face. \"Which way did the spirit from the LORD go when he went from me to speak to you?\" he asked.","Accessit autem Sedecias filius Chanaana et percussit Michaeae maxillam et ait:  “Per quam viam transivit spiritus Domini a me, ut loqueretur tibi? “.","ויגש צדקיהו בן כנענה ויך את מיכיהו על הלחי ויאמר אי זה הדרך עבר רוח יהוה מאתי לדבר אתך׃"],["14","18","24","미카야가 대답하였다. “네가 골방으로 들어가 숨는 날에 알게 될 것이다.”","미가야가 대답하였다. \"네가 골방으로 피신해 들어가는 날이 올 터인데 그 날에 스스로 알게 되리라.\"","미가야가 이르되 네가 골방에 들어가서 숨는 바로 그 날에 보리라 하더라","미가야가 가로되 네가 골방에 들어가서 숨는 그 날에 보리라","미가야가 대답하였다. \"네가 골방에 들어가 숨는 날이 오면, 네 스스로 알게 될 것이다\"","Micaiah said, “You shall find out on the day you go into an innermost room to hide.”","And Micaiah said, Behold, thou shalt see on that day when thou shalt go into an inner chamber to hide thyself.","Micaiah replied, \"You will find out on the day you go to hide in an inner room.\"","Dixitque Michaeas:  “Tu ipse videbis in die illo, quando ingressus fueris cubiculum intra cubiculum, ut abscondaris “.","ויאמר מיכיהו הנך ראה ביום ההוא אשר תבוא חדר בחדר להחבא׃"],["14","18","25","그러자 이스라엘 임금은 말하였다. “미카야를 붙잡아 아몬 성주와 요아스 왕자에게 끌고 가라.","이스라엘 왕이 영을 내렸다. \"미가야를 잡아 성주 아몬과 왕자 요아스에게 넘기고,","이스라엘 왕이 이르되 미가야를 잡아 시장 아몬과 왕자 요아스에게로 끌고 돌아가서","이스라엘 왕이 가로되 미가야를 잡아 부윤 아몬과 왕자 요아스에게로 끌고 돌아가서","아합왕이 명령을 내렸다. \"미가야를 붙들어다가 이 성읍의 사령관 아몬과 왕자 요아스에게 넘겨 주고","The king of Israel then said: “Seize Micaiah and take him back to Amon, prefect of the city, and to Joash the king’s son,","Then the king of Israel said, Take ye Micaiah, and carry him back to Amon the governor of the city, and to Joash the king's son;","The king of Israel then ordered, \"Take Micaiah and send him back to Amon the ruler of the city and to Joash the king's son,","Praecepit autem rex Israel dicens:  “Tollite Michaeam et ducite eum ad Amon principem civitatis et ad Ioas filium regis","ויאמר מלך ישראל קחו את מיכיהו והשיבהו אל אמון שר העיר ואל יואש בן המלך׃"],["14","18","26","그리고 이 임금이 이렇게 말한다고 전하여라. ‘내가 무사히 돌아올 때까지, 이자를 감옥에 가두고 빵과 물을 조금씩만 주어라.’”","이렇게 나의 말을 전하여라. '어명이다. 내가 안전하게 전장에서 돌아올 때까지 이자를 감옥에 가두고 굶어 죽지 않을 정도로 먹여라.'\"","왕이 이같이 말하기를 이 놈을 옥에 가두고 내가 평안히 돌아올 때까지 고난의 떡과 고난의 물을 먹게 하라 하셨나이다 하니","말하기를 왕의 말씀이 이 놈을 옥에 가두고 내가 평안히 돌아올 때까지 고생의 떡과 고생의 물로 먹이라 하라","이렇게 왕명을 전하여라. \"내가 승리하고 돌아올 때까지 이 자를 감옥에 가두어 놓아라. 그동안에는 겨우 목숨을 연명할 만큼만 밥과 물을 주어 고통을 당하게 하여라!\"","and say, ‘This is the king’s order: Put this man in prison and feed him scanty rations of bread and water until I come back in safety!’”","And say, Thus saith the king, Put this fellow in the prison, and feed him with bread of affliction and with water of affliction, until I return in peace.","and say, 'This is what the king says: Put this fellow in prison and give him nothing but bread and water until I return safely.'\"","et dicetis: “Haec dicit rex: Mittite hunc in carcerem et date ei panis modicum et aquae pauxillum, donec revertar in pace” “.","ואמרתם כה אמר המלך שימו זה בית הכלא והאכלהו לחם לחץ ומים לחץ עד שובי בשלום׃"],["14","18","27","미카야가 말하였다. “임금님께서 무사히 돌아오시기만 한다면, 이 말씀은 주님께서 나를 통하여 하신 말씀이 아닙니다.” 그리고 이렇게 말하였다. “민족들아, 모두 들어라.”","미가야가 말하였다. \"임금께서 무사히 돌아오신다면, 내가 받은 말씀이 야훼의 말씀이 아닙니다.\"2)히브리어 본문에는 \"너희 모든 백성들아, 들어라.\"는 말이 더 들어 있다.","미가야가 이르되 왕이 참으로 평안히 돌아오시게 된다면 여호와께서 내게 말씀하지 아니하셨으리이다 하고 또 이르되 너희 백성들아 다 들을지어다 하니라","미가야가 가로되 왕이 참으로 평안히 돌아오시게 될찐대 여호와께서 나로 말씀하지 아니하셨으리이다 또 가로되 너희 백성들아 다 들을찌어다 하니라","미가야가 대답하였다. \"임금님께서 참으로 안전하게 돌아오실 일이었다면 여호와께서 내게 이런 말씀을 시키지도 아니하셨을 것입니다.\" 그리고 미가야는 온 백성을 향하여 말하였다. \"이곳에 있는 모든 이들은 내가 한 말을 똑똑히 들어두시오.\"","But Micaiah said, “If ever you return in safety, the LORD has not spoken through me.” (He also said, “Hear, O peoples, all of you!”)","And Micaiah said, If thou certainly return in peace, then hath not the LORD spoken by me. And he said, Hearken, all ye people.","Micaiah declared, \"If you ever return safely, the LORD has not spoken through me.\" Then he added, \"Mark my words, all you people!\"","Dixitque Michaeas:  “Si reversus fueris in pace, non est locutus Dominus in me “. Et ait:  “Audite, populi omnes! “.","ויאמר מיכיהו אם שוב תשוב בשלום לא דבר יהוה בי ויאמר שמעו עמים כלם׃"],["14","18","28","이스라엘 임금과 유다 임금 여호사팟은 라못 길앗으로 올라갔다.","이스라엘 왕과 유다 왕 여호사밧은 라못길르앗으로 쳐 올라갔다.","이스라엘 왕과 유다 왕 여호사밧이 길르앗 라못으로 올라가니라","이스라엘 왕과 유다 왕 여호사밧이 길르앗 라못으로 올라가니라","이스라엘 왕 아합과 유다 왕 여호사밧이 함께 길르앗라못 성읍을 치려고 출전하였다.","The king of Israel and Jehoshaphat, king of Judah, went up to Ramoth-gilead,","So the king of Israel and Jehoshaphat the king of Judah went up to Ramothgilead.","So the king of Israel and Jehoshaphat king of Judah went up to Ramoth Gilead.","Igitur ascenderunt rex Israel et Iosaphat rex Iudae in Ramoth Galaad.","ויעל מלך ישראל ויהושפט מלך יהודה אל רמת גלעד׃"],["14","18","29","이스라엘 임금이 여호사팟에게 말하였다. “나는 변장을 하고 싸움터에 나갈 터이니, 임금님은 그대로 정장을 하십시오.” 이스라엘 임금이 변장을 하고 나자, 그들은 함께 싸움터로 나갔다.","이스라엘 왕이 여호사밧에게 말하였다. \"나는 변장하고 전장에 나갈 터이니 왕은 왕복을 입고 나가시오.\" 이스라엘 왕은 변장하고 싸움터로 나갔다.","이스라엘 왕이 여호사밧에게 이르되 나는 변장하고 전쟁터로 들어가려 하노니 당신은 왕복을 입으소서 하고 이스라엘 왕이 변장하고 둘이 전쟁터로 들어가니라","이스라엘 왕이 여호사밧에게 이르되 나는 변장하고 군중으로 들어가려 하노니 당신은 왕복을 입으소서 하고 이스라엘 왕이 변장하고 둘이 군중으로 들어가니라","싸움터로 기는 길에서 아합이 여호사밧에게 말하였다. \"나는 변장을 하고 최전선으로 들어가겠소. 그러나 당신은 왕복을 그대로 입고 있어도 위험하지 않을 것이오\" 아합은 이미 아람 왕이 자기 전차부대의 지휘관들에게 \"너희는 이스라엘 왕만 공격하여라. 다른 사람은 아무리 높은 장군이더라도 그냥 두어라!\" 하고 내린 작전 명령을 입수하고 있었다. 그래서 아합은 변장을 하고 싸움터에 나갔다.","and the king of Israel said to Jehoshaphat, “I will disguise myself and go into battle. But you, put on your own robes.” So the king of Israel disguised himself and they entered the battle.","And the king of Israel said unto Jehoshaphat, I will disguise myself, and I will go to the battle; but put thou on thy robes. So the king of Israel disguised himself; and they went to the battle.","The king of Israel said to Jehoshaphat, \"I will enter the battle in disguise, but you wear your royal robes.\" So the king of Israel disguised himself and went into battle.","Dixitque rex Israel ad Iosaphat:  “Mutabo habitum et sic ad pugnam vadam; tu autem induere vestibus tuis “. Mutatoque rex Israel habitu venit ad bellum.","ויאמר מלך ישראל אל יהושפט התחפש ובוא במלחמה ואתה לבש בגדיך ויתחפש מלך ישראל ויבאו במלחמה׃"],["14","18","30","아람 임금은 그의 병거대 장수들에게 명령하였다. “낮은 자든 높은 자든 누구하고도 싸우지 말고 오직 이스라엘 임금하고만 싸워라.”","시리아 왕은 그의 병거대 대장들에게 \"아무하고도 싸우지 말고 오직 이스라엘 왕만 공격하여라.\" 하고 명령하였다.","아람 왕이 그의 병거 지휘관들에게 이미 명령하여 이르기를 너희는 작은 자나 큰 자나 더불어 싸우지 말고 오직 이스라엘 왕하고만 싸우라 한지라","아람 왕이 그 병거 장관들에게 이미 명하여 이르기를 너희는 작은 자나 큰 자나 더불어 싸우지 말고 오직 이스라엘 왕과 싸우라 한지라","(29절에 포함되어 있음)","In the meantime, the king of Aram had given his chariot commanders the order, “Fight with no one, great or small, except the king of Israel alone.”","Now the king of Syria had commanded the captains of the chariots that were with him, saying, Fight ye not with small or great, save only with the king of Israel.","Now the king of Aram had ordered his chariot commanders, \"Do not fight with anyone, small or great, except the king of Israel.\"","Rex autem Syriae praeceperat ducibus curruum suorum dicens:  “Ne pugnetis contra minimum aut contra maximum, nisi contra solum regem Israel “.","ומלך ארם צוה את שרי הרכב אשר לו לאמר לא תלחמו את הקטן את הגדול כי אם את מלך ישראל לבדו׃"],["14","18","31","병거대 장수들은 여호사팟을 보고, “저자가 이스라엘 임금이다.” 하며, 그와 싸우려고 돌아섰다. 여호사팟이 소리를 지르자, 주님께서 그를 도우시어 그들을 그에게서 유인해 내셨다.","병거대 대장들은 여호사밧을 보고 그가 이스라엘 왕이리라 생각하여 그를 치려고 달려들었다. 여호사밧이 소리치자 야훼께서 도와주셨다. 왕을 잡을 수 없도록 하느님께서 그들을 유인해 내셨다.","병거의 지휘관들이 여호사밧을 보고 이르되 이가 이스라엘 왕이라 하고 돌아서서 그와 싸우려 한즉 여호사밧이 소리를 지르매 여호와께서 그를 도우시며 하나님이 그들을 감동시키사 그를 떠나가게 하신지라","병거의 장관들이 여호사밧을 보고 이르되 이가 이스라엘 왕이라 하고 돌이켜 저와 싸우려 한즉 여호사밧이 소리를 지르매 여호와께서 저를 도우시며 하나님이 저희를 감동시키사 저를 떠나가게 하신지라","전차 부대의 용사들이 여호사밧을 보자 \"이스라엘 왕이다.\" 하고 외치며 사방에서 그를 공격하기 시작하였다. 이에 여호사밧이 여호와께 살려 달라고 부르짖었다. 그러자 하나님이 그를 도와주셨다. 하나님께서 그들을 꾀어 여호사밧에게서 물러나게 하셨다.","When the chariot commanders saw Jehoshaphat, they thought, “There is the king of Israel!” and wheeled to fight him. But Jehoshaphat cried out and the LORD helped him; God induced them to leave him alone.","And it came to pass, when the captains of the chariots saw Jehoshaphat, that they said, It is the king of Israel. Therefore they compassed about him to fight: but Jehoshaphat cried out, and the LORD helped him; and God moved them to depart from him.","When the chariot commanders saw Jehoshaphat, they thought, \"This is the king of Israel.\" So they turned to attack him, but Jehoshaphat cried out, and the LORD helped him. God drew them away from him,","Itaque, cum vidissent principes curruum Iosaphat, dixerunt:  “Rex Israel est iste! “. Et circumdederunt eum dimicantes. At ille clamavit ad Dominum, et auxiliatus est ei atque avertit eos Deus ab illo.","ויהי כראות שרי הרכב את יהושפט והמה אמרו מלך ישראל הוא ויסבו עליו להלחם ויזעק יהושפט ויהוה עזרו ויסיתם אלהים ממנו׃"],["14","18","32","병거대 장수들은 그가 이스라엘 임금이 아님을 알아보고서, 그를 쫓다가 돌아섰다.","병거대 대장들은 그가 이스라엘 왕이 아님을 확인하고 더 이상 추격하지 않고 돌아섰다.","병거의 지휘관들이 그가 이스라엘 왕이 아님을 보고 추격을 그치고 돌아갔더라","병거의 장관들이 저가 이스라엘 왕이 아님을 보고 쫓기를 그치고 돌이켰더라","전차 부대의 용사들이 여호사밧을 알아보고 더 이상 추격하지 않은 것이다. 그들이 원하는 아합이 아니었다는 것을 하나님이 알게 하셨다.","The chariot commanders, seeing that he was not the king of Israel, turned away from him.","For it came to pass, that, when the captains of the chariots perceived that it was not the king of Israel, they turned back again from pursuing him.","for when the chariot commanders saw that he was not the king of Israel, they stopped pursuing him.","Cum enim vidissent duces curruum quod non esset rex Israel, reliquerunt eum.","ויהי כראות שרי הרכב כי לא היה מלך ישראל וישבו מאחריו׃"],["14","18","33","그런데 어떤 병사가 무턱대고 쏜 화살이 이스라엘 임금을 맞추었다. 화살이 갑옷 가슴막이의 이음매에 꽂히자, 임금은 자기 병거를 모는 부하에게 말하였다. “병거를 돌려 싸움터에서 빠져나가자. 내가 부상을 입었다.”","군인들이 마구 쏘아대던 화살 하나가 이스라엘 왕에게 명중하였다. 화살이 갑옷과 가슴막이를 이은 부분에 꽂히자 왕은 그의 병거를 모는 병사에게 명령하였다. \"내가 다쳤다. 병거를 돌려 여기에서 빠져 나가자.\"","한 사람이 무심코 활을 당겨 이스라엘 왕의 갑옷 솔기를 쏜지라 왕이 그의 병거 모는 자에게 이르되 내가 부상하였으니 네 손을 돌려 나를 진중에서 나가게 하라 하였으나","한 사람이 우연히 활을 당기어 이스라엘 왕의 갑옷 솔기를 쏜지라 왕이 그 병거 모는 자에게 이르되 내가 부상하였으니 네 손을 돌이켜 나로 군중에서 나가게 하라 하였으나","그때 어떤 사병이 되는 대로 쏜 화살 하나가 이스라엘 왕의 갑옷 흉갑과 비늘 조각들이 이어진 사이를 꿰뚫고 들어가 꽂혔다. 아합이 전차를 모는 부하에게 명령하였다. \"전차를 돌려라! 이곳에서 후퇴하자. 내가 부상을 입었다.\"","But someone drew his bow at random and hit the king of Israel between the joints of his breastplate. He ordered his charioteer, “Rein about and take me out of the ranks, for I am wounded.”","And a certain man drew a bow at a venture, and smote the king of Israel between the joints of the harness: therefore he said to his chariot man, Turn thine hand, that thou mayest carry me out of the host; for I am wounded.","But someone drew his bow at random and hit the king of Israel between the sections of his armor. The king told the chariot driver, \"Wheel around and get me out of the fighting. I've been wounded.\"","Accidit autem, ut unus e populo sagittam in incertum iaceret et percuteret regem Israel inter iuncturas et loricam. At ille aurigae suo ait:  “Converte manum tuam et educ me de acie, quia vulneratus sum “.","ואיש משך בקשת לתמו ויך את מלך ישראל בין הדבקים ובין השרין ויאמר לרכב הפך ידיך והוצאתני מן המחנה כי החליתי׃"],["14","18","34","그러나 그날 싸움이 격렬해져서, 임금은 아람군을 마주 보며 병거 위에서 부축을 받고 저녁때까지 서 있다가 해질 무렵에 죽었다.","마침 그 날 싸움이 막바지에 이르렀을 때였으므로 왕은 저녁때까지 병거 위에 버티고 서서 시리아 군과 맞서 싸우다가 해가 질 무렵에 숨을 거두었다.","이 날의 전쟁이 맹렬하였으므로 이스라엘 왕이 병거에서 겨우 지탱하며 저녁 때까지 아람 사람을 막다가 해가 질 즈음에 죽었더라","이 날의 전쟁이 맹렬하였으므로 이스라엘 왕이 병거에서 스스로 부지하며 저녁때까지 아람 사람을 막다가 해가 질 즈음에 죽었더라","그러나 전투가 점점 더 치열해졌기 때문에 왕은 아람 군대와 대치한 채 저녁때까지 그대로 전차에서 버틸 수밖에 없었다. 해가 질 무렵 아합이 출혈이 심하여 죽었다.","The battle grew fierce during the day, and the king of Israel braced himself up in his chariot facing the Arameans until evening. He died as the sun was setting.","And the battle increased that day: howbeit the king of Israel stayed himself up in his chariot against the Syrians until the even: and about the time of the sun going down he died.","All day long the battle raged, and the king of Israel propped himself up in his chariot facing the Arameans until evening. Then at sunset he died.","Et aggravata est pugna in die illo; porro rex Israel stabat in curru suo contra Syros usque ad vesperam et mortuus est occidente sole.","ותעל המלחמה ביום ההוא ומלך ישראל היה מעמיד במרכבה נכח ארם עד הערב וימת לעת בוא השמש׃"],["14","19","1","유다 임금 여호사팟은 예루살렘에 있는 자기 집으로 무사히 돌아왔다.","유다 왕 여호사밧은 예루살렘에 있는 자기 궁궐에 무사히 돌아왔다.","유다 왕 여호사밧이 평안히 예루살렘에 돌아와서 그의 궁으로 들어가니라","유다 왕 여호사밧이 평안히 예루살렘에 돌아와서 그 궁으로 들어가니라","유다 왕 여호사밧은 예루살렘의 왕궁으로 무사히 돌아왔다.","Jehoshaphat king of Judah returned in safety to his house in Jerusalem.","And Jehoshaphat the king of Judah returned to his house in peace to Jerusalem.","When Jehoshaphat king of Judah returned safely to his palace in Jerusalem,","Reversus est autem Iosaphat rex Iudae in domum suam pacifice in Ierusalem.","וישב יהושפט מלך יהודה אל ביתו בשלום לירושלם׃"],["14","19","2","그러자 하나니의 아들 예후 선견자가 나가 여호사팟 임금을 맞으며 말하였다. “임금님께서 그렇게 악한 자를 돕고 주님을 미워하는 자들을 사랑하셔야 합니까? 이 일 때문에 주님의 진노가 임금님께 내릴 것입니다.","그러나 하나니의 아들 선견자 예후가 나와 맞으며 여호사밧 왕에게 말하였다. \"이 어찌 된 일입니까? 불의한 자를 도우시다니요! 야훼를 미워하는 자들을 사랑하시다니요! 이 일로 해서 임금께서는 야훼의 진노를 받으실 것입니다.","하나니의 아들 선견자 예후가 나가서 여호사밧 왕을 맞아 이르되 왕이 악한 자를 돕고 여호와를 미워하는 자들을 사랑하는 것이 옳으니이까 그러므로 여호와께로부터 진노하심이 왕에게 임하리이다","하나니의 아들 선견자 예후가 나가서 여호사밧 왕을 맞아 가로되 왕이 악한 자를 돕고 여호와를 미워하는 자를 사랑하는 것이 가하니이까 그러므로 여호와께로서 진노하심이 왕에게 임하리이다","그 당시 유다에는 북왕국에서 활동하다가 남쪽으로 내려 온 예언자가 있었다. 하나니의 아들 예후였다. 그가 왕궁으로 돌아오는 여호사밧을 만나 말하였다. \"임금께서 어떻게 여호와를 미워하는 사람들과 함께 어울리실 수 있단 말입니까? 이번 일로 임금께서는 여호와의 진노를 사셨습니다.","Jehu the seer, son of Hanani, went out to meet King Jehoshaphat and said to him: “Should you help the wicked and love those who hate the LORD? For this reason, wrath is upon you from the LORD.","And Jehu the son of Hanani the seer went out to meet him, and said to king Jehoshaphat, Shouldest thou help the ungodly, and love them that hate the LORD? therefore is wrath upon thee from before the LORD.","Jehu the seer, the son of Hanani, went out to meet him and said to the king, \"Should you help the wicked and love those who hate the LORD? Because of this, the wrath of the LORD is upon you.","Cui occurrit Iehu filius Hanani videns et ait ad eum:  “Impio praebes auxilium et his, qui oderunt Dominum, amicitia iungeris, et idcirco iram quidem Domini merebaris;","ויצא אל פניו יהוא בן חנני החזה ויאמר אל המלך יהושפט הלרשע לעזר ולשנאי יהוה תאהב ובזאת עליך קצף מלפני יהוה׃"],["14","19","3","그렇지만 임금님께서는 좋은 일도 하셨습니다. 아세라 목상들을 이 나라에서 쓸어버리시고, 주님을 찾기로 마음을 굳히신 것입니다.”","그러나 임금께서 하신 좋은 일들도 하느님께서는 알고 계십니다. 임금께서는 전국에서 아세라 목상들을 쓸어버리셨으며 또한 결심하시고 야훼만 찾으셨습니다.\"","그러나 왕에게 선한 일도 있으니 이는 왕이 아세라 목상들을 이 땅에서 없애고 마음을 기울여 하나님을 찾음이니이다 하였더라","그러나 왕에게 선한 일도 있으니 이는 왕이 아세라 목상들을 이 땅에서 없이하고 마음을 오로지하여 하나님을 찾음이니이다 하였더라","그러나 이번의 실수보다는 임금께서 그동안에 쌓은 공적을 여호와께서 더 크게 생각하십니다. 아세라 목상들을 전국에서 없애고 한마음으로 하나님을 섬긴 일을 여호와께서는 더 크게 생각하십니다.\"","Yet some good has been found in you, since you have removed the asherahs from the land and have set your heart to seek God.”","Nevertheless there are good things found in thee, in that thou hast taken away the groves out of the land, and hast prepared thine heart to seek God.","There is, however, some good in you, for you have rid the land of the Asherah poles and have set your heart on seeking God.\"","sed bona opera inventa sunt in te, eo quod abstuleris palos de terra et praeparaveris cor tuum, ut requireres Deum “.","אבל דברים טובים נמצאו עמך כי בערת האשרות מן הארץ והכינות לבבך לדרש האלהים׃"],["14","19","4","여호사팟은 예루살렘에 머물렀다가, 다시 브에르 세바에서 에프라임 산악 지방에 이르기까지 백성 가운데를 돌아다니며 그들을 주 저희 조상들의 하느님께 돌아오게 하였다.","여호사밧은 예루살렘에 살면서 브엘세바에서 에브라임 산악 지대에 이르기까지 백성들 사는 곳을 찾아 사람들을 선조들의 하느님 야훼께로 돌아오게 하였다.","여호사밧이 예루살렘에 살더니 다시 나가서 브엘세바에서부터 에브라임 산지까지 민간에 두루 다니며 그들을 그들의 조상들의 하나님 여호와께로 돌아오게 하고","여호사밧이 예루살렘에 거하더니 나가서 브엘세바에서부터 에브라임 산지까지 민간에 순행하며 저희를 그 열조의 하나님 여호와께로 돌아오게 하고","그때 이후로 여호사밧이 다시는 북왕국 이스라엘에 간 일이 없었다. 그는 오직 예루살렘에 머무르면서 전에 하던 대로 선한 일을 계속해 갔다. 더 나아가 유다 백성들이 온갖 우상숭배에서 떠나 다시 그들 조상의 하나님 여호와께 돌아오도록 몸소 브엘세바에서 에브라임 산지에 이르기까지 전국을 돌아다니며 백성을 가르쳤다.","Jehoshaphat dwelt in Jerusalem; but he went out again among the people from Beer-sheba to the highlands of Ephraim and brought them back to the LORD, the God of their ancestors.","And Jehoshaphat dwelt at Jerusalem: and he went out again through the people from Beersheba to mount Ephraim, and brought them back unto the LORD God of their fathers.","Jehoshaphat lived in Jerusalem, and he went out again among the people from Beersheba to the hill country of Ephraim and turned them back to the LORD, the God of their fathers.","Habitavit ergo Iosaphat in Ierusalem. Rursumque egressus est ad populum de Bersabee usque ad montem Ephraim et revocavit eos ad Dominum, Deum patrum suorum.","וישב יהושפט בירושלם וישב ויצא בעם מבאר שבע עד הר אפרים וישיבם אל יהוה אלהי אבותיהם׃"],["14","19","5","그는 유다 전역의 모든 요새 성읍에 일일이 판관들을 세우고,","또 유다 전국 요새지의 도성마다에 재판관을 임명하였다.","또 유다 온 나라의 견고한 성읍에 재판관을 세우되 성읍마다 있게 하고","또 유다 온 나라 견고한 성에 재판관을 세우되 성마다 있게 하고","그는 또 올바른 법질서를 세워 놓았다. 그는 유다의 요새화된 모든 성읍에 판사들을 세우고","He appointed judges in the land, in all the fortified cities of Judah, city by city,","And he set judges in the land throughout all the fenced cities of Judah, city by city,","He appointed judges in the land, in each of the fortified cities of Judah.","Constituitque iudices terrae in cunctis civitatibus Iudae munitis per singula loca.","ויעמד שפטים בארץ בכל ערי יהודה הבצרות לעיר ועיר׃"],["14","19","6","그 판관들에게 말하였다. “그대들은 맡은 일을 조심해서 하시오. 사람을 대신해서가 아니라, 주님을 대신해서 판결하기 때문이오. 그대들이 판결을 내릴 때에 그분께서 그대들과 함께 계실 것이오.","그는 그 재판관들에게 이렇게 당부하였다. \"그대들은 삼가 맡은 일을 이행하시오. 사람을 보고 재판할 것이 아니라, 야훼를 생각하고 재판해야 하오. 주께서 그대들이 판결을 내릴 때 옆에서 지켜보신다오.","재판관들에게 이르되 너희가 재판하는 것이 사람을 위하여 할 것인지 여호와를 위하여 할 것인지를 잘 살피라 너희가 재판할 때에 여호와께서 너희와 함께 하심이니라","재판관에게 이르되 너희는 행하는 바를 삼가하라 너희의 재판하는 것이 사람을 위함이 아니요 여호와를 위함이니 너희가 재판할 때에 여호와께서 너희와 함께하실지라","이렇게 가르쳤다. \"여러분이 맡은 임무가 무엇인지를 똑똑히 알아 두시오. 여러분은 사람의 지시나 부탁에 따라서 판결할 것이 아니라 여호와의 임무를 맡아 판결한다는 사실을 명심하시오!","and he said to them: “Take care what you do, for the judgment you give is not human but divine; for when it comes to judgment God will be with you.","And said to the judges, Take heed what ye do: for ye judge not for man, but for the LORD, who is with you in the judgment.","He told them, \"Consider carefully what you do, because you are not judging for man but for the LORD, who is with you whenever you give a verdict.","Et praecipiens iudicibus:  “Videte, ait, quid faciatis. Non enim homini exercetis iudicium sed Domino, qui vobiscum est, quando iudicaveritis.","ויאמר אל השפטים ראו מה אתם עשים כי לא לאדם תשפטו כי ליהוה ועמכם בדבר משפט׃"],["14","19","7","이제 그대들이 주님을 경외하기를 바라오. 명심하여 일하시오. 주 우리 하느님께는 불의나 차별이나 수뢰가 있을 수 없소.”","뇌물을 주는 쪽이 유리하게 판결하는 일을 우리 하느님 야훼께서는 용납하지 않으시오. 그것은 그릇된 일이오. 야훼를 두려워하며 맡은 일을 성심껏 하시오.\"","그런즉 너희는 여호와를 두려워하는 마음으로 삼가 행하라 우리의 하나님 여호와께서는 불의함도 없으시고 치우침도 없으시고 뇌물을 받는 일도 없으시니라 하니라","그런즉 너희는 여호와를 두려워하는 마음으로 삼가 행하라 우리의 하나님 여호와께서는 불의함도 없으시고 편벽됨도 없으시고 뇌물을 받으심도 없으시니라","늘 여호와를 두려워하며 양심에 따라서 직무를 수행해야 하오. 여러분이 어떤 사람에게 특혜를 주거나 뇌물을 받게 되더라도 곧 우리의 하나님 여호와께서 여러분의 양심을 깨우쳐 그 받은 선물을 되돌려 주게 만들어 주실 것이오\"","And now, let the fear of the LORD be upon you. Act carefully, for with the LORD, our God, there is no injustice, no partiality, no bribe-taking.”","Wherefore now let the fear of the LORD be upon you; take heed and do it: for there is no iniquity with the LORD our God, nor respect of persons, nor taking of gifts.","Now let the fear of the LORD be upon you. Judge carefully, for with the LORD our God there is no injustice or partiality or bribery.\"","Sit timor Domini, vobiscum et caute cuncta facite; non est enim apud Dominum Deum nostrum iniquitas nec personarum acceptio nec cupido munerum “.","ועתה יהי פחד יהוה עליכם שמרו ועשו כי אין עם יהוה אלהינו עולה ומשא פנים ומקח שחד׃"],["14","19","8","여호사팟은 예루살렘에도 레위인들과 사제들과, 이스라엘 가문의 우두머리들 가운데에서 사람들을 세워, 주님을 대신해서 판결을 내리고 송사를 해결하게 하였다. 그들은 예루살렘에서 살았다.","여호사밧은 또 레위인과 사제와 이스라엘 여러 가문 어른들 가운데서 사람들을 뽑아 예루살렘에 임명하여 야훼의 법을 세우게 하고 예루살렘 시민들의 시비도 가려주게 하였다.","여호사밧이 또 예루살렘에서 레위 사람들과 제사장들과 이스라엘 족장들 중에서 사람을 세워 여호와께 속한 일과 예루살렘 주민의 모든 송사를 재판하게 하고","여호사밧이 또 예루살렘에서 레위 사람과 제사장과 이스라엘 족장 중에서 사람을 세워 여호와께 속한 일과 1)예루살렘 거민의 모든 송사를 재판하게 하고 히, 모든 송사를 재판하게 하고 예루살렘으로 돌아가니라","여호사밧은 예루살렘에도 몇 명의 레위 사람들과 제사장들과 족장들을 재판관으로 임명하였다. 그들은 전국을 총괄하는 최고 재판관이 되어 여호와의 이름으로 판결을 내렸다. 그들은 물론 예루살렘 사람들의 소송문제도 맡아 판결하였다.","In Jerusalem also, Jehoshaphat appointed some Levites and priests and some of the family heads of Israel for the LORD’s judgment and the disputes of those who dwell in Jerusalem.","Moreover in Jerusalem did Jehoshaphat set of the Levites, and of the priests, and of the chief of the fathers of Israel, for the judgment of the LORD, and for controversies, when they returned to Jerusalem.","In Jerusalem also, Jehoshaphat appointed some of the Levites, priests and heads of Israelite families to administer the law of the LORD and to settle disputes. And they lived in Jerusalem.","In Ierusalem quoque constituit Iosaphat ex Levitis et sacerdotibus et principibus familiarum Israel pro iudicio Domini et pro causis habitatorum Ierusalem.","וגם בירושלם העמיד יהושפט מן הלוים והכהנים ומראשי האבות לישראל למשפט יהוה ולריב וישבו ירושלם׃"],["14","19","9","여호사팟은 그들에게 이렇게 명령하였다. “그대들은 주님을 경외하며 성실히, 한결같은 마음으로 맡은 일을 하시오.","그리고 그는 다음과 같은 지시를 내렸다. \"그대들은 야훼를 두려워하며 진실하게 온 마음을 기울여 맡은 일을 하되 이렇게들 하시오.","그들에게 명령하여 이르되 너희는 진실과 성심을 다하여 여호와를 경외하라","저희에게 명하여 가로되 너희는 여호와를 경외하고 충의와 성심으로 이 일을 행하라","여호사밧이 그들에게 지시하였다. \"여러분은 여호와를 두려워하는 바른 마음을 가지고 성실하고 정직하게 직무를 수행하시오!","He gave them this command: “Thus you shall act: in the fear of the LORD, with fidelity and with an undivided heart.","And he charged them, saying, Thus shall ye do in the fear of the LORD, faithfully, and with a perfect heart.","He gave them these orders: \"You must serve faithfully and wholeheartedly in the fear of the LORD.","Praecepitque eis dicens:  “Sic agetis in timore Domini fideliter et corde perfecto.","ויצו עליהם לאמר כה תעשון ביראת יהוה באמונה ובלבב שלם׃"],["14","19","10","어느 성읍에서든지, 살인이나 율법이나 계명이나 규정이나 법규와 관련된 송사가 형제들에게서 올라오면, 그들에게 경고하여 주님께 잘못을 저지르지 않게 하시오. 그러지 않으면 그분의 진노가 그대들과 형제들에게 내릴 것이오. 그렇게 경고해야 그대들은 잘못을 저지르지 않게 될 것이오.","살인사건이든, 법의 계명과 조항과 규정을 어떻게 해석하느냐 하는 문제이든, 각 성읍에서 올라오는 겨레들의 시비를 다룰 때 야훼께 죄를 얻지 않도록 하라고 경고를 내리시오. 그래야 야훼의 진노가 그대들과 그대들의 겨레 위에 떨어지지 아니할 것이오. 이렇게만 하면 그대들에게는 아무 책임이 없소.","어떤 성읍에 사는 너희 형제가 혹 피를 흘림이나 혹 율법이나 계명이나 율례나 규례로 말미암아 너희에게 와서 송사하거든 어떤 송사든지 그들에게 경고하여 여호와께 죄를 범하지 않게 하여 너희와 너희 형제에게 진노하심이 임하지 말게 하라 너희가 이렇게 행하면 죄가 없으리라","무릇 어느 성읍에 거한 너희 형제가 혹 피를 흘림이나 혹 율법이나 계명이나 율례나 규례를 인하여 너희에게 와서 송사하거든 저희를 경계하여 여호와께 죄를 얻지 않게 하여 너희와 너희 형제에게 진노하심이 임하지 말게 하라 너희가 이렇게 행하면 죄가 없으리라","지방 성읍의 판사들이 여러분을 찾아와서 살인 문제나 율법과 규정과 지시와 관례에 대한 것들을 물어 보거든, 여호와 앞에서 죄를 짓지 않도록 잘 가르쳐 주고, 뇌물을 받아 법을 왜곡하는 일이 없도록 경고해 주시오. 만약 이러한 임무를 게을리 한다면 여러분에게도 허물이 돌아가 여호와의 진노가 여러분과 그들에게 다 같이 내릴 것이오.","And in every dispute that comes to you from your kin living in their cities, whether it concerns bloodguilt or questions of law, command, statutes, or ordinances, warn them lest they incur guilt before the LORD and his wrath come upon you and your kin. Do that and you shall not incur guilt.","And what cause soever shall come to you of your brethren that dwell in your cities, between blood and blood, between law and commandment, statutes and judgments, ye shall even warn them that they trespass not against the LORD, and so wrath come upon you, and upon your brethren: this do, and ye shall not trespass.","In every case that comes before you from your fellow countrymen who live in the cities--whether bloodshed or other concerns of the law, commands, decrees or ordinances--you are to warn them not to sin against the LORD; otherwise his wrath will come on you and your brothers. Do this, and you will not sin.","Omnem causam, quae venerit ad vos fratrum vestrorum, qui habitant in urbibus suis, ubicumque quaestio est de homicidio, de lege, de mandato, de praeceptis et de iustificationibus, commonete eos, ut non peccent in Dominum, et ne veniat ira super vos et super fratres vestros; sic ergo agetis et non peccabitis.","וכל ריב אשר יבוא עליכם מאחיכם הישבים בעריהם בין דם לדם בין תורה למצוה לחקים ולמשפטים והזהרתם אתם ולא יאשמו ליהוה והיה קצף עליכם ועל אחיכם כה תעשון ולא תאשמו׃"],["14","19","11","주님과 관련된 모든 문제에 대해서는 우두머리 사제 아마르야가 그대들을 지휘하고, 임금과 관련된 모든 문제는 유다 집안의 영도자, 이스마엘의 아들 즈바드야가 지휘할 것이오. 레위인들은 관리자로서 그대들을 도울 것이오. 용기를 내어 맡은 일을 하시오. 주님께서 선한 이와 함께 계셔 주실 것이오.”","야훼를 예배하다가 생긴 문제는 무엇이든지 대사제 아마리야의 결정에 따르고 왕을 섬기다가 생긴 문제는 유다 가문의 지도자인 이스마엘의 아들 즈바디야의 결정에 따르도록 하시오. 레위인들은 관리일을 맡아보도록 하시오. 마음을 든든히 먹고 맡은 일을 해나가시오. 야훼께서 잘 보살펴 주실 것이오.\"","여호와께 속한 모든 일에는 대제사장 아마랴가 너희를 다스리고 왕에게 속한 모든 일은 유다 지파의 어른 이스마엘의 아들 스바댜가 다스리고 레위 사람들은 너희 앞에 관리가 되리라 너희는 힘써 행하라 여호와께서 선한 자와 함께 하실지로다 하니라","여호와께 속한 모든 일에는 대제사장 아마랴가 너희를 다스리고 왕에게 속한 모든 일은 유다 지파의 어른 이스마엘의 아들 스바댜가 다스리고 레위 사람들은 너희 앞에 관리가 되리라 너희는 힘써 행하라 여호와께서 선한 자와 함께 하실찌로다 하니라","여호와의 율법에 관련된 모든 문제의 최고 책임자는 대제사장 아마랴이고, 왕권에 관련된 모든 규정의 최고 책임자는 유다 지파의 우두머리인 이스마엘의 아들 스바댜입니다. 레위 사람들은 법정의 서기관이 되어 언제나 여러분을 도와줄 것이오. 그러므로 이제 가서 빈틈없이 임무를 수행하시오. 여호와께서 옳은 일을 하는 여러분의 편에 서 계실 것입니다.\"","See now, Amariah is chief priest over you for everything that pertains to the LORD, and Zebadiah, son of Ishmael, is leader of the house of Judah in all that pertains to the king; and the Levites will be your officials. Take firm action, and the LORD will be with the good.”","And, behold, Amariah the chief priest is over you in all matters of the LORD; and Zebadiah the son of Ishmael, the ruler of the house of Judah, for all the king's matters: also the Levites shall be officers before you. Deal courageously, and the LORD shall be with the good.","\"Amariah the chief priest will be over you in any matter concerning the LORD, and Zebadiah son of Ishmael, the leader of the tribe of Judah, will be over you in any matter concerning the king, and the Levites will serve as officials before you. Act with courage, and may the LORD be with those who do well.\"","Amarias autem sacerdos princeps super vos in omnibus, quae ad Deum pertinent, praesidebit; porro Zabadias filius Ismael, qui est dux in domo Iudae, super ea opera erit, quae ad regis officium pertinent; habetisque Levitas coram vobis ut scribas. Confortamini et agite diligenter, et sit Dominus cum bonis “.","והנה אמריהו כהן הראש עליכם לכל דבר יהוה וזבדיהו בן ישמעאל הנגיד לבית יהודה לכל דבר המלך ושטרים הלוים לפניכם חזקו ועשו ויהי יהוה עם הטוב׃"],["14","20","1","그 뒤에 모압 자손들과 암몬 자손들이 므운 사람들과 함께 여호사팟에게 싸움을 걸어왔다.","그런 일이 있은 지 얼마 뒤에 모압과 암몬 사람들이 1)므운 사람들과 함께 여호사밧을 쳐들어왔다. 히브리어 본문: \"암몬 사람들.\"","그 후에 모압 자손과 암몬 자손들이 마온 사람들과 함께 와서 여호사밧을 치고자 한지라","그 후에 모압 자손과 암몬 자손이 몇 1)마온 사람과 함께 와서 여호사밧을 치고자 한지라 암몬","그런 뒤 얼마 지나지 않아서였다. 모압 족속과 암몬 족속이 큰 군대를 이끌고 여호사밧을 치러 왔다. 유다 남쪽의 마온 족속들까지 그들과 합세해 있었다.","After this the Moabites, the Ammonites, and with them some Meunites came to fight against Jehoshaphat.","It came to pass after this also, that the children of Moab, and the children of Ammon, and with them other beside the Ammonites, came against Jehoshaphat to battle.","After this, the Moabites and Ammonites with some of the Meunites came to make war on Jehoshaphat.","Post haec congregati sunt filii Moab et filii Ammon et cum eis de Meunitis ad Iosaphat, ut pugnarent contra eum.","ויהי אחריכן באו בני מואב ובני עמון ועמהם מהעמונים על יהושפט למלחמה׃"],["14","20","2","전령들이 와서 여호사팟에게 보고하였다. “큰 무리가 바다 건너 에돔에서 임금님을 치러 오고 있습니다. 그들은 지금 하차촌 타마르, 곧 엔 게디에 있습니다.”","2)바다 건너 에돔에서 쳐들어오던 대군이 이미 하사손다말, 곧 엔게디에 이르렀다는 정보가 여호사밧에게 전해졌다. 사해를 가리킨다.","어떤 사람이 와서 여호사밧에게 전하여 이르되 큰 무리가 바다 저쪽 아람에서 왕을 치러 오는데 이제 하사손다말 곧 엔게디에 있나이다 하니","혹이 와서 여호사밧에게 고하여 가로되 큰 무리가 바다 저편 아람에서 왕을 치러 오는데 이제 하사손다말 곧 엔게디에 있나이다","전령들이 달려와서 여호사밧에게 다급한 사정을 알렸다. \"엄청난 군대가 에돔에서부터 서쪽의 해안선을 타고 몰려옵니다. 그들은 이미 하사손 다말에 이르렀습니다.\"","Jehoshaphat was told: “A great multitude is coming against you from across the sea, from Edom; they are already in Hazazon-tamar” (which is En-gedi).","Then there came some that told Jehoshaphat, saying, There cometh a great multitude against thee from beyond the sea on this side Syria; and, behold, they be in Hazazontamar, which is Engedi.","Some men came and told Jehoshaphat, \"A vast army is coming against you from Edom, from the other side of the Sea. It is already in Hazazon Tamar\" (that is, En Gedi).","Veneruntque nuntii et indicaverunt Iosaphat dicentes:  “Venit contra te multitudo magna de his locis, quae trans mare sunt, de Edom, et ecce consistunt in Asasonthamar, quae est Engaddi “.","ויבאו ויגידו ליהושפט לאמר בא עליך המון רב מעבר לים מארם והנם בחצצון תמר היא עין גדי׃"],["14","20","3","여호사팟은 두려워서 주님께 문의하기로 작정한 다음, 온 유다에 단식을 선포하였다.","여호사밧은 두려워하여 야훼께 호소하기로 결심하고 유다 전국에 단식령을 선포하였다.","여호사밧이 두려워하여 여호와께로 낯을 향하여 간구하고 온 유다 백성에게 금식하라 공포하매","여호사밧이 두려워하여 여호와께로 낯을 향하여 간구하고 온 유다 백성에게 금식하라 공포하매","여호사밧이 몹시 놀라 모든 것을 여호와께 맡기기로 결심하고, 유다 온 나라에 금식을 선포하였다.","Frightened, Jehoshaphat resolved to consult the LORD. He proclaimed a fast throughout all Judah.","And Jehoshaphat feared, and set himself to seek the LORD, and proclaimed a fast throughout all Judah.","Alarmed, Jehoshaphat resolved to inquire of the LORD, and he proclaimed a fast for all Judah.","Iosaphat autem timore perterritus totum se contulit ad rogandum Dominum et praedicavit ieiunium universo Iudae.","וירא ויתן יהושפט את פניו לדרוש ליהוה ויקרא צום על כל יהודה׃"],["14","20","4","그러자 유다 백성이 주님께 도움을 구하려고 모여들었다. 유다의 모든 성읍에서 주님을 찾으려고 온 것이다.","그러자 유다 백성은 야훼께 도움을 청하려고 유다 온 성읍에서 모여들어 야훼께 간구하였다.","유다 사람이 여호와께 도우심을 구하려 하여 유다 모든 성읍에서 모여와서 여호와께 간구하더라","유다 사람이 여호와께 도우심을 구하려 하여 유다 모든 성읍에서 모여와서 여호와께 간구하더라","유다 온 백성이 예루살렘으로 모여와서 여호와께 도움을 간구하였다.","Then Judah gathered to seek the LORD’s help; from every one of the cities of Judah they came to seek the LORD.","And Judah gathered themselves together, to ask help of the LORD: even out of all the cities of Judah they came to seek the LORD.","The people of Judah came together to seek help from the LORD; indeed, they came from every town in Judah to seek him.","Congregatusque est Iuda ad precandum Dominum; sed et de omnibus urbibus suis venerunt ad obsecrandum eum.","ויקבצו יהודה לבקש מיהוה גם מכל ערי יהודה באו לבקש את יהוה׃"],["14","20","5","여호사팟은 주님의 집 새 뜰 앞에 모인 유다와 예루살렘 회중 가운데에 서서,","여호사밧은 야훼의 성전 새 뜰 앞에 모인 유다와 예루살렘 회중 가운데 서서","여호사밧이 여호와의 전 새 뜰 앞에서 유다와 예루살렘의 회중 가운데 서서","여호사밧이 여호와의 전 새 뜰 앞에서 유다와 예루살렘의 회중 가운데 서서","여호사밧이 새로 만든 성전 앞 광장에 모인 유다 백성과 예루살렘 주민 앞에 나아가","Jehoshaphat stood up in the assembly of Judah and Jerusalem in the house of the LORD before the new court,","And Jehoshaphat stood in the congregation of Judah and Jerusalem, in the house of the LORD, before the new court,","Then Jehoshaphat stood up in the assembly of Judah and Jerusalem at the temple of the LORD in the front of the new courtyard","Cumque stetisset Iosaphat in medio coetu Iudae et Ierusalem in domo Domini ante atrium novum,","ויעמד יהושפט בקהל יהודה וירושלם בבית יהוה לפני החצר החדשה׃"],["14","20","6","이렇게 말하였다. “주 저희 조상들의 하느님, 당신은 하늘에 계신 하느님이 아니십니까? 또 당신은 민족들의 모든 나라를 다스리시는 분이 아니십니까? 당신의 손에 힘과 권능이 있기에 아무도 당신께 맞서지 못합니다.","이렇게 기도하였다. \"우리 선조들의 하느님 야훼여, 당신께서는 하늘에 계시는 하느님이 아니십니까? 세계 만방을 다스리시는 이가 아니십니까? 아무도 모든 힘과 권력을 잡고 계신 당신께 맞설 자가 없습니다.","이르되 우리 조상들의 하나님 여호와여 주는 하늘에서 하나님이 아니시니이까 이방 사람들의 모든 나라를 다스리지 아니하시나이까 주의 손에 권세와 능력이 있사오니 능히 주와 맞설 사람이 없나이다","가로되 우리 열조의 하나님 여호와여 주는 하늘에서 하나님이 아니시니이까 이방 사람의 모든 나라를 다스리지 아니하시나이까 주의 손에 권세와 능력이 있사오니 능히 막을 사람이 없나이다","이렇게 기도하였다. \"우리 조상의 하나님 여호와여. 주님은 하늘에 계시는 하나님이시요, 세상의 모든 나라들을 다스리시는 분이십니다. 주님과 겨룰 수 있을 만큼 모든 권세와 힘을 가진 이는 아무도 없습니다.","and he said: “LORD, God of our ancestors, are you not God in heaven, and do you not rule over all the kingdoms of the nations? In your hand is power and might, and no one can withstand you.","And said, O LORD God of our fathers, art not thou God in heaven? and rulest not thou over all the kingdoms of the heathen? and in thine hand is there not power and might, so that none is able to withstand thee?","and said: \"O LORD, God of our fathers, are you not the God who is in heaven? You rule over all the kingdoms of the nations. Power and might are in your hand, and no one can withstand you.","ait:  “Domine, Deus patrum nostrorum, tu es Deus in caelo et dominaris cunctis regnis gentium; in manu tua est fortitudo et potentia, nec quisquam tibi potest resistere.","ויאמר יהוה אלהי אבתינו הלא אתה הוא אלהים בשמים ואתה מושל בכל ממלכות הגוים ובידך כח וגבורה ואין עמך להתיצב׃"],["14","20","7","저희의 하느님, 당신께서는 이 땅의 주민들을 당신 백성 이스라엘 앞에서 쫓아내시고, 당신의 벗 아브라함의 후손들에게 이곳을 영원히 주지 않으셨습니까?","우리의 하느님이여, 하느님께서 이 땅에 사는 백성을 당신의 백성 이스라엘 앞에서 몰아내지 않으셨습니까? 그리고 당신께서 사랑하시는 아브라함의 후손에게 이 땅을 주시지 않으셨습니까?","우리 하나님이시여 전에 이 땅 주민을 주의 백성 이스라엘 앞에서 쫓아내시고 그 땅을 주께서 사랑하시는 아브라함의 자손에게 영원히 주지 아니하셨나이까","우리 하나님이시여 전에 이 땅 거민을 주의 백성 이스라엘 앞에서 쫓아내시고 그 땅으로 주의 벗 아브라함의 자손에게 영영히 주지 아니하셨나이까","일찍이 이 땅의 원주민들을 주님의 백성인 이스라엘 앞에서 쫓아내시고, 주님을 사랑하는 아브라함의 후손인 우리들에게 이 땅을 영원히 주신 분도 바로 우리의 하나님 여호와이십니다.","Was it not you, our God, who dispossessed the inhabitants of this land before your people Israel and gave it forever to the descendants of Abraham, your friend?","Art not thou our God, who didst drive out the inhabitants of this land before thy people Israel, and gavest it to the seed of Abraham thy friend for ever?","O our God, did you not drive out the inhabitants of this land before your people Israel and give it forever to the descendants of Abraham your friend?","Nonne tu, Deus noster, expulisti habitatores terrae huius coram populo tuo Israel et dedisti eam semini Abraham amici tui in sempiternum?","הלא אתה אלהינו הורשת את ישבי הארץ הזאת מלפני עמך ישראל ותתנה לזרע אברהם אהבך לעולם׃"],["14","20","8","그리하여 그들은 이곳에 살면서 주님의 이름을 위한 성소를 당신께 지어 바치고 이렇게 말하였습니다.","그래서 우리는 이 곳에 살면서 하느님의 이름을 위하여 성전을 지어 바치고","그들이 이 땅에 살면서 주의 이름을 위하여 한 성소를 주를 위해 건축하고 이르기를","저희가 이 땅에 거하여 주의 이름을 위하여 한 성소를 건축하고 이르기를","우리의 조상들은 이곳에 정착하여 주님의 영광을 위하여 성전을 건축하고 이렇게 말하였습니다.","They have dwelt in it and they built in it a sanctuary for your name. They have said:","And they dwelt therein, and have built thee a sanctuary therein for thy name, saying,","They have lived in it and have built in it a sanctuary for your Name, saying,","Habitaveruntque in ea et exstruxerunt in illa sanctuarium nomini tuo dicentes:","וישבו בה ויבנו לך בה מקדש לשמך לאמר׃"],["14","20","9","‘저희에게 심판의 칼이나 흑사병이나 기근과 같은 재앙이 닥친다 하더라도, 저희는 이 집과 당신 앞에 서겠습니다. 이 집에 당신의 이름이 있기 때문입니다. 그래서 저희가 곤경 속에서 당신께 부르짖으면, 당신께서 들으시고 구원해 주실 것입니다.’","다짐하였습니다. '전쟁이 나거나 곡식이 여물지 않거나 염병이 퍼지거나 흉년이 들거나 어떤 재앙을 당하든지 이 집은 하느님의 이름이 붙은 집이니 우리가 이 집 앞에서 하느님 앞에 나서리라. 곤경에 빠질 때마다 하느님께 부르짖으면 하느님께서는 들으시고 우리를 건져주시리라.'","만일 재앙이나 난리나 견책이나 전염병이나 기근이 우리에게 임하면 주의 이름이 이 성전에 있으니 우리가 이 성전 앞과 주 앞에 서서 이 환난 가운데에서 주께 부르짖은즉 들으시고 구원하시리라 하였나이다","만일 재앙이나 난리나 견책이나 온역이나 기근이 우리에게 임하면 주의 이름이 이 전에 있으니 우리가 이 전 앞과 주의 앞에 서서 이 환난 가운데서 주께 부르짖은즉 들으시고 구원하시리라 하였나이다","\"우리가 이 땅에 사는 동안 만일 전쟁이나 전염병이나 기근과 같이 무서운 재앙이 닥쳐오면 여기 성전으로 주께 찾아와서 이 환난 속에서 우리를 살려 달라고 주께 호소할 것이다. 여기는 우리가 주께 호소할 수 있는 곳이다. 주님은 우리의 간구를 들으시고 우리를 도와주실 것이다.\"","‘If evil comes upon us, the sword of judgment, or pestilence, or famine, we will stand before this house and before you, for your name is in this house, and we will cry out to you in our affliction, and you will hear and save!’","If, when evil cometh upon us, as the sword, judgment, or pestilence, or famine, we stand before this house, and in thy presence, (for thy name is in this house,) and cry unto thee in our affliction, then thou wilt hear and help.","'If calamity comes upon us, whether the sword of judgment, or plague or famine, we will stand in your presence before this temple that bears your Name and will cry out to you in our distress, and you will hear us and save us.'","“Si irruerint super nos mala, gladius iudicii, pestilentia et fames, stabimus coram domo hac in conspectu tuo, quia nomen tuum est in domo hac, et clamabimus ad te in tribulationibus nostris, et exaudies salvosque facies”.","אם תבוא עלינו רעה חרב שפוט ודבר ורעב נעמדה לפני הבית הזה ולפניך כי שמך בבית הזה ונזעק אליך מצרתנו ותשמע ותושיע׃"],["14","20","10","이제 저 암몬 자손들과 모압과 세이르 산 주민들을 보십시오. 당신께서는 이스라엘이 이집트 땅에서 나올 때에 그들에게 쳐들어가지 못하게 하셨습니다. 그래서 이스라엘은 그들을 멸망시키지 않고 비켜 갔습니다.","이제 보십시오. 암몬 사람, 모압 사람, 세일 산에 사는 사람들이 저렇게 밀려왔습니다. 이스라엘은 이집트에서 나올 때, 당신께서 저들이 사는 곳으로 들어가지 말라고 하셨으므로 저들을 멸망시키지 않고 돌아서 와야 했습니다.","옛적에 이스라엘이 애굽 땅에서 나올 때에 암몬 자손과 모압 자손과 세일 산 사람들을 침노하기를 주께서 용납하지 아니하시므로 이에 돌이켜 그들을 떠나고 멸하지 아니하였거늘","옛적에 이스라엘이 애굽 땅에서 나올 때에 암몬 자손과 모압 자손과 세일산 사람을 침노하기를 주께서 용납하지 아니하시므로 이에 치우쳐 저희를 떠나고 멸하지 아니하였거늘","그런데 지금 암몬 족속과 모압 족속과 세밀 산지의 백성이 우리를 치려고 몰려온 것을 보십시오! 일찍이 이스라엘 백성이 애굽에서 나올 때에, 주님은 우리의 조상들에게 저 백성들의 땅으로 들어가는 것조차도 금하셨습니다. 그래서 우리 조상들은 그들의 땅을 멀리 돌아서 통과하고, 그 백성들을 해친 일이 없습니다.","And now, see the Ammonites, Moabites, and those of Mount Seir whom you did not allow Israel to invade when they came from the land of Egypt, but instead they passed them by and did not destroy them:","And now, behold, the children of Ammon and Moab and mount Seir, whom thou wouldest not let Israel invade, when they came out of the land of Egypt, but they turned from them, and destroyed them not;","\"But now here are men from Ammon, Moab and Mount Seir, whose territory you would not allow Israel to invade when they came from Egypt; so they turned away from them and did not destroy them.","Nunc igitur ecce filii Ammon et Moab et mons Seir, per quos non concessisti Israeli ut transirent, quando egrediebantur de Aegypto, sed declinaverunt ab eis et non interfecerunt illos,","ועתה הנה בני עמון ומואב והר שעיר אשר לא נתתה לישראל לבוא בהם בבאם מארץ מצרים כי סרו מעליהם ולא השמידום׃"],["14","20","11","그런데 보십시오, 그들은 당신께서 저희에게 상속 재산으로 주신 당신의 소유지에서 저희를 쫓아내려고 왔습니다. 저희에게 앙갚음하려는 것입니다.","그런데 저들은 당신께서 우리에게 유산으로 주신 당신의 땅에서 우리를 몰아내려고 합니다. 이렇게 배은망덕한 것들에게","이제 그들이 우리에게 갚는 것을 보옵소서 그들이 와서 주께서 우리에게 주신 주의 기업에서 우리를 쫓아내고자 하나이다","이제 저희가 우리에게 갚는 것을 보옵소서 저희가 와서 주께서 우리에게 주신 주의 기업에서 우리를 쫓아 내고자 하나이다","그런데 그들은 이제 도리어 주께서 우리에게 주신 이 땅에서 우리들을 쫓아내려고 왔습니다.","See how they are now repaying us by coming to drive us out of the possession you have given us.","Behold, I say, how they reward us, to come to cast us out of thy possession, which thou hast given us to inherit.","See how they are repaying us by coming to drive us out of the possession you gave us as an inheritance.","e contrario agunt et nituntur eicere nos de possessione tua, quam tradidisti nobis.","והנה הם גמלים עלינו לבוא לגרשנו מירשתך אשר הורשתנו׃"],["14","20","12","그러니 저희 하느님, 그들을 심판해 주지 않으시렵니까? 저희를 치러 온 저 큰 무리를 대적할 힘이 저희에게는 없습니다. 저희는 어찌할 바를 몰라 당신만 바라볼 뿐입니다.”","우리 하느님이여, 벌을 내리시지 않으시렵니까? 우리를 치러 온 저 대군 앞에서 우리의 힘은 보잘것없습니다. 우리는 지금 어떻게 해야 할지 모르겠습니다. 다만 당신을 우러러볼 뿐입니다.\"","우리 하나님이여 그들을 징벌하지 아니하시나이까 우리를 치러 오는 이 큰 무리를 우리가 대적할 능력이 없고 어떻게 할 줄도 알지 못하옵고 오직 주만 바라보나이다 하고","우리 하나님이여 저희를 징벌하지 아니하시나이까 우리를 치러 오는 이 큰 무리를 우리가 대적할 능력이 없고 어떻게 할줄도 알지 못하옵고 오직 주만 바라보나이다 하고","우리의 하나님 여호와여, 주께서 대신 그들에게 벌을 내려 주시지 않겠습니까? 저 엄청난 군대에 대항하기에는 우리의 힘이 너무도 약합니다. 도대체 우리가 어떻게 해야 할지도 모르겠습니다. 그래서 오직 우리는 지금 주님만 바라보고 있습니다!\"","O our God, will you not bring judgment on them? We are powerless before this vast multitude that is coming against us. We ourselves do not know what to do, so our eyes are turned toward you.”","O our God, wilt thou not judge them? for we have no might against this great company that cometh against us; neither know we what to do: but our eyes are upon thee.","O our God, will you not judge them? For we have no power to face this vast army that is attacking us. We do not know what to do, but our eyes are upon you.\"","Deus noster, ergo non iudicabis eos? In nobis quidem non tanta est fortitudo, ut possimus huic multitudini resistere, quae irruit super nos; sed, cum ignoremus quid agere debeamus, hoc solum habemus residui, ut oculos nostros dirigamus ad te “.","אלהינו הלא תשפט בם כי אין בנו כח לפני ההמון הרב הזה הבא עלינו ואנחנו לא נדע מה נעשה כי עליך עינינו׃"],["14","20","13","온 유다 백성은 어린아이들과 아내와 자녀들과 함께 주님 앞에 서 있었다.","온 유다 백성은 부녀자들까지 야훼 앞에 나와 서 있었다.","유다 모든 사람들이 그들의 아내와 자녀와 어린이와 더불어 여호와 앞에 섰더라","유다 모든 사람은 그 아내와 자녀와 어린 자로 더불어 여호와 앞에 섰더라","유다 온 백성이 부녀자와 젖먹이들까지 모여 여호와 앞에 금식하며 간구하고 있었다.","All Judah was standing before the LORD, with their little ones, their wives, and their children.","And all Judah stood before the LORD, with their little ones, their wives, and their children.","All the men of Judah, with their wives and children and little ones, stood there before the LORD.","Omnis vero Iuda stabat coram Domino cum parvulis et uxoribus et liberis suis.","וכל יהודה עמדים לפני יהוה גם טפם נשיהם ובניהם׃"],["14","20","14","그때에 회중 가운데에 있는 야하지엘에게 주님의 영이 내렸다. 그의 아버지는 즈카르야이고 할아버지는 브나야이며, 증조부는 여이엘이고 고조부는 레위인으로 아삽의 자손인 마탄야이다.","마침 그 회중 가운데는 레위인 야하지엘이라는 사람이 있었다. 그의 아버지는 즈가리야요 그 윗대는 브나야, 그 윗대는 여이엘, 그 윗대는 마따니야였다. 그가 야훼의 영을 받아","여호와의 영이 회중 가운데에서 레위 사람 야하시엘에게 임하셨으니 그는 아삽 자손 맛다냐의 현손이요 여이엘의 증손이요 브나야의 손자요 스가랴의 아들이더라","여호와의 신이 회중 가운데서 레위 사람 야하시엘에게 임하셨으니 저는 아삽 자손 맛다냐의 현손이요 여이엘의 증손이요 브나야의 손자요 스가랴의 아들이더라","이때에 여호와의 영이 군중 속에 섞여 있던 레위 사람 야하시엘에게 임하였다. 그는 아삽 지파에 속한 스가랴의 아들로서 그 윗대는 브나야, 여이엘, 맛다냐 순으로 이어져 올라갔다.","And the spirit of the LORD came upon Jahaziel, son of Zechariah, son of Benaiah, son of Jeiel, son of Mattaniah, a Levite of the clan of Asaph, in the midst of the assembly,","Then upon Jahaziel the son of Zechariah, the son of Benaiah, the son of Jeiel, the son of Mattaniah, a Levite of the sons of Asaph, came the Spirit of the LORD in the midst of the congregation;","Then the Spirit of the LORD came upon Jahaziel son of Zechariah, the son of Benaiah, the son of Jeiel, the son of Mattaniah, a Levite and descendant of Asaph, as he stood in the assembly.","Erat autem Iahaziel filius Zachariae filii Banaiae filii Iehiel filii Matthaniae Levites de filiis Asaph, super quem factus est spiritus Domini in medio congregationis,","ויחזיאל בן זכריהו בן בניה בן יעיאל בן מתניה הלוי מן בני אסף היתה עליו רוח יהוה בתוך הקהל׃"],["14","20","15","야하지엘이 말하였다. “온 유다 백성과 예루살렘 주민들과 여호사팟 임금님, 제 말을 들으십시오. 주님께서 여러분에게 이렇게 말씀하십니다. ‘저 큰 무리 앞에서 두려워하지도 당황하지도 마라. 이 전쟁은 너희의 것이 아니라, 하느님의 것이다.","말하였다. \"온 유다 백성, 예루살렘 시민, 여호사밧 왕은 들으시오. 야훼께서 이르시는 말씀이오. '두려워 마라. 적군이 아무리 많더라도 겁내지 마라. 이 전쟁은 너희의 것이 아니라, 하느님의 것이다.","야하시엘이 이르되 온 유다와 예루살렘 주민과 여호사밧 왕이여 들을지어다 여호와께서 이같이 너희에게 말씀하시기를 너희는 이 큰 무리로 말미암아 두려워하거나 놀라지 말라 이 전쟁은 너희에게 속한 것이 아니요 하나님께 속한 것이니라","야하시엘이 가로되 온 유다와 예루살렘 거민과 여호사밧왕이여 들을찌어다 여호와께서 너희에게 말씀하시기를 이 큰 무리로 인하여 두려워하거나 놀라지 말라 이 전쟁이 너희에게 속한 것이 아니요 하나님께 속한 것이니라","야하시엘이 여호와의 영에 사로 잡혀서 이렇게 외쳤다. \"유다 백성과 예루살렘 주민 여러분, 그리고 특별히 여호사밧왕이시여, 똑똑히 들으시오! 여호와께서 이렇게 말씀하십니다. \"너희는 두려워 말라! 저 대군을 보고 겁을 먹지 말라. 이 전쟁은 너희가 싸우는 것이 아니라 내가 싸우는 것이다.","and he said: “Pay attention, all of Judah, inhabitants of Jerusalem, and King Jehoshaphat! The LORD says to you: Do not fear or be dismayed at the sight of this vast multitude, for the battle is not yours but God’s.","And he said, Hearken ye, all Judah, and ye inhabitants of Jerusalem, and thou king Jehoshaphat, Thus saith the LORD unto you, Be not afraid nor dismayed by reason of this great multitude; for the battle is not yours, but God's.","He said: \"Listen, King Jehoshaphat and all who live in Judah and Jerusalem! This is what the LORD says to you: 'Do not be afraid or discouraged because of this vast army. For the battle is not yours, but God's.","et ait:  “Attendite, omnis Iuda et qui habitatis Ierusalem et tu rex Iosaphat: Haec dicit Dominus vobis: Nolite timere nec paveatis hanc multitudinem magnam; non est enim vestra pugna sed Dei.","ויאמר הקשיבו כל יהודה וישבי ירושלם והמלך יהושפט כה אמר יהוה לכם אתם אל תיראו ואל תחתו מפני ההמון הרב הזה כי לא לכם המלחמה כי לאלהים׃"],["14","20","16","내일 그들과 맞서러 내려가라. 그들이 치츠 오르막길로 올라오면 너희는 여루엘 광야 맞은쪽 마른내 끝에서 그들을 만날 것이다.","내일 너희는 내려가거라. 적은 시스 고개로 올라올 것이다. 여루엘 광야 맞은편 골짜기 끝에서 너희는 적을 만날 것이다.","내일 너희는 그들에게로 내려가라 그들이 시스 고개로 올라올 때에 너희가 골짜기 어귀 여루엘 들 앞에서 그들을 만나려니와","내일 너희는 마주 내려 가라 저희가 시스 고개로 말미암아 올라 오리니 너희가 골짜기 어귀 여루엘 들 앞에서 만나려니와","너희는 내일 골짜기로 내려가 정면으로 그들을 향하여 출전하라! 그들은 시스 고개를 타고 올라오리니 너희가 골짜기에서 빠져 나가 여루엘 광야가 시작되는 곳에 이르면 그들과 마주칠 것이다.","Go down against them tomorrow. You will see them coming up by the ascent of Ziz, and you will come upon them at the end of the wadi which opens on the wilderness of Jeruel.","To morrow go ye down against them: behold, they come up by the cliff of Ziz; and ye shall find them at the end of the brook, before the wilderness of Jeruel.","Tomorrow march down against them. They will be climbing up by the Pass of Ziz, and you will find them at the end of the gorge in the Desert of Jeruel.","Cras descendetis contra eos; ascensuri enim sunt per clivum nomine Sis, et invenietis illos in summitate torrentis, qui est contra solitudinem Ieruel.","מחר רדו עליהם הנם עלים במעלה הציץ ומצאתם אתם בסוף הנחל פני מדבר ירואל׃"],["14","20","17","이 전쟁에서는 너희가 싸울 것이 없다. 제자리를 지키고 서서, 주님이 너희에게 승리를 가져다주는 것을 보기만 하여라. 유다와 예루살렘아, 두려워하지도 당황하지도 마라. 내일 그들에게 맞서러 나가라. 주님이 너희와 함께 있을 것이다.”","이 싸움은 너희의 싸움이 아니니, 그냥 멈추어 서서 이 야훼가 승전하는 것을 구경만 하여라. 유다야, 예루살렘아, 두려워하지 말고 겁내지도 마라. 내일 너희는 마주 쳐나가거라. 야훼가 너희 곁을 떠나지 아니하리라.'\"","이 전쟁에는 너희가 싸울 것이 없나니 대열을 이루고 서서 너희와 함께 한 여호와가 구원하는 것을 보라 유다와 예루살렘아 너희는 두려워하지 말며 놀라지 말고 내일 그들을 맞서 나가라 여호와가 너희와 함께 하리라 하셨느니라 하매","이 전쟁에는 너희가 싸울 것이 없나니 항오를 이루고 서서 너희와 함께한 여호와가 구원하는 것을 보라 유다와 예루살렘아 너희는 두려워하며 놀라지 말고 내일 저희를 마주 나가라 여호와가 너희와 함께 하리라 하셨느니라 하매","그러나 너희가 직접 싸울 필요는 없다. 너희는 그저 가만히 서서 나 여호와가 너희를 위하여 대신 싸우고 승리하는 것을 똑똑히 보기만 하라. 그러므로 유다와 예루살렘아 조금도 두려워하지 말고 겁내지 말라. 내일 너희는 그들을 향하여 출전하기만 하면 나 여호와가 너희와 함께 하며 대신 싸우리라\"","You will not have to fight in this encounter. Take your places, stand firm, and see the salvation of the LORD; he will be with you, Judah and Jerusalem. Do not fear or be dismayed. Tomorrow go out to meet them, and the LORD will be with you.”","Ye shall not need to fight in this battle: set yourselves, stand ye still, and see the salvation of the LORD with you, O Judah and Jerusalem: fear not, nor be dismayed; to morrow go out against them: for the LORD will be with you.","You will not have to fight this battle. Take up your positions; stand firm and see the deliverance the LORD will give you, O Judah and Jerusalem. Do not be afraid; do not be discouraged. Go out to face them tomorrow, and the LORD will be with you.'\"","Non eritis vos, qui dimicabitis; sed tantummodo confidenter state et videbitis auxilium Domini super vos, o Iuda et Ierusalem. Nolite timere nec paveatis; cras egredimini contra eos, et Dominus erit vobiscum “.","לא לכם להלחם בזאת התיצבו עמדו וראו את ישועת יהוה עמכם יהודה וירושלם אל תיראו ואל תחתו מחר צאו לפניהם ויהוה עמכם׃"],["14","20","18","여호사팟이 얼굴을 땅에 대고 절하니, 온 유다와 예루살렘 주민들도 주님 앞에 엎드려 주님을 경배하였다.","여호사밧이 땅에 엎드리자 온 유다 백성과 예루살렘 시민도 야훼 앞에 엎드려 예배하는데,","여호사밧이 몸을 굽혀 얼굴을 땅에 대니 온 유다와 예루살렘 주민들도 여호와 앞에 엎드려 여호와께 경배하고","여호사밧이 몸을 굽혀 얼굴을 땅에 대니 온 유다와 예루살렘 거민들도 여호와 앞에 엎드려 경배하고","여호사밧이 땅에 엎드려 여호와께 경배하자, 온 백성도 엎드려 여호와께 경배하였다.","Then Jehoshaphat knelt down with his face to the ground, and all Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem fell down before the LORD in worship.","And Jehoshaphat bowed his head with his face to the ground: and all Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem fell before the LORD, worshipping the LORD.","Jehoshaphat bowed with his face to the ground, and all the people of Judah and Jerusalem fell down in worship before the LORD.","Iosaphat ergo inclinavit se super faciem suam in terra, et omnis Iuda et habitatores Ierusalem ceciderunt coram Domino et adoraverunt eum.","ויקד יהושפט אפים ארצה וכל יהודה וישבי ירושלם נפלו לפני יהוה להשתחות ליהוה׃"],["14","20","19","그러자 크핫 자손과 코라 자손 레위인들이 일어나, 아주 큰 소리로 주 이스라엘의 하느님을 찬양하였다.","크핫 일가와 코라 일가의 레위인들이 일어나, 목청을 높여 이스라엘의 하느님 야훼를 찬양하였다.","그핫 자손과 고라 자손에게 속한 레위 사람들은 서서 심히 큰 소리로 이스라엘 하나님 여호와를 찬송하니라","그핫 자손과 고라 자손에게 속한 레위 사람들은 서서 심히 큰 소리로 이스라엘 하나님 여호와를 찬송하니라","그러자 그핫의 후손들 가운데 고라 족속에 속하는 레위 사람들이 일어나 큰소리로 이스라엘의 하나님 여호와를 찬양하였다.","Levites from among the Kohathites and Korahites stood up to sing the praises of the LORD, the God of Israel, their voices ever louder.","And the Levites, of the children of the Kohathites, and of the children of the Korhites, stood up to praise the LORD God of Israel with a loud voice on high.","Then some Levites from the Kohathites and Korahites stood up and praised the LORD, the God of Israel, with very loud voice.","Porro Levitae de filiis Caath, de filiis Core scilicet, surrexerunt et laudabant Dominum, Deum Israel, voce magna in excelsum.","ויקמו הלוים מן בני הקהתים ומן בני הקרחים להלל ליהוה אלהי ישראל בקול גדול למעלה׃"],["14","20","20","그들은 다음 날 아침 일찍 일어나 트코아 광야로 나갔다. 그들이 나갈 때에 여호사팟이 일어나 말하였다. “유다와 예루살렘 주민들이여, 내 말을 들으시오. 주 여러분의 하느님을 믿으시오. 그러면 굳건해질 것이오. 그분의 예언자들을 믿으시오. 그러면 성공할 것이오.”","그들은 아침 일찍이 일어나 드고아 광야를 향하였다. 출동하는 마당에 여호사밧이 나서서 당부하였다. \"유다 백성과 예루살렘 시민은 나의 말을 들어라. 야훼께서 너희 하느님이시다. 그를 믿어라. 그리하면 흔들리지 아니하리라. 그가 세우신 예언자들을 믿어라. 그리하면 이기리라.\"","이에 백성들이 아침에 일찍이 일어나서 드고아 들로 나가니라 나갈 때에 여호사밧이 서서 이르되 유다와 예루살렘 주민들아 내 말을 들을지어다 너희는 너희 하나님 여호와를 신뢰하라 그리하면 견고히 서리라 그의 선지자들을 신뢰하라 그리하면 형통하리라 하고","이에 백성들이 일찌기 일어나서 드고아 들로 나가니라 나갈 때에 여호사밧이 서서 가로되 유다와 예루살렘 거민들아 내 말을 들을찌어다 너희는 너희 하나님 여호와를 신뢰하라 그리하면 견고히 서리라 그 선지자를 신뢰하라 그리하면 형통하리라 하고","다음날 이른 아침 백성들이 드고아 광야로 출발할 때에 여호사밧이 그들 앞에 서서 이렇게 말하였다. \"유다 백성과 예루살렘 주민 여러분, 여러분의 하나님 여호와를 의지하십시오. 그리하면 여러분이 강해질 것입니다. 여러분의 하나님 여호와께서 세우신 예언자를 믿으십시오. 그리하면 여러분이 승리할 것입니다!\"","Early in the morning they went out to the wilderness of Tekoa. As they were going out, Jehoshaphat halted and said: “Listen to me, Judah and inhabitants of Jerusalem! Let your faith in the LORD, your God, be firm, and you will be firm. Have faith in his prophets and you will succeed.”","And they rose early in the morning, and went forth into the wilderness of Tekoa: and as they went forth, Jehoshaphat stood and said, Hear me, O Judah, and ye inhabitants of Jerusalem; Believe in the LORD your God, so shall ye be established; believe his prophets, so shall ye prosper.","Early in the morning they left for the Desert of Tekoa. As they set out, Jehoshaphat stood and said, \"Listen to me, Judah and people of Jerusalem! Have faith in the LORD your God and you will be upheld; have faith in his prophets and you will be successful.\"","Cumque mane surrexissent, egressi sunt ad desertum Thecue; profectisque eis, stans Iosaphat in medio eorum dixit:  “Audite me, Iuda et habitatores Ierusalem! Credite in Domino Deo vestro et permanebitis; credite prophetis eius, et cuncta evenient vobis prospera “.","וישכימו בבקר ויצאו למדבר תקוע ובצאתם עמד יהושפט ויאמר שמעוני יהודה וישבי ירושלם האמינו ביהוה אלהיכם ותאמנו האמינו בנביאיו והצליחו׃"],["14","20","21","그러고 나서 여호사팟은 백성과 의논한 다음, 거룩한 예복을 입고 주님께 노래와 찬양을 드릴 이들을 내세웠다. 그리하여 이들이 군대 앞에 서서 나가며 노래하게 하였다. “주님을 찬송하여라. 주님의 자애는 영원하시다.”","그리고 백성들과 의논한 다음 야훼를 노래할 성가대를 거룩한 예복을 입혀 군대 앞에 세워 내보냈다. 성가대원들은 \"야훼께 감사하여라. 그의 사랑 영원하여라.\" 하고 노래를 불렀다.","백성과 더불어 의논하고 노래하는 자들을 택하여 거룩한 예복을 입히고 군대 앞에서 행진하며 여호와를 찬송하여 이르기를 여호와께 감사하세 그의 인자하심이 영원하도다 하게 하였더니","백성으로 더불어 의논하고 노래하는 자를 택하여 거룩한 예복을 입히고 군대 앞에서 행하며 여호와를 찬송하여 이르기를 여호와께 감사하세 그 자비하심이 영원하도다 하게 하였더니","여호사밧은 온 백성의 지휘관들과 의논한 다음, 성전 가수들에게 성가대원의 예복을 입혀 모든 군대의 선두에 세워 놓았다. 그리고 그들에게 노래를 계속 불러 여호와를 찬양하게 하였다. \"여호와의 사랑은 언제까지나 변함이 없으니, 너희가 모두 주님을 찬양하여라\"","After taking counsel with the people, he appointed some to sing to the LORD and some to praise the holy Splendor as it went forth at the head of the army. They sang: “Give thanks to the LORD, whose love endures forever.”","And when he had consulted with the people, he appointed singers unto the LORD, and that should praise the beauty of holiness, as they went out before the army, and to say, Praise the LORD; for his mercy endureth for ever.","After consulting the people, Jehoshaphat appointed men to sing to the LORD and to praise him for the splendor of his holiness as they went out at the head of the army, saying: \"Give thanks to the LORD, for his love endures forever.\"","Habuitque consilium cum populo et statuit cantores Domini, ut laudarent eum in ornatu sancto et antecederent exercitum ac voce consona dicerent:  “Confitemini Domino, quoniam in aeternum misericordia eius “.","ויועץ אל העם ויעמד משררים ליהוה ומהללים להדרת קדש בצאת לפני החלוץ ואמרים הודו ליהוה כי לעולם חסדו׃"],["14","20","22","그들이 이렇게 환호와 찬양의 노래를 시작하였을 때, 주님께서 유다를 치러 온 암몬 자손들과 모압과 세이르 산 주민들에게 복병을 보내시니, 그들이 패배하였다.","이렇게 큰소리로 찬양을 부르기 시작하였을 때 야훼께서 암몬과 모압과 세일 산에서 유다를 치러 온 군대를 교묘하게 치시니,","그 노래와 찬송이 시작될 때에 여호와께서 복병을 두어 유다를 치러 온 암몬 자손과 모압과 세일 산 주민들을 치게 하시므로 그들이 패하였으니","그 노래와 찬송이 시작될 때에 여호와께서 복병을 두어 유다를 치러 온 암몬 자손과 모압과 세일산 사람을 치게 하시므로 저희가 패하였으니","성가대원들이 노래를 시작하자, 여호와께서 유다 백성을 향하여 밀려들어오는 원수들을 혼란에 빠뜨려 서로 쳐죽이게 하셨다. 처음에는 암몬 족속과 모압 족속이 세일 산지에서 온 지원군들에게 달려들어 모조리 쳐죽이더니 다음에는 암몬 군대와 모압 군대가 서로 달려들어 저희들끼리 쳐죽였다.","At the moment they began their jubilant praise, the LORD laid an ambush against the Ammonites, Moabites, and those of Mount Seir who were coming against Judah, so that they were defeated.","And when they began to sing and to praise, the LORD set ambushments against the children of Ammon, Moab, and mount Seir, which were come against Judah; and they were smitten.","As they began to sing and praise, the LORD set ambushes against the men of Ammon and Moab and Mount Seir who were invading Judah, and they were defeated.","Cumque coepissent laudes canere, vertit Dominus insidias eorum contra filios Ammon et Moab et montem Seir, qui egressi fuerant, ut pugnarent contra Iudam, et percussi sunt.","ובעת החלו ברנה ותהלה נתן יהוה מארבים על בני עמון מואב והר שעיר הבאים ליהודה וינגפו׃"],["14","20","23","그러자 암몬 자손들과 모압이 세이르 산 주민들에게 맞서 일어나, 그들을 완전히 전멸시켰다. 암몬 자손들과 모압은 세이르 산 주민들을 다 죽인 다음, 이번에는 동료들끼리 서로 쳐 죽였다.","암몬 백성과 모압 백성이 세일 산에서 온 사람들을 전멸시키려고 달려들었다. 이리하여 저희끼리 맞싸워 자멸하고 말았다.","곧 암몬과 모압 자손이 일어나 세일 산 주민들을 쳐서 진멸하고 세일 주민들을 멸한 후에는 그들이 서로 쳐죽였더라","곧 암몬과 모압 자손이 일어나 세일산 거민을 쳐서 진멸하고 세일 거민을 멸한 후에는 저희가 피차에 살륙하였더라","(22절에 포함되어 있음)","For the Ammonites and Moabites set upon the inhabitants of Mount Seir and exterminated them according to the ban. And when they had finished with the inhabitants of Seir, each helped to destroy the other.","For the children of Ammon and Moab stood up against the inhabitants of mount Seir, utterly to slay and destroy them: and when they had made an end of the inhabitants of Seir, every one helped to destroy another.","The men of Ammon and Moab rose up against the men from Mount Seir to destroy and annihilate them. After they finished slaughtering the men from Seir, they helped to destroy one another.","Et filii Ammon et Moab consurrexerunt adversum habitatores montis Seir, ut interficerent et delerent eos; cumque hoc opere perpetrassent, etiam in semetipsos versi mutuis concidere vulneribus.","ויעמדו בני עמון ומואב על ישבי הר שעיר להחרים ולהשמיד וככלותם ביושבי שעיר עזרו איש ברעהו למשחית׃"],["14","20","24","유다 사람들이 광야의 망대에 이르러 무리를 바라보니, 주검들만 땅에 쓰러져 있고 살아남은 자는 하나도 없었다.","유다인들이 광야를 내다보는 망대에 이르러보니 한 명도 살아 남지 못하고 모두 시체가 되어 땅 위에 널려 있는 것이었다.","유다 사람이 들 망대에 이르러 그 무리를 본즉 땅에 엎드러진 시체들뿐이요 한 사람도 피한 자가 없는지라","유다 사람이 들 망대에 이르러 그 무리를 본즉 땅에 엎드러진 시체뿐이요 하나도 피한 자가 없는지라","유다 사람들이 광야를 한눈에 볼 수 있는 산마루에 이르러 적진을 내려다보니 땅바닥에 누워 있는 시체들만이 즐비할뿐 살아 남은 사람은 한 사람도 없었다.","When Judah came to the watchtower of the wilderness and looked toward the throng, there were only corpses fallen on the ground, with no survivors.","And when Judah came toward the watch tower in the wilderness, they looked unto the multitude, and, behold, they were dead bodies fallen to the earth, and none escaped.","When the men of Judah came to the place that overlooks the desert and looked toward the vast army, they saw only dead bodies lying on the ground; no one had escaped.","Porro Iuda, cum venisset ad speculam, quae respicit solitudinem, vidit procul omnem late regionem plenam cadaveribus, nec superesse quemquam, qui necem potuisset evadere.","ויהודה בא על המצפה למדבר ויפנו אל ההמון והנם פגרים נפלים ארצה ואין פליטה׃"],["14","20","25","여호사팟은 백성과 함께 가서 전리품들을 거두었다. 그들은 많은 가축과 물품과 옷과 값비싼 기물을 발견하고서는 옮길 수 없을 만큼 많은 것을 노획하였다. 전리품이 너무 많아 그것들을 거두는 데에 사흘이나 걸렸다.","여호사밧의 군대는 전리품을 거두어들였다. 가축, 개인 소지품, 옷, 귀중품 등 닥치는 대로 거두다 보니 운반할 수 없을 만큼 되었다. 전리품이 어찌나 많았던지 그것을 다 거두어들이는 데 사흘이나 걸렸다.","여호사밧과 그의 백성이 가서 적군의 물건을 탈취할새 본즉 그 가운데에 재물과 의복과 보물이 많이 있으므로 각기 탈취하는데 그 물건이 너무 많아 능히 가져갈 수 없을 만큼 많으므로 사흘 동안에 거두어들이고","여호사밧과 그 백성이 가서 적군의 물건을 취할쌔 본즉 그 가운데에 재물과 의복과 보물이 많이 있는고로 각기 취하는데 그 물건이 너무 많아 능히 가져갈 수 없을만큼 많으므로 사흘 동안에 취하고","여호사밧이 유다군을 거느리고 내려가서 적군의 군수품을 운반하는 가축들과 전사자들이 지니고 다니던 귀중품들과 의류와 귀중한 기구들을 전리품으로 거두기 시작하였다. 이렇게 시체들을 뒤져서 더 이상 가지고 갈 수 없을 정도로 전리품들을 모아들이는 데에만 사흘이 걸렸다. 그토록 전리품들이 많았다.","Jehoshaphat and his people came to gather the spoils, and they found an abundance of cattle and personal property, garments and precious vessels. They took so much that they were unable to carry it all; it took them three days to gather the spoils, there was so much of it.","And when Jehoshaphat and his people came to take away the spoil of them, they found among them in abundance both riches with the dead bodies, and precious jewels, which they stripped off for themselves, more than they could carry away: and they were three days in gathering of the spoil, it was so much.","So Jehoshaphat and his men went to carry off their plunder, and they found among them a great amount of equipment and clothing and also articles of value--more than they could take away. There was so much plunder that it took three days to collect it.","Venit ergo Iosaphat et omnis populus cum eo ad detrahenda spolia mortuorum inveneruntque iumenta multa et supellectilem, vestes quoque et vasa pretiosissima et diripuerunt, ita ut omnia portare non possent, et per tres dies spolia auferebant pro praedae magnitudine.","ויבא יהושפט ועמו לבז את שללם וימצאו בהם לרב ורכוש ופגרים וכלי חמדות וינצלו להם לאין משא ויהיו ימים שלושה בזזים את השלל כי רב הוא׃"],["14","20","26","나흘째 되는 날, 그들은 '브라카 골짜기'에 모였다. 거기에서 그들이 주님을 찬미하였으므로, 오늘날까지 그곳의 이름을 '브라카 골짜기'라고 한다.","나흘째 되는 날 그들은 찬양계곡에 모였다. 그 때 거기에서 야훼를 찬양했다고 해서 지금도 그 곳 이름을 찬양계곡이라고 부르는 것이다.","넷째 날에 무리가 브라가 골짜기에 모여서 거기서 여호와를 송축한지라 그러므로 오늘날까지 그 곳을 브라가 골짜기라 일컫더라","제 사일에 무리가 2)브라가 골짜기에 모여서 거기서 여호와를 송축한지라 그러므로 오늘날까지 그곳을 2)브라가 골짜기라 일컫더라 송축송축","나흘째 되는 날 그들은 브라가 골짜기에 모여 여호와께 감사하였다. 그래서 베들레헴에서 남서쪽으로 9.6킬로미터 지점에 있는 그 골짜기의 이름이 감사의 골짜기가 되었고, 그 이름이 오늘날까지도 그대로 사용되고 있다.","On the fourth day they held an assembly in the Valley of Berakah—for there they blessed the LORD; that is why the place is called the Valley of Berakah to this day.","And on the fourth day they assembled themselves in the valley of Berachah; for there they blessed the LORD: therefore the name of the same place was called, The valley of Berachah, unto this day.","On the fourth day they assembled in the Valley of Beracah, where they praised the LORD. This is why it is called the Valley of Beracah to this day.","Die autem quarto congregati sunt in valle Baracha; etenim, quoniam ibi benedixerant Domino, vocaverunt locum illum vallis Benedictionis usque in praesentem diem.","וביום הרבעי נקהלו לעמק ברכה כי שם ברכו את יהוה על כן קראו את שם המקום ההוא עמק ברכה עד היום׃"],["14","20","27","유다와 예루살렘의 모든 사람이 여호사팟을 앞세우고, 기뻐하며 예루살렘으로 돌아왔다. 주님께서 그들에게 원수들을 이기는 기쁨을 주셨기 때문이다.","여호사밧을 앞세우고 온 유다인과 예루살렘 시민이 예루살렘으로 개선하였다. 야훼께서 그들에게 원수들을 쳐 이기는 기쁨을 주셨던 것이다.","유다와 예루살렘 모든 사람이 다시 여호사밧을 선두로 하여 즐겁게 예루살렘으로 돌아왔으니 이는 여호와께서 그들이 그 적군을 이김으로써 즐거워하게 하셨음이라","유다와 예루살렘 모든 사람이 여호사밧을 선두로 즐거이 예루살렘으로 돌아왔으니 이는 여호와께서 저희로 그 적군을 이김을 인하여 즐거워하게 하셨음이라","그들은 모두 여호사밧을 선두에 세우고 예루살렘으로 다시 기쁘게 돌아왔다. 여호와께서 원수들을 물리치는 큰 기쁨을 그들에게 안겨 주셨기 때문이다.","Then all the men of Judah and Jerusalem, with Jehoshaphat at their head, returned to Jerusalem with joy; for the LORD had given them joy over their enemies.","Then they returned, every man of Judah and Jerusalem, and Jehoshaphat in the forefront of them, to go again to Jerusalem with joy; for the LORD had made them to rejoice over their enemies.","Then, led by Jehoshaphat, all the men of Judah and Jerusalem returned joyfully to Jerusalem, for the LORD had given them cause to rejoice over their enemies.","Reversusque est omnis vir Iudae et Ierusalem et Iosaphat ante eos in Ierusalem cum laetitia magna, eo quod dedisset eis Dominus gaudium de inimicis suis;","וישבו כל איש יהודה וירושלם ויהושפט בראשם לשוב אל ירושלם בשמחה כי שמחם יהוה מאויביהם׃"],["14","20","28","그들은 수금과 비파와 쇠 나팔을 연주하며 예루살렘에 들어와, 주님의 집으로 나아갔다.","그들은 거문고와 수금을 뜯고 나팔을 불며 예루살렘으로 돌아와 야훼의 성전으로 나아갔다.","그들이 비파와 수금과 나팔을 합주하고 예루살렘에 이르러 여호와의 전에 나아가니라","무리가 비파와 수금과 나팔을 합주하고 예루살렘에 이르러 여호와의 전에 나아가니라","그들은 비파와 수금을 뜯고 나팔을 불며 예루살렘으로 돌아와 여호와의 성전으로 향하였다.","They came to Jerusalem, with harps, lyres, and trumpets, to the house of the LORD.","And they came to Jerusalem with psalteries and harps and trumpets unto the house of the LORD.","They entered Jerusalem and went to the temple of the LORD with harps and lutes and trumpets.","ingressique sunt Ierusalem cum psalteriis et citharis et tubis in domum Domini.","ויבאו ירושלם בנבלים ובכנרות ובחצצרות אל בית יהוה׃"],["14","20","29","세상의 모든 나라가 주님께서 친히 이스라엘의 원수들과 싸우셨다는 소식을 듣고서는 하느님에 대한 두려움에 사로잡혔다.","야훼께서 몸소 이스라엘의 원수들을 치셨다는 소문이 퍼지자 세계 만방은 야훼를 두려워하게 되었다.","이방 모든 나라가 여호와께서 이스라엘의 적군을 치셨다 함을 듣고 하나님을 두려워하므로","이방 모든 나라가 여호와께서 이스라엘의 적군을 치셨다 함을 듣고 하나님을 두려워한고로","여호와께서 유다 백성의 원수들을 쳐서 멸망시키셨다는 소식이 전해지자 사방의 모든 나라가 하나님을 두려워하게 되었다.","And the fear of God came upon all the kingdoms of the surrounding lands when they heard how the LORD had fought against the enemies of Israel.","And the fear of God was on all the kingdoms of those countries, when they had heard that the LORD fought against the enemies of Israel.","The fear of God came upon all the kingdoms of the countries when they heard how the LORD had fought against the enemies of Israel.","Irruit autem pavor Dei super universa regna terrarum, cum audissent quod pugnasset Dominus contra inimicos Israel.","ויהי פחד אלהים על כל ממלכות הארצות בשמעם כי נלחם יהוה עם אויבי ישראל׃"],["14","20","30","이제 여호사팟의 왕국은 안정되었다. 그의 하느님께서 사방으로부터 평온하게 해 주셨기 때문이다.","하느님께서 사방으로 평안을 주셨으므로 여호사밧이 다스리는 동안 나라는 평온하였다.","여호사밧의 나라가 태평하였으니 이는 그의 하나님이 사방에서 그들에게 평강을 주셨음이더라","여호사밧의 나라가 태평하였으니 이는 그 하나님이 사방에서 저희에게 평강을 주셨음이더라","그래서 그 이후로는 여호사밧이 태평성대를 누리게 되었다. 하나님 여호와께서 모든 국경선을 지켜 주셨기 때문이다.","Thereafter Jehoshaphat’s kingdom had peace, for his God gave him rest on every side.","So the realm of Jehoshaphat was quiet: for his God gave him rest round about.","And the kingdom of Jehoshaphat was at peace, for his God had given him rest on every side.","Quievitque regnum Iosaphat, et praebuit ei Deus eius pacem per circuitum.","ותשקט מלכות יהושפט וינח לו אלהיו מסביב׃"],["14","20","31","여호사팟은 이렇게 유다를 다스렸다. 그는 서른다섯 살에 임금이 되어, 예루살렘에서 스물다섯 해 동안 다스렸다. 그의 어머니 이름은 아주바인데 실히의 딸이었다.","3)여호사밧은 삼십오 세에 유다 왕이 되어 이십오 년간 예루살렘에서 다스렸다. 그의 어머니는 실히의 딸로서 이름은 아주바라고 하였다.20:31-33에 대해서는 1열왕 22:41-43 참조.","여호사밧이 유다의 왕이 되어 왕위에 오를 때에 나이가 삼십오 세라 예루살렘에서 이십오 년 동안 다스리니라 그의 어머니의 이름은 아수바라 실히의 딸이더라","여호사밧이 유다 왕이 되어 위에 나아갈 때에 나이 삼십 오세라 예루살렘에서 이십 오년을 치리하니라 그 모친의 이름은 아수바라 실히의 딸이더라","여호사밧은 35세에 유다 왕이 되어 25년 동안 수도 예루살렘에서 다스렸다. 그의 어머니는 실히의 딸 아수바였다.","Thus Jehoshaphat reigned over Judah. He was thirty-five years old when he became king, and he reigned twenty-five years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Azubah, daughter of Shilhi.","And Jehoshaphat reigned over Judah: he was thirty and five years old when he began to reign, and he reigned twenty and five years in Jerusalem. And his mother's name was Azubah the daughter of Shilhi.","So Jehoshaphat reigned over Judah. He was thirty-five years old when he became king of Judah, and he reigned in Jerusalem twenty-five years. His mother's name was Azubah daughter of Shilhi.","Regnavit igitur Iosaphat super Iudam. Et erat triginta quinque annorum, cum regnare coepisset; viginti autem et quinque annis regnavit in Ierusalem. Nomen matris eius Azuba filia Selachi.","וימלך יהושפט על יהודה בן שלשים וחמש שנה במלכו ועשרים וחמש שנה מלך בירושלם ושם אמו עזובה בת שלחי׃"],["14","20","32","그는 자기 아버지 아사가 걷던 길에서 벗어나지 않고 그 길을 따라 걸어, 주님의 눈에 드는 옳은 일을 하였다.","그는 부왕 아사의 본을 따라 어김없이 그대로 하여 야훼 보시기에 바른 일만을 하였다.","여호사밧이 그의 아버지 아사의 길로 행하여 돌이켜 떠나지 아니하고 여호와 보시기에 정직하게 행하였으나","여호사밧이 그 부친 아사의 길로 행하여 돌이켜 떠나지 아니하고 여호와 보시기에 정직히 행하였으나","여호사밧은 아버지 아사를 본받아 살았고, 여호와께서 옳게 보시는 일들만 하였다.","He walked in the way of Asa his father unceasingly, doing what was right in the LORD’s sight.","And he walked in the way of Asa his father, and departed not from it, doing that which was right in the sight of the LORD.","He walked in the ways of his father Asa and did not stray from them; he did what was right in the eyes of the LORD.","Et ambulavit in via patris sui Asa nec declinavit ab ea, faciens quod rectum erat coram Domino.","וילך בדרך אביו אסא ולא סר ממנה לעשות הישר בעיני יהוה׃"],["14","20","33","그러나 산당들은 없애지 않아, 백성은 여전히 자기 조상들의 하느님께 마음을 굳게 두지 않았다.","그러나 산당만은 없애지 않았으므로 백성들은 선조들의 하느님께만 충성을 바칠 수 없었다.","산당만은 철거하지 아니하였으므로 백성이 여전히 마음을 정하여 그들의 조상들의 하나님께로 돌아오지 아니하였더라","산당은 폐하지 아니하였으므로 백성이 오히려 마음을 정하여 그 열조의 하나님께로 돌아오지 아니하였더라","그러나 유다 백성 중에도 그 조상의 하나님을 온전히 섬기지 않는 사람이 있었으므로 가나안 원주민의 신들을 섬기는 제사처들이 전국에 그대로 있었다.","Nevertheless, the high places did not disappear and the people had not yet set their hearts on the God of their ancestors.","Howbeit the high places were not taken away: for as yet the people had not prepared their hearts unto the God of their fathers.","The high places, however, were not removed, and the people still had not set their hearts on the God of their fathers.","Verumtamen excelsa non ablata sunt; et adhuc populus non direxerat cor suum ad Deum patrum suorum.","אך הבמות לא סרו ועוד העם לא הכינו לבבם לאלהי אבתיהם׃"],["14","20","34","여호사팟의 나머지 행적은 처음부터 끝까지 이스라엘 임금들의 실록에 실린, 하나니의 아들 예후의 기록에 쓰여 있다.","여호사밧의 나머지 역사는 처음부터 끝까지 하나니의 아들 예후의 역사서에 기록되어 있는데, 이것은 이스라엘 왕조실록에 올랐다.","이 외에 여호사밧의 시종 행적은 하나니의 아들 예후의 글에 다 기록되었고 그 글은 이스라엘 열왕기에 올랐더라","이 외에 여호사밧의 시종 행적이 하나니의 아들 예후의 글에 다 기록되었고 그 글은 이스라엘 열왕기에 올랐더라","여호사밧의 행적에 대해서는 처음부터 끝까지 하나니의 아들 예후가 쓴 책에서 자세히 읽을 수 있다. 그 책은 이스라엘과 유다의 열왕기에 들어 있다.","The rest of the acts of Jehoshaphat, first and last, are recorded in the chronicle of Jehu, son of Hanani, which was incorporated into the book of the kings of Israel.","Now the rest of the acts of Jehoshaphat, first and last, behold, they are written in the book of Jehu the son of Hanani, who is mentioned in the book of the kings of Israel.","The other events of Jehoshaphat's reign, from beginning to end, are written in the annals of Jehu son of Hanani, which are recorded in the book of the kings of Israel.","Reliqua autem gestorum Iosaphat, priorum et novissimorum, scripta sunt in verbis Iehu filii Hanani, quae digesta sunt in libros regum Israel.","ויתר דברי יהושפט הראשנים והאחרנים הנם כתובים בדברי יהוא בן חנני אשר העלה על ספר מלכי ישראל׃"],["14","20","35","그 뒤에 유다 임금 여호사팟은 이스라엘 임금 아하즈야와 동맹을 맺었는데, 아하즈야는 악을 저지르는 자였다.","그런 일이 있은 지 얼마 뒤에 유다 왕 여호사밧은 이스라엘 왕 아하지야와 손을 잡았는데 아하지야는 그를 나쁜 길로 인도하였다.","유다 왕 여호사밧이 나중에 이스라엘 왕 아하시야와 교제하였는데 아하시야는 심히 악을 행하는 자였더라","유다 왕 여호사밧이 나중에 이스라엘 왕 아하시야와 교제하였는데 아하시야는 심히 악을 행하는 자이었더라","한번은 유다 왕 여호사밧이 온갖 악한 일들만 골라서 하는 이스라엘 왕 아하시야와 사업을 같이 하였다.","After this, Jehoshaphat king of Judah joined with Ahaziah king of Israel—he acted wickedly.","And after this did Jehoshaphat king of Judah join himself with Ahaziah king of Israel, who did very wickedly:","Later, Jehoshaphat king of Judah made an alliance with Ahaziah king of Israel, who was guilty of wickedness.","Post haec iniit amicitias Iosaphat rex Iudae cum Ochozia rege Israel, cuius opera fuerunt impiissima,","ואחריכן אתחבר יהושפט מלך יהודה עם אחזיה מלך ישראל הוא הרשיע לעשות׃"],["14","20","36","여호사팟은 타르시스로 가는 상선들을 만드는 일에 아하즈야와 동맹을 맺고, 에츠욘 게베르에서 상선들을 만들었다.","둘은 서로 손을 잡고 다르싯행 상선들을 만들었다. 배를 만든 곳은 에시욘게벨이었다.","두 왕이 서로 연합하고 배를 만들어 다시스로 보내고자 하여 에시온게벨에서 배를 만들었더니","두 왕이 서로 결합하고 배를 지어 다시스로 보내고자 하여 에시온게벨에서 배를 지었더니","그들은 함께 다시스로 운항하는 함대를 건조하기로 약속하고 아카바만 북단의 에시온게벨에 조선소를 차렸다.","He joined with him in building ships to go to Tarshish; the fleet was built at Ezion-geber.","And he joined himself with him to make ships to go to Tarshish: and they made the ships in Eziongaber.","He agreed with him to construct a fleet of trading ships. After these were built at Ezion Geber,","et particeps fuit, ut facerent naves, quae irent in Tharsis, feceruntque classem in Asiongaber.","ויחברהו עמו לעשות אניות ללכת תרשיש ויעשו אניות בעציון גבר׃"],["14","20","37","그러자 마레사 사람 도다와후의 아들 엘리에제르가 여호사팟에게 이렇게 예언하였다. “임금님께서 아하즈야와 동맹을 맺으셨기 때문에, 임금님께서 만드신 것들을 주님께서 파괴하셨습니다.” 그 말대로 상선들이 부서져 타르시스로 갈 수 없게 되었다.","그 때 마레사 사람 도다와후의 아들 엘리에젤이 여호사밧에게 나타나 예언하였다. \"임금님께서 아하지야와 손을 잡았으므로 야훼께서 임금님의 일을 방해하실 것이오.\" 그 말대로 그가 만든 배는 부서져 다르싯까지 가지 못하고 말았다.","마레사 사람 도다와후의 아들 엘리에셀이 여호사밧을 향하여 예언하여 이르되 왕이 아하시야와 교제하므로 여호와께서 왕이 지은 것들을 파하시리라 하더니 이에 그 배들이 부서져서 다시스로 가지 못하였더라","마레사 사람 도다와후의 아들 엘리에셀이 여호사밧을 향하여 예언하여 가로되 왕이 아하시야와 교제하는고로 여호와께서 왕의 지은 것을 파하시리라 하더니 이에 그 배가 파상하여 다시스로 가지 못하였더라","이때 마레사 출신인 도다와후의 아들 엘리에셀 예언자가 여호사밧을 책망하였다. \"왕께서 온갖 악행을 골라서 하는 아하시야와 손을 잡으셨으니, 여호와께서 그 무역 선단을 모조리 파손시키실 것입니다.\" 과연 그 선단은 출항하자마자 파선을 당하여 다시스에 한번 가보지도 못하였다.","But Eliezer, son of Dodavahu from Mareshah, prophesied against Jehoshaphat. He said: “Because you have joined with Ahaziah, the LORD will shatter your work.” And the ships were wrecked and were unable to sail to Tarshish.","Then Eliezer the son of Dodavah of Mareshah prophesied against Jehoshaphat, saying, Because thou hast joined thyself with Ahaziah, the LORD hath broken thy works. And the ships were broken, that they were not able to go to Tarshish.","Eliezer son of Dodavahu of Mareshah prophesied against Jehoshaphat, saying, \"Because you have made an alliance with Ahaziah, the LORD will destroy what you have made.\" The ships were wrecked and were not able to set sail to trade. 2CH","Prophetavit autem Eliezer filius Dodiae de Maresa contra Iosaphat dicens:  “Quia habuisti foedus cum Ochozia, percussit Dominus opera tua “. Contritaeque sunt naves nec potuerunt ire in Tharsis.","ויתנבא אליעזר בן דדוהו ממרשה על יהושפט לאמר כהתחברך עם אחזיהו פרץ יהוה את מעשיך וישברו אניות ולא עצרו ללכת אל תרשיש׃"],["14","21","1","여호사팟은 자기 조상들과 함께 잠들어, 다윗 성에 조상들과 함께 묻히고, 그의 아들 여호람이 그 뒤를 이어 임금이 되었다.","여호사밧이 세상을 떠나 다윗 성에 있는 왕실 묘지에 묻히자 그의 아들 여호람이 뒤를 이어 왕위에 올랐다.","여호사밧이 그의 조상들과 함께 누우매 그의 조상들과 함께 다윗 성에 장사되고 그의 아들 여호람이 대신하여 왕이 되니라","여호사밧이 그 열조와 함께 자매 그 열조와 함께 다윗성에 장사되고 그 아들 여호람이 대신하여 왕이 되니라","여호사밧이 죽어 다윗성에 선왕들과 함께 안장되자, 그의 아들 여호람이 뒤를 이어 왕위에 올랐다.","Jehoshaphat rested with his ancestors; he was buried with them in the City of David. Jehoram, his son, succeeded him as king.","Now Jehoshaphat slept with his fathers, and was buried with his fathers in the city of David. And Jehoram his son reigned in his stead.","Then Jehoshaphat rested with his fathers and was buried with them in the City of David. And Jehoram his son succeeded him as king.","Dormivit autem Iosaphat cum patribus suis et sepultus est cum eis in civitate David; regnavitque Ioram filius eius pro eo.","וישכב יהושפט עם אבתיו ויקבר עם אבתיו בעיר דויד וימלך יהורם בנו תחתיו׃"],["14","21","2","여호람에게는 같은 여호사팟의 아들인 아우들이 있었는데, 아자르야, 여히엘, 즈카르야, 아자르야, 미카엘, 스파트야이다. 이들이 모두 이스라엘 임금 여호사팟의 아들이다.","그에게는 아우가 있었는데, 이름은 아자리야, 여히엘, 즈가리야, 아자리야, 미가엘, 스바티야였다. 이들은 유다 왕 여호사밧의 아들들이었다.","여호사밧의 아들 여호람의 아우들 아사랴와 여히엘과 스가랴와 아사랴와 미가엘과 스바댜는 다 유다 왕 여호사밧의 아들들이라","여호사밧의 아들 여호람의 아우 아사랴와 여히엘과 스가랴와 아사랴와 미가엘과 스바댜는 다 유다 왕 여호사밧의 아들이라","여호사밧왕은 장자인 여호람 밑으로 여섯 아들을 더 두었다. 아사랴, 여히엘, 스가랴, 아사랴, 미가엘, 스바댜.","He had brothers, Jehoshaphat’s sons: Azariah, Jehiel, Zechariah, Azariah, Michael, and Shephatiah; all these were sons of King Jehoshaphat of Judah.","And he had brethren the sons of Jehoshaphat, Azariah, and Jehiel, and Zechariah, and Azariah, and Michael, and Shephatiah: all these were the sons of Jehoshaphat king of Israel.","Jehoram's brothers, the sons of Jehoshaphat, were Azariah, Jehiel, Zechariah, Azariahu, Michael and Shephatiah. All these were sons of Jehoshaphat king of Israel.","Qui habuit fratres filios Iosaphat Azariam et Iahiel et Zachariam et Azariam et Michael et Saphatiam: omnes hi filii Iosaphat regis Israel.","ולו אחים בני יהושפט עזריה ויחיאל וזכריהו ועזריהו ומיכאל ושפטיהו כל אלה בני יהושפט מלך ישראל׃"],["14","21","3","그들의 아버지는 그들에게 유다의 요새 성읍과 더불어 은과 금과 보화 등 많은 선물을 주었다. 그러나 왕권은 여호람에게 넘겨주었으니, 그가 맏아들이었기 때문이다.","부왕은 이 아들들에게 금은 보화와 함께 유다의 요새화된 성읍을 선물로 주었지만 왕권만은 맏아들인 여호람에게 물려주었다.","그의 아버지가 그들에게는 은금과 보물과 유다 견고한 성읍들을 선물로 후히 주었고 여호람은 장자이므로 왕위를 주었더니","그 부친이 저희에게는 은금과 보물과 유다 견고한 성읍들을 선물로 후히 주었고 여호람은 장자인고로 왕위를 주었더니","그는 장자에게 왕위를 계승시키는 궁중의 법도대로 여호람에게 왕위를 물려주고 다른 아들들에게는 금과 은과 귀중품들을 넉넉히 나누어 주어 요새 도성의 사령관으로 세워 놓았다.","Their father gave them many gifts of silver, gold, and precious objects, together with fortified cities in Judah, but the kingship he gave to Jehoram because he was the firstborn.","And their father gave them great gifts of silver, and of gold, and of precious things, with fenced cities in Judah: but the kingdom gave he to Jehoram; because he was the firstborn.","Their father had given them many gifts of silver and gold and articles of value, as well as fortified cities in Judah, but he had given the kingdom to Jehoram because he was his firstborn son.","Deditque eis pater suus multa munera argenti et auri et res pretiosas cum civitatibus munitissimis in Iuda; regnum autem tradidit Ioram, eo quod esset primogenitus.","ויתן להם אביהם מתנות רבות לכסף ולזהב ולמגדנות עם ערי מצרות ביהודה ואת הממלכה נתן ליהורם כי הוא הבכור׃"],["14","21","4","여호람은 자기 아버지의 왕위에 올라 자리를 굳힌 다음, 아우들을 모두 칼로 쳐 죽이고 이스라엘의 대신들도 더러 죽였다.","여호람은 부왕에게서 물려받은 왕좌에 올라 자리를 굳힌 다음 동생들을 다 칼로 쳐죽이고 이스라엘 장군들도 더러 죽였다.","여호람이 그의 아버지의 왕국을 다스리게 되어 세력을 얻은 후에 그의 모든 아우들과 이스라엘 방백들 중 몇 사람을 칼로 죽였더라","여호람이 그 부친의 위에 올라 세력을 얻은 후에 그 모든 아우와 이스라엘 방백 중 몇 사람을 칼로 죽였더라","그러나 아버지를 이어 왕위에 오른 여호람은 권력을 확고히 거머쥐자, 여섯 명의 아우들과 이스라엘의 관리 가운데서 자기를 비판하는 이들을 모조리 죽여 왕위를 넘겨다볼 만한 세력들을 모두 없앴다.","When Jehoram had acceded to his father’s kingdom and was firmly in power, he killed all his brothers with the sword, and also some of the princes of Israel.","Now when Jehoram was risen up to the kingdom of his father, he strengthened himself, and slew all his brethren with the sword, and divers also of the princes of Israel.","When Jehoram established himself firmly over his father's kingdom, he put all his brothers to the sword along with some of the princes of Israel.","Surrexit ergo Ioram super regnum patris sui; cumque se confirmasset, occidit omnes fratres suos gladio et quosdam de principibus Israel.","ויקם יהורם על ממלכת אביו ויתחזק ויהרג את כל אחיו בחרב וגם משרי ישראל׃"],["14","21","5","여호람은 서른두 살에 임금이 되어, 예루살렘에서 여덟 해 동안 다스렸다.","1)여호람은 삼십이 세에 왕위에 올라 예루살렘에서 팔 년간 다스렸다.21:5-10에 대해서는 2열왕 8:17-22 참조.","여호람이 왕위에 오를 때에 나이가 삼십이 세라 예루살렘에서 팔 년 동안 다스리니라","여호람이 위에 나아갈 때에 나이 삼십 이세라 예루살렘에서 팔년을 치리하니라","여호람은 32세에 왕이 되어 8년 동안 예루살렘에서 다스렸다.","Jehoram was thirty-two years old when he became king, and he reigned eight years in Jerusalem.","Jehoram was thirty and two years old when he began to reign, and he reigned eight years in Jerusalem.","Jehoram was thirty-two years old when he became king, and he reigned in Jerusalem eight years.","Triginta duorum annorum erat Ioram, cum regnare coepisset, et octo annis regnavit in Ierusalem.","בן שלשים ושתים שנה יהורם במלכו ושמונה שנים מלך בירושלם׃"],["14","21","6","여호람은 아합의 딸을 아내로 맞아들였기 때문에, 아합 집안이 하던 대로 이스라엘 임금들의 길을 따라 걸어, 주님의 눈에 거슬리는 악한 짓을 저질렀다.","그는 아합의 사위가 되다 보니, 아합 가문이 하던 대로 이스라엘 왕들의 전철을 밟아 야훼의 눈에 거슬리는 일을 하게 되었다.","그가 이스라엘 왕들의 길로 행하여 아합의 집과 같이 하였으니 이는 아합의 딸이 그의 아내가 되었음이라 그가 여호와 보시기에 악을 행하였으나","저가 이스라엘 왕들의 길로 행하여 아합의 집과 같이 하였으니 이는 아합의 딸이 그 아내가 되었음이라 저가 여호와 보시기에 악을 행하였으나","여호람은 여호와의 마음에 들지 않는 일들만 골라서 하였다. 이 점에서 그는 아합왕의 가문과 흉악한 이스라엘의 왕들을 본받았다. 그가 이렇게 된 것은 아합과 이세벨 사이에 낳은 딸 아달랴를 아내로 삼은 데에 원인이 있었다.","He walked in the way of the kings of Israel as the house of Ahab had done, since the daughter of Ahab was his wife; and he did what was evil in the LORD’s sight.","And he walked in the way of the kings of Israel, like as did the house of Ahab: for he had the daughter of Ahab to wife: and he wrought that which was evil in the eyes of the LORD.","He walked in the ways of the kings of Israel, as the house of Ahab had done, for he married a daughter of Ahab. He did evil in the eyes of the LORD.","Ambulavitque in viis regum Israel, sicut egerat domus Achab; filia quippe Achab erat uxor eius. Et fecit malum in conspectu Domini.","וילך בדרך מלכי ישראל כאשר עשו בית אחאב כי בת אחאב היתה לו אשה ויעש הרע בעיני יהוה׃"],["14","21","7","그러나 주님께서는 다윗과 맺으신 계약 때문에, 또 일찍이 다윗과 그 자손들에게 영원히 등불을 주시겠다고 말씀하셨기 때문에, 다윗의 집안을 멸망시키려고 하지는 않으셨다.","그러나 야훼께서는 당신의 종 다윗과 맺으신 계약을 생각하시고 다윗 왕가를 멸망시킬 생각은 없으셨다. 일찍이 다윗과 그 후손들에게 영원히 꺼지지 않는 불씨를 주겠다고 약속하셨던 것이다.","여호와께서 다윗의 집을 멸하기를 즐겨하지 아니하셨음은 이전에 다윗과 더불어 언약을 세우시고 또 다윗과 그의 자손에게 항상 등불을 주겠다고 말씀하셨음이더라","여호와께서 다윗의 집을 멸하기를 즐겨하지 아니하셨음은 이전에 다윗으로 더불어 언약을 세우시고 또 다윗과 그 자손에게 항상 등불을 주겠다고 허하셨음이더라","그러나 여호와께서는 그가 저지르는 갖가지 악행을 보시고도 다윗의 왕가를 멸절시키려 하지 않으셨다. 여호와께서 일찍이 다윗과 계약을 맺으시고 언제까지나 그의 후손들 중에서 왕을 일으켜 주시기로 약속하셨기 때문이다.","Even so, the LORD was unwilling to destroy the house of David because of the covenant he had made with David and because of his promise to leave him and his sons a holding for all time.","Howbeit the LORD would not destroy the house of David, because of the covenant that he had made with David, and as he promised to give a light to him and to his sons for ever.","Nevertheless, because of the covenant the LORD had made with David, the LORD was not willing to destroy the house of David. He had promised to maintain a lamp for him and his descendants forever.","Noluit autem Dominus disperdere domum David propter pactum, quod inierat cum eo, et quia promiserat, ut daret ei lucernam et filiis eius omni tempore.","ולא אבה יהוה להשחית את בית דויד למען הברית אשר כרת לדויד וכאשר אמר לתת לו ניר ולבניו כל הימים׃"],["14","21","8","여호람 시대에 에돔은 유다의 지배에 반란을 일으키고, 자기들의 임금을 세웠다.","그가 다스리고 있는 동안에 에돔은 유다에 반기를 들고 저희의 왕을 세웠다.","여호람 때에 에돔이 배반하여 유다의 지배하에서 벗어나 자기 위에 왕을 세우므로","여호람 때에 에돔이 배반하여 유다의 수하에서 벗어나 자기 위에 왕을 세운고로","여호람이 나라를 다스리는 동안 유다는 예속 국가들을 잃게 되었다. 우선 에돔 족속이 유다에 반기를 들고 스스로 왕을 세웠다.","During his time Edom revolted against the rule of Judah and installed its own king.","In his days the Edomites revolted from under the dominion of Judah, and made themselves a king.","In the time of Jehoram, Edom rebelled against Judah and set up its own king.","In diebus illis rebellavit Edom, ne esset subditus Iudae, et constituit sibi regem.","בימיו פשע אדום מתחת יד יהודה וימליכו עליהם מלך׃"],["14","21","9","그러자 여호람은 자기 장수들과 모든 병거대를 이끌고 그곳으로 건너갔다. 여호람은 밤에 일어나 자기와 병거대 대장들을 포위한 에돔군을 쳤다.","여호람은 장군들을 이끌고 모든 병거대를 출동시켜 세일로 건너 갔다가 수하 장군들이 거느리는 병거대와 함께 에돔 군에게 포위되었으나 밤에 일어나 에돔 군 포위망을 뚫고 나왔다.","여호람이 지휘관들과 모든 병거를 거느리고 출정하였더니 밤에 일어나서 자기를 에워싼 에돔 사람과 그 병거의 지휘관들을 쳤더라","여호람이 장관들과 모든 병거를 거느리고 출정하였더니 밤에 일어나서 자기를 에워싼 에돔 사람과 그 병거의 장관들을 쳤더라","그러자 여호람이 장군들과 전차 부대를 모두 거느리고 에돔으로 출격하였으나 오히려 에돔군에게 포위되고 말았다. 이리하여 그는 밤중에 일어나 겨우 에돔 군대를 뚫고 탈출하였다.","Thereupon Jehoram with his officers and all his chariots crossed over. He arose by night and broke through the Edomites when they had surrounded him and the commanders of his chariots.","Then Jehoram went forth with his princes, and all his chariots with him: and he rose up by night, and smote the Edomites which compassed him in, and the captains of the chariots.","So Jehoram went there with his officers and all his chariots. The Edomites surrounded him and his chariot commanders, but he rose up and broke through by night.","Cumque transisset Ioram cum principibus suis et cunctis curribus, qui erant secum, surrexit nocte et percussit Edom, qui eum circumdederat, et omnes duces curruum eius.","ויעבר יהורם עם שריו וכל הרכב עמו ויהי קם לילה ויך את אדום הסובב אליו ואת שרי הרכב׃"],["14","21","10","에돔은 유다의 지배에 반란을 일으켜 오늘에 이르렀는데, 리브나가 유다의 지배에 반란을 일으킨 것도 그때다. 여호람이 주 자기 조상들의 하느님을 저버렸기 때문이다.","이리하여 에돔은 유다의 지배에서 벗어나 오늘에 이르렀다. 리브나가 반란을 일으켜 유다의 지배에서 벗어난 것도 그 때였다. 그는 선조들의 하느님 야훼를 저버렸다가 이 변을 당했던 것이다.","이와 같이 에돔이 배반하여 유다의 지배하에서 벗어났더니 오늘까지 그러하였으며 그 때에 립나도 배반하여 여호람의 지배 하에서 벗어났으니 이는 그가 그의 조상들의 하나님 여호와를 버렸음이더라","이와 같이 에돔이 배반하여 유다의 수하에서 벗어났더니 오늘날까지 그러하였으며 그 때에 립나도 배반하여 여호람의 수하에서 벗어났으니 이는 저가 그 열조의 하나님 여호와를 버렸음이더라","에돔이 이처럼 유다에서 독립하여 오늘날에 이르고 있다. 이때에 유다 야산 지대의 서쪽 끝, 예루살렘에서 남서쪽으로 30킬로미터 지점에 있는 도시 국가 립나도 유다 총독을 몰아내고 독립하였다. 이 모든 일은 여호람이 조상들의 하나님 여호와를 버리고 떠나서 온갖 우상을 들여다가 섬겼기 때문에 생긴 일이었다.","To this day Edom has been in revolt against the rule of Judah. Libnah also revolted at that time against his rule because he had abandoned the LORD, the God of his ancestors.","So the Edomites revolted from under the hand of Judah unto this day. The same time also did Libnah revolt from under his hand; because he had forsaken the LORD God of his fathers.","To this day Edom has been in rebellion against Judah. Libnah revolted at the same time, because Jehoram had forsaken the LORD, the God of his fathers.","Attamen rebellavit Edom, ne esset sub dicione Iudae, usque ad hanc diem. Eo tempore et Lobna recessit, ne esset sub manu illius; dereliquerat enim Dominum, Deum patrum suorum.","ויפשע אדום מתחת יד יהודה עד היום הזה אז תפשע לבנה בעת ההיא מתחת ידו כי עזב את יהוה אלהי אבתיו׃"],["14","21","11","그는 또 유다 산악 지방에 산당을 세워, 예루살렘 주민들이 불륜을 저지르게 하고 유다를 그릇된 길로 이끌었다.","그는 유다 언덕들 위에 산당을 세우고 예루살렘 시민들을 유혹하여 우상을 섬기게 하고 유다 백성을 죄에 빠뜨렸다.","여호람이 또 유다 여러 산에 산당을 세워 예루살렘 주민으로 음행하게 하고 또 유다를 미혹하게 하였으므로","여호람이 또 유다 여러 산에 산당을 세워 예루살렘 거민으로 음란하듯 우상을 섬기게 하고 또 유다를 미혹케 하였으므로","그는 유다의 모든 산에다 성창들을 두고 이방의 신들을 섬기는 제사처들을 세웠다. 이렇게 하여 그는 예루살렘 주민과 유다 백성을 꾀어 여호와를 버리고 떠나게 하였다.","He also set up high places in the mountains of Judah, prostituting the inhabitants of Jerusalem, leading Judah astray.","Moreover he made high places in the mountains of Judah and caused the inhabitants of Jerusalem to commit fornication, and compelled Judah thereto.","He had also built high places on the hills of Judah and had caused the people of Jerusalem to prostitute themselves and had led Judah astray.","Insuper et excelsa fabricatus est in montibus Iudae et fornicari fecit habitatores Ierusalem et praevaricari Iudam.","גם הוא עשה במות בהרי יהודה ויזן את ישבי ירושלם וידח את יהודה׃"],["14","21","12","그래서 엘리야 예언자가 그에게 이런 글을 보냈다. “임금님의 조상 다윗의 하느님이신 주님께서 이렇게 말씀하십니다. ‘너는 네 아버지 여호사팟과 유다 임금 아사의 길을 따라 걷지 않고,","예언자 엘리야가 그에게 이런 편지를 보낸 일이 있다. \"네 선조 다윗의 하느님 야훼께서 하시는 말씀이다. '너는 네 아비 여호사밧이나 유다 왕 아사가 가던 길을 따르지 않고","선지자 엘리야가 여호람에게 글을 보내어 이르되 왕의 조상 다윗의 하나님 여호와께서 이같이 말씀하시기를 네가 네 아비 여호사밧의 길과 유다 왕 아사의 길로 행하지 아니하고","선지자 엘리야가 여호람에게 글을 보내어 가로되 왕의 조상 다윗의 하나님 여호와의 말씀이 네가 네 아비 여호사밧의 길과 유다 왕 아사의 길로 행치 아니하고","남왕국 유다의 왕 여호람이 왕위에 올라 수많은 사람을 죽이고, 간사한 아내 아달랴의 꾐에 빠져 음란한 이방종교를 온 나라에 퍼뜨리자, 북왕국의 예언자 엘리야가 승천하기 직전에 다음과 같이 무서운 선고를 내려 보냈다. \"당신의 조상 다윗의 하나님 여호와께서 이런 말씀을 전하셨습니다. \"너는 흉악한 짓들만 골라서 하고 있다. 네 아버지 여호사밧의 길과 네 조부 아사의 길을 따르기는 커녕","A letter came to him from Elijah the prophet with this message: “Thus says the LORD, the God of David your father: Because you have not walked in the way of your father Jehoshaphat, nor of Asa, king of Judah,","And there came a writing to him from Elijah the prophet, saying, Thus saith the LORD God of David thy father, Because thou hast not walked in the ways of Jehoshaphat thy father, nor in the ways of Asa king of Judah,","Jehoram received a letter from Elijah the prophet, which said: \"This is what the LORD, the God of your father David, says: 'You have not walked in the ways of your father Jehoshaphat or of Asa king of Judah.","Allatae sunt autem ei litterae ab Elia propheta, in quibus scriptum erat: “Haec dicit Dominus, Deus David patris tui: Quoniam non ambulasti in viis Iosaphat patris tui et in viis Asa regis Iudae,","ויבא אליו מכתב מאליהו הנביא לאמר כה אמר יהוה אלהי דויד אביך תחת אשר לא הלכת בדרכי יהושפט אביך ובדרכי אסא מלך יהודה׃"],["14","21","13","이스라엘 임금들의 길을 따라 걸었다. 너는 또 아합 집안이 그러하였듯이 유다와 예루살렘 주민들이 불륜을 저지르게 하고, 너보다 착한 네 아버지 집안의 아우들마저 살해하였다.","이스라엘 왕들의 전철을 밟고 있다. 너는 아합 가문의 더러운 행실을 본떠 유다 백성과 예루살렘 시민을 유혹하여 우상을 섬기게 하였다. 또 같은 아비의 피를 나누어 받은 아우들을 죽였다. 그들은 너보다 나은 사람들이었다.","오직 이스라엘 왕들의 길로 행하여 유다와 예루살렘 주민들이 음행하게 하기를 아합의 집이 음행하듯 하며 또 네 아비 집에서 너보다 착한 아우들을 죽였으니","오직 이스라엘 열왕의 길로 행하여 유다와 예루살렘 거민으로 음란하듯 우상을 섬기게 하기를 아합의 집과 같이 하며 또 너의 아비 집에서 너보다 선한 아우들을 죽였으니","오히려 너는 북왕국 이스라엘 왕들이 저지른 흉악한 행실을 본받고 있다. 북왕국 아합의 왕가와 똑같이 음란한 종교에 빠져서 나 여호와를 버리고 유다 백성과 예루살렘 사람들까지 음행하는 종교에 빠뜨려 버렸다. 너는 심지어 너보다 훨씬 나은 아우들까지 모조리 죽였다.","but instead have walked in the way of the kings of Israel, leading Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem into prostitution, like the harlotries of the house of Ahab, and because you have killed your brothers of your father’s house, who were better than you,","But hast walked in the way of the kings of Israel, and hast made Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem to go a whoring, like to the whoredoms of the house of Ahab, and also hast slain thy brethren of thy father's house, which were better than thyself:","But you have walked in the ways of the kings of Israel, and you have led Judah and the people of Jerusalem to prostitute themselves, just as the house of Ahab did. You have also murdered your own brothers, members of your father's house, men who were better than you.","sed incessisti per iter regum Israel et fornicari fecisti Iudam et habitatores Ierusalem imitatus fornicationem domus Achab, insuper et fratres tuos domum patris tui meliores te occidisti:","ותלך בדרך מלכי ישראל ותזנה את יהודה ואת ישבי ירושלם כהזנות בית אחאב וגם את אחיך בית אביך הטובים ממך הרגת׃"],["14","21","14","그러므로 이제 주님이 네 백성과 네 자식들과 아내들, 그리고 네 모든 재산을 큰 재난으로 치겠다.","이제 나 야훼가 네 백성, 네 자식들, 네 계집들, 네 가축들에게 큰 재앙을 내리리라.","여호와가 네 백성과 네 자녀들과 네 아내들과 네 모든 재물을 큰 재앙으로 치시리라","여호와가 네 백성과 네 자녀와 네 아내들과 네 모든 재물을 큰 재앙으로 치리라","그러므로 이제 나 여호와가 큰 벌을 내리겠다. 네 민족과 네 처자식들과 네 소유물 전체에 무서운 재앙을 내리겠다.","the LORD will strike your people, your children, your wives, and all that is yours with a great plague.","Behold, with a great plague will the LORD smite thy people, and thy children, and thy wives, and all thy goods:","So now the LORD is about to strike your people, your sons, your wives and everything that is yours, with a heavy blow.","ecce Dominus percutiet plaga magna populum tuum, filios et uxores tuas universamque substantiam tuam;","הנה יהוה נגף מגפה גדולה בעמך ובבניך ובנשיך ובכל רכושך׃"],["14","21","15","그리고 너 자신은 창자에 생긴 병으로 중병을 앓게 되고, 마침내 그 병 때문에 나날이 창자가 빠져나올 것이다.’”","너 또한 뱃속을 훑어내는 무서운 배앓이에 걸려 오래 고생하리라.'\"","또 너는 창자에 중병이 들고 그 병이 날로 중하여 창자가 빠져나오리라 하셨다 하였더라","또 너는 창자에 중병이 들고 그 병이 날로 중하여 창자가 빠져나오리라 하셨다 하였더라","너 자신도 창자가 썩어서 오랫동안 심하게 앓다가 결국에는 창자가 빠져 나와 죽게 하겠다.\"","You shall have severe pains from a disease in your bowels, which will fall out because of the disease, day after day.”","And thou shalt have great sickness by disease of thy bowels, until thy bowels fall out by reason of the sickness day by day.","You yourself will be very ill with a lingering disease of the bowels, until the disease causes your bowels to come out.'\"","tu autem aegrotabis pessimo languore uteri tui, donec egrediantur vitalia tua paulatim per singulos dies “.","ואתה בחליים רבים במחלה מעיך עד יצאו מעיך מן החלי ימים על ימים׃"],["14","21","16","주님께서는 여호람을 거슬러 필리스티아인들의 적개심과, 에티오피아인들 곁에 사는 아라비아인들의 적개심을 불러일으키셨다.","야훼께서는 불레셋 사람과 에티오피아와 인접해 사는 아랍인들의 마음을 부추겨 여호람을 치게 하셨다.","여호와께서 블레셋 사람들과 구스에서 가까운 아라비아 사람들의 마음을 격동시키사 여호람을 치게 하셨으므로","여호와께서 블레셋 사람과 구스에서 가까운 아라비아 사람의 마음을 격동시키사 여호람을 치게 하셨으므로","여호와께서는 예언자의 예고대로 곧 형벌을 집행하셨다. 주께서는 먼저 유다에 조공을 바치던 블레셋 족속들의 마음을 부추겨 침공하게 하시고, 구스와 인접해 사는 아라비아 족속들까지 일으켜 여호람을 공격하게 하셨다.","Then the LORD stirred up against Jehoram the animosity of the Philistines and of the Arabians who were neighbors of the Ethiopians.","Moreover the LORD stirred up against Jehoram the spirit of the Philistines, and of the Arabians, that were near the Ethiopians:","The LORD aroused against Jehoram the hostility of the Philistines and of the Arabs who lived near the Cushites.","Suscitavit ergo Dominus contra Ioram spiritum Philisthinorum et Arabum, qui confines sunt Aethiopibus,","ויער יהוה על יהורם את רוח הפלשתים והערבים אשר על יד כושים׃"],["14","21","17","그들은 유다로 올라와 공격한 끝에 왕궁에 있는 모든 재산을 가져가고 임금의 아들들과 여자들도 데려갔다. 그에게 남은 아들이라고는 막내아들 여호아하즈뿐이었다.","그들은 유다로 쳐 올라와서는 성을 뚫고 대궐 안에 들어와 닥치는 대로 모든 재산을 가져가고 왕의 아들들과 여자들을 마구 잡아갔다. 남은 사람이라고는 막내아들 여호아하즈뿐이었다.","그들이 올라와서 유다를 침략하여 왕궁의 모든 재물과 그의 아들들과 아내들을 탈취하였으므로 막내 아들 여호아하스 외에는 한 아들도 남지 아니하였더라","그 무리가 올라와서 유다를 침노하여 왕궁의 모든 재물과 그 아들들과 아내들을 탈취하였으므로 말째 아들 여호아하스 외에는 한 아들도 남지 아니하였더라","그들은 단번에 유다 전역으로 뚫고 들어와 온 백성을 치고 약탈한 뒤 이어서 왕궁에 있는 재산을 모조리 탈취하였다. 그들은 여호람의 처자식들도 모조리 붙잡아 갔는데 오직 막내 아들 여호아하스만이 그대로 왕궁에서 살아 남았다. 이때에 그는 궁중의 전쟁에 가담할 수 없을 정도로 나이가 어렸기 때문이다.","They came up against Judah, breached it, and carried away all the wealth found in the king’s house, along with his sons and his wives. He was left with only one son, Jehoahaz, his youngest.","And they came up into Judah, and brake into it, and carried away all the substance that was found in the king's house, and his sons also, and his wives; so that there was never a son left him, save Jehoahaz, the youngest of his sons.","They attacked Judah, invaded it and carried off all the goods found in the king's palace, together with his sons and wives. Not a son was left to him except Ahaziah, the youngest.","et ascenderunt in terram Iudae et irruperunt in eam diripueruntque cunctam substantiam, quae inventa est in domo regis, insuper et filios eius et uxores, nec remansit ei filius nisi Ioachaz, qui minimus natu erat.","ויעלו ביהודה ויבקעוה וישבו את כל הרכוש הנמצא לבית המלך וגם בניו ונשיו ולא נשאר לו בן כי אם יהואחז קטן בניו׃"],["14","21","18","이 모든 일이 일어난 다음, 주님께서 여호람을 치시어 창자에 불치병이 들게 하셨다.","이런 일이 있은 뒤에 여호람은 야훼께 벌을 받아 고칠 수 없는 속병을 얻어","이 모든 일 후에 여호와께서 여호람을 치사 능히 고치지 못할 병이 그 창자에 들게 하셨으므로","이 모든 일 후에 여호와께서 여호람을 치사 능히 고치지 못할 병이 그 창자에 들게 하셨으므로","그런 다음에는 주께서 여호람왕에게 어느 의사도 치료할 수 없는 병을 주셨다.","After these events, the LORD afflicted him with a disease of the bowels for which there was no cure.","And after all this the LORD smote him in his bowels with an incurable disease.","After all this, the LORD afflicted Jehoram with an incurable disease of the bowels.","Et post haec omnia percussit eum Dominus alvi languore insanabili.","ואחרי כל זאת נגפו יהוה במעיו לחלי לאין מרפא׃"],["14","21","19","세월이 흘러 두 해가 지날 무렵, 그는 이 병으로 창자가 빠져나와 큰 고통 속에서 죽었다. 그러나 백성은 그의 조상들에게 해 준 것과는 달리 그를 위해서는 불을 켜 놓지 않았다.","오랫동안 고생하였다. 이렇게 속을 훑어내는 고질병으로 이 년을 고생하다가 마침내 죽었다. 그러나 백성은 그를 위하여, 그의 부왕에게 했듯이 불을 밝혀두지는 않았다.","여러 날 후 이 년 만에 그의 창자가 그 병으로 말미암아 빠져나오매 그가 그 심한 병으로 죽으니 백성이 그들의 조상들에게 분향하던 것 같이 그에게 분향하지 아니하였으며","여러 날 후 이년만에 그 창자가 그 병으로 인하여 빠져나오매 저가 그 심한 병으로 죽으니 백성이 그 열조에게 분향하던것 같이 저에게 분향하지 아니하였으며","창자가 썩는 이 병은 매일 매시간 쓰라린 고통만 오래 계속될 뿐 빨리 죽지도 않는 병이었다. 마침내 2년의 긴 세월이 다 차게 지나서야 왕은 창자들이 쏟아져 나오는 무서운 고통 속에서 죽어 갔다. 유다의 왕들이 죽을 때에는 백성들이 언제나 화톳불을 크게 피우고 애도하였으나, 여호람을 위해서는 그렇게 하지 않았다.","Some time later, after a period of two years had elapsed, his bowels fell out because of the disease and he died in great pain. His people did not make a fire for him as they had for his ancestors.","And it came to pass, that in process of time, after the end of two years, his bowels fell out by reason of his sickness: so he died of sore diseases. And his people made no burning for him, like the burning of his fathers.","In the course of time, at the end of the second year, his bowels came out because of the disease, and he died in great pain. His people made no fire in his honor, as they had for his fathers.","Cumque diei succederet dies, et temporum spatia volverentur, duorum annorum expletus est circulus; et sic longa consumptus tabe, ita ut egereret etiam viscera sua, languore pariter et vita caruit. Mortuusque est in infirmitate pessima, et non fecit ei populus eius secundum morem combustionis exsequias, sicut fecerat maioribus eius.","ויהי לימים מימים וכעת צאת הקץ לימים שנים יצאו מעיו עם חליו וימת בתחלאים רעים ולא עשו לו עמו שרפה כשרפת אבתיו׃"],["14","21","20","여호람은 서른두 살에 임금이 되어 예루살렘에서 여덟 해를 다스리고, 애석해하는 이 없이 가고 말았다. 사람들은 그를 다윗 성에 묻기는 하였으나 임금들의 무덤에 묻지는 않았다.","그는 삼십이 세에 왕위에 올라 예루살렘에서 팔 년간 다스렸다. 그러나 애도하는 사람 하나 없는 가운데 그는 가고 말았다. 사람들은 그를 다윗 성에 안장하기는 했으나 왕실 묘지를 쓰지는 않았다.","여호람이 삼십이 세에 즉위하고 예루살렘에서 팔 년 동안 다스리다가 아끼는 자 없이 세상을 떠났으며 무리가 그를 다윗 성에 장사하였으나 열왕의 묘실에는 두지 아니하였더라","여호람이 삼십 이세에 즉위하고 예루살렘에서 팔년을 치리하다가 아끼는 자 없이 세상을 떠났으며 무리가 저를 다윗성에 장사하였으나 열왕의 묘실에는 두지 아니하였더라","그는 32세에 왕이 되어 8년 동안 수도 예루살렘에서 통치하였다. 그가 죽었는데도 온 나라에는 그를 위하여 슬퍼하는 사람이 한 명도 없었다. 그가 다윗성에 안장되기는 했으나 선왕들의 무덤에 들지는 못하였다.","He was thirty-two years old when he became king, and he reigned eight years in Jerusalem. He departed unloved; and they buried him in the City of David, though not in the tombs of the kings.","Thirty and two years old was he when he began to reign, and he reigned in Jerusalem eight years, and departed without being desired. Howbeit they buried him in the city of David, but not in the sepulchres of the kings.","Jehoram was thirty-two years old when he became king, and he reigned in Jerusalem eight years. He passed away, to no one's regret, and was buried in the City of David, but not in the tombs of the kings.","Triginta duorum annorum fuit, cum regnare coepisset, et octo annis regnavit in Ierusalem. Obiitque nullo relicto desiderio sui; et sepelierunt eum in civitate David, verumtamen non in sepulcro regum.","בן שלשים ושתים היה במלכו ושמונה שנים מלך בירושלם וילך בלא חמדה ויקברהו בעיר דויד ולא בקברות המלכים׃"],["14","22","1","예루살렘의 주민들은 여호람의 막내아들 아하즈야를 그 뒤를 이어 임금으로 세웠다. 아하즈야의 형들은 아라비아인들과 함께 진영에 쳐들어온 약탈대에게 학살당하였던 것이다. 그래서 여호람의 아들 아하즈야가 유다의 임금이 되어 다스렸다.","1)예루살렘 시민들은 그의 막내아들 아하지야를 왕으로 세워 뒤를 잇게 하였다. 아하지야의 형들은 전에 아랍인들과 함께 쳐들어왔던 침략군에게 학살당했던 것이다. 그리하여 여호람의 아들 아하지야가 유다 왕이 되었다.22:1-6에 대해서는 2열왕 8:25-29 참조.","예루살렘 주민이 여호람의 막내 아들 아하시야에게 왕위를 계승하게 하였으니 이는 전에 아라비아 사람들과 함께 와서 진을 치던 부대가 그의 모든 형들을 죽였음이라 그러므로 유다 왕 여호람의 아들 아하시야가 왕이 되었더라","예루살렘 거민이 여호람의 말째 아들 아하시야로 위를 이어 왕을 삼았으니 이는 전에 아라비아 사람과 함께 와서 영을 치던 부대가 그의 모든 형을 죽였음이라 그러므로 유다 왕 여호람의 아들 아하시야가 왕이 되었더라","예루살렘 주민들은 혼란을 막기 위하여 여호람의 막내 아들 ㄱ) 아하시야를 급히 왕위 계승자로 세웠다. 아하시야의 형들은 모두 아라비아 사람들과 함께 유다의 진지를 기습한 강도 떼에게 살해되었기 때문에 아하시야가 유다 왕이 된 것이다. (ㄱ. 아하시야는 \"여호아하스\"라는 이름의 다른 표현이다)","Then the inhabitants of Jerusalem made Ahaziah, his youngest son, king to succeed him, since all the older sons had been killed by the band that had come into the camp with the Arabians. Thus Ahaziah, son of Jehoram, reigned as the king of Judah.","And the inhabitants of Jerusalem made Ahaziah his youngest son king in his stead: for the band of men that came with the Arabians to the camp had slain all the eldest. So Ahaziah the son of Jehoram king of Judah reigned.","The people of Jerusalem made Ahaziah, Jehoram's youngest son, king in his place, since the raiders, who came with the Arabs into the camp, had killed all the older sons. So Ahaziah son of Jehoram king of Judah began to reign.","Constituerunt autem habita tores Ierusalem Ochoziam fi lium eius minimum regem pro eo; omnes enim maiores natu interfecerat turba, quae irruerat cum Arabibus in castra. Regnavitque Ochozias filius Ioram regis Iudae.","וימליכו יושבי ירושלם את אחזיהו בנו הקטן תחתיו כי כל הראשנים הרג הגדוד הבא בערבים למחנה וימלך אחזיהו בן יהורם מלך יהודה׃"],["14","22","2","아하즈야는 마흔두 살에 임금이 되어, 예루살렘에서 한 해 동안 다스렸다. 그의 어머니의 이름은 아탈야인데 오므리의 손녀였다.","아하지야는 2)사십이 세에 왕이 되어 예루살렘에서 일 년간 다스렸다. 그의 어머니는 오므리의 손녀로서 이름은 아달리야라고 하였다. 2열왕 8:26에는 \"이십이 세\"로 되어 있다.","아하시야가 왕이 될 때에 나이가 사십이 세라 예루살렘에서 일 년 동안 다스리니라 그의 어머니의 이름은 아달랴요 오므리의 손녀더라","아하시야가 왕이 될 때에 나이 사십 이세라 예루살렘에서 일년을 치리하니라 그 모친의 이름은 아달랴라 오므리의 손녀더라","아하시야는 22세에 왕이 되어 예루살렘에서 겨우 1년 동안 다스렸다. 그의 어머니는 북왕국 오므리왕의 손녀요, 아합과 이세벨의 딸인 아달랴였다.","Ahaziah was twenty-two years old when he became king, and he reigned one year in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Athaliah, daughter of Omri.","Forty and two years old was Ahaziah when he began to reign, and he reigned one year in Jerusalem. His mother's name also was Athaliah the daughter of Omri.","Ahaziah was twenty-two years old when he became king, and he reigned in Jerusalem one year. His mother's name was Athaliah, a granddaughter of Omri.","Filius viginti duo annorum erat Ochozias, cum regnare coepisset, et uno anno regnavit in Ierusalem. Nomen matris eius Athalia filia Amri.","בן ארבעים ושתים שנה אחזיהו במלכו ושנה אחת מלך בירושלם ושם אמו עתליהו בת עמרי׃"],["14","22","3","어머니가 고문관이 되어 악을 저지르게 하였기 때문에, 아하즈야도 아합 집안의 길을 따라 걸었다.","어머니의 그릇된 의견을 따르다 보니 그도 아합 가문의 전철을 밟게 되었고,","아하시야도 아합의 집 길로 행하였으니 이는 그의 어머니가 꾀어 악을 행하게 하였음이라","아하시야도 아합의 집 길로 행하였으니 이는 그 모친이 꾀어 악을 행하게 하였음이라","아달랴는 아들 아하시야를 조종하는 악마와 같아서, 아합과 이세벨의 더러운 행실을 따르도록 늘 그를 부추겼다.","He, too, walked in the ways of the house of Ahab, because his mother was his counselor in doing evil.","He also walked in the ways of the house of Ahab: for his mother was his counsellor to do wickedly.","He too walked in the ways of the house of Ahab, for his mother encouraged him in doing wrong.","Sed et ipse ingressus est per vias domus Achab; mater enim eius impulit eum, ut impie ageret.","גם הוא הלך בדרכי בית אחאב כי אמו היתה יועצתו להרשיע׃"],["14","22","4","아버지가 죽은 뒤에 아합 집안 사람들이 그의 고문관이 되었으므로, 그는 그 집안처럼 주님의 눈에 거슬리는 악한 짓을 저질러 망하고 말았다.","아합 가문처럼 야훼의 눈에 거슬리는 일을 하였다. 부왕이 죽은 뒤에 그들의 의견을 따르다가 스스로 자기 무덤을 파고 만 것이다.","그의 아버지가 죽은 후에 그가 패망하게 하는 아합의 집의 가르침을 따라 여호와 보시기에 아합의 집 같이 악을 행하였더라","그 부친이 죽은 후에 저가 패망케 하는 아합의 집 교도를 좇아 여호와 보시기에 아합의 집 같이 악을 행하였더라","아하시야는 여호와께서 보시기에 악한 일들만 골라서 하였다. 그는 아합과 이세벨을 그대로 본받았다. 그리하여 결국 아버지 여호람이 죽은 뒤 아합 집안의 사악한 조언만을 따르다가 망하게 되었다.","To his own destruction, he did what was evil in the sight of the LORD, like the house of Ahab, since they were his counselors after the death of his father.","Wherefore he did evil in the sight of the LORD like the house of Ahab: for they were his counsellors after the death of his father to his destruction.","He did evil in the eyes of the LORD, as the house of Ahab had done, for after his father's death they became his advisers, to his undoing.","Fecit igitur malum in conspectu Domini sicut domus Achab; ipsi enim fuerunt ei consiliarii post mortem patris sui in interitum eius.","ויעש הרע בעיני יהוה כבית אחאב כי המה היו לו יועצים אחרי מות אביו למשחית לו׃"],["14","22","5","그는 그들의 조언에 따라 이스라엘 임금, 아합의 아들 요람과 함께 아람 임금 하자엘과 싸우려고 라못 길앗으로 갔다. 그런데 거기에서 아람인들이 요람에게 부상을 입혔다.","그는 그들의 의견을 받아들여 이스라엘 왕 요람과 함께 시리아 왕 하자엘을 맞아 싸우려고 라못길르앗으로 갔다. 그 싸움에서 요람은 시리아 군에게 맞아 다쳤다.","아하시야가 아합의 집의 가르침을 따라 이스라엘 왕 아합의 아들 요람과 함께 길르앗 라못으로 가서 아람 왕 하사엘과 더불어 싸우더니 아람 사람들이 요람을 상하게 한지라","아하시야가 아합의 집 교도를 좇고 이스라엘 왕 아합의 아들 요람과 함께 길르앗 라못으로 가서 아람 왕 하사엘로 더불어 싸우더니 아람 사람들이 요람을 상하게 한지라","아합 집안의 참모들은 아하시야에게 이스라엘의 요람왕과 함께 아람의 하사엘왕을 치러 출전하도록 꾀었다. 그 두 왕이 출전하여 길르앗의 라못에서 아람 군대와 접전하다가 요람이 부상을 당하여","He was also following their counsel when he joined Jehoram, son of Ahab, king of Israel, in battle against Hazael, king of Aram, at Ramoth-gilead, where the Arameans wounded Jehoram.","He walked also after their counsel, and went with Jehoram the son of Ahab king of Israel to war against Hazael king of Syria at Ramothgilead: and the Syrians smote Joram.","He also followed their counsel when he went with Joram son of Ahab king of Israel to war against Hazael king of Aram at Ramoth Gilead. The Arameans wounded Joram;","Ambulavitque in consiliis eorum et perrexit cum Ioram filio Achab rege Israel in bellum contra Hazael regem Syriae in Ramoth Galaad; vulneraveruntque Syri Ioram.","גם בעצתם הלך וילך את יהורם בן אחאב מלך ישראל למלחמה על חזאל מלך ארם ברמות גלעד ויכו הרמים את יורם׃"],["14","22","6","요람은 라마에서 아람 임금 하자엘과 싸울 때에 아람인들에게 입은 부상을 치료하려고, 이즈르엘로 돌아갔다. 이렇게 아합의 아들 요람이 아팠으므로, 유다 임금 여호람의 아들 아하즈야가 그를 보려고 이즈르엘로 내려갔다.","그는 시리아 왕 하자엘과 라못에서 싸우다가 얻은 상처를 치료하려고 이즈르엘로 돌아왔는데, 유다 왕 여호람의 아들 3)아하지야는 요람을 문병하러 이즈르엘로 내려갔다. 히브리어 본문: \"아자리야.\"","요람이 아람 왕 하사엘과 싸울 때에 라마에서 맞아 상한 것을 치료하려 하여 이스르엘로 돌아왔더라 아합의 아들 요람이 병이 있으므로 유다 왕 여호람의 아들 아사랴가 이스르엘에 내려가서 방문하였더라","요람이 아람 왕 하사엘과 싸울 때에 라마에서 맞아 상한 것을 치료하려 하여 이스르엘로 돌아왔더라 아합의 아들 요람이 병이 있으므로 유다 왕 여호람의 아들 1)아사랴가 이스르엘에 내려가서 방문하였더라 본장 1절에는 「아하시야」","이스르엘 골짜기로 돌아와 상처를 치료하고 있었다. 그러자 아하시야가 그곳으로 가서 요람에게 병문안을 하였는데","He returned to Jezreel to be healed of the wounds that had been inflicted on him at Ramah in his battle against Hazael, king of Aram. Then Ahaziah, son of Jehoram, king of Judah, went down to Jezreel to visit Jehoram, son of Ahab, for he was sick.","And he returned to be healed in Jezreel because of the wounds which were given him at Ramah, when he fought with Hazael king of Syria. And Azariah the son of Jehoram king of Judah went down to see Jehoram the son of Ahab at Jezreel, because he was sick.","so he returned to Jezreel to recover from the wounds they had inflicted on him at Ramoth in his battle with Hazael king of Aram. Then Ahaziah son of Jehoram king of Judah went down to Jezreel to see Joram son of Ahab because he had been wounded.","Qui reversus est, ut curaretur in Iezrahel a plagis, quas acceperat in supradicto certamine. Igitur Ochozias filius Ioram rex Iudae descendit, ut inviseret Ioram filium Achab in Iezrahel aegrotantem.","וישב להתרפא ביזרעאל כי המכים אשר הכהו ברמה בהלחמו את חזהאל מלך ארם ועזריהו בן יהורם מלך יהודה ירד לראות את יהורם בן אחאב ביזרעאל כי חלה הוא׃"],["14","22","7","아하즈야가 요람에게 가서 패망하게 된 것은 하느님의 뜻이었다. 아하즈야가 도착하여 요람과 함께 님시의 손자 예후를 만나러 나갔다. 이 예후는 주님께서 아합의 집안을 제거하시려고 기름을 부으신 자였다.","아하지야는 요람에게로 갔다가 망하게 되었다. 하느님께서 그렇게 꾸미신 것이다. 야훼께서는 이미 님시의 아들 예후에게 기름을 부어주시고 아합 가문을 멸하려고 하시는데 아하지야는 그것도 모르고 요람과 함께 예후에게로 갔다.","아하시야가 요람에게 가므로 해를 입었으니 이는 하나님께로 말미암은 것이라 아하시야가 갔다가 요람과 함께 나가서 님시의 아들 예후를 맞았으니 그는 여호와께서 기름을 부으시고 아합의 집을 멸하게 하신 자이더라","아하시야가 요람에게 가므로 해를 받았으니 이는 하나님께로 말미암은 것이라 아하시야가 갔다가 요람과 함께 나가서 임시의 아들 예후를 맞았으니 그는 여호와께서 기름을 부으시고 아합의 집을 멸하게 하신 자더라","이 방문은 아하시야에게 죽음의 길이 되었다. 하나님께서 그렇게 계획해 두셨기 때문이다. 아하시야가 요람과 앉아 있다가 님시의 손자 예후를 맞으러 함께 나아갔다. 그러나 예후는 여호와께서 이미 왕으로 정해 놓으시고 아합의 후손을 멸절시키라는 임무를 내리신 사람이었다.","Now from God came Ahaziah’s downfall, that he should join Jehoram; for after his arrival he rode out with Jehoram to Jehu, son of Nimshi, whom the LORD had anointed to cut down the house of Ahab.","And the destruction of Ahaziah was of God by coming to Joram: for when he was come, he went out with Jehoram against Jehu the son of Nimshi, whom the LORD had anointed to cut off the house of Ahab.","Through Ahaziah's visit to Joram, God brought about Ahaziah's downfall. When Ahaziah arrived, he went out with Joram to meet Jehu son of Nimshi, whom the LORD had anointed to destroy the house of Ahab.","Voluntatis quippe fuit Dei adversum Ochoziam, ut veniret ad Ioram et, cum venisset, egrederetur cum eo adversum Iehu filium Namsi, quem unxit Dominus, ut deleret domum Achab.","ומאלהים היתה תבוסת אחזיהו לבוא אל יורם ובבאו יצא עם יהורם אל יהוא בן נמשי אשר משחו יהוה להכרית את בית אחאב׃"],["14","22","8","예후는 아합 집안에 내린 심판을 수행하는 가운데, 유다의 대신들과 아하즈야를 시중드는 그 형제들의 아들들을 발견하고서 그들까지 살해하였다.","예후는 아합 가문의 죄를 다스리다가 유다 군 장교들과 아하지야를 모시는 왕의 조카들을 만나 죽였다.","예후로 하여금 아합의 집을 심판하게 하실 때에 유다 방백들과 아하시야의 형제들의 아들들 곧 아하시야를 섬기는 자들을 만나서 죽였고","예후가 아합의 집을 징벌할 때에 유다 방백들과 아하시야의 형제의 아들들 곧 아하시야를 섬기는 자들을 만나서 죽였고","예후는 아합의 후손들을 잡아죽였다. 이때 그는 아하시야왕을 따라서 북쪽으로 온 유다의 관리들과 아하시야의 조카들도 잡아 죽였다.","While Jehu was executing judgment on the house of Ahab, he also came upon the princes of Judah and the nephews of Ahaziah who were his attendants, and he killed them.","And it came to pass, that, when Jehu was executing judgment upon the house of Ahab, and found the princes of Judah, and the sons of the brethren of Ahaziah, that ministered to Ahaziah, he slew them.","While Jehu was executing judgment on the house of Ahab, he found the princes of Judah and the sons of Ahaziah's relatives, who had been attending Ahaziah, and he killed them.","Cum ergo iudicium faceret Iehu in domum Achab, invenit principes Iudae et filios fratrum Ochoziae, qui ministrabant ei, et interfecit illos.","ויהי כהשפט יהוא עם בית אחאב וימצא את שרי יהודה ובני אחי אחזיהו משרתים לאחזיהו ויהרגם׃"],["14","22","9","그러고 나서 예후가 아하즈야를 찾자 사람들이 사마리아에 숨어 있던 아하즈야를 잡아 예후에게 끌고 갔다. 그들은 아하즈야를 죽인 다음, “그래도 그는 마음을 다하여 주님을 찾은 여호사팟의 손자이다!” 하며, 그를 묻어 주었다. 그러고 나니, 아하즈야의 집안에는 나라를 다스릴 힘이 있는 사람이 없었다.","아하지야는 사마리아에 가서 숨어 있다가 끌려왔다. 예후가 그를 죽이자 사람들은 \"그래도 한마음으로 야훼만 찾던 여호사밧의 아들인데.\" 하며 장례를 치러주었다. 마침내 아하지야 집안에는 왕노릇 할 만큼 강한 사람이 없게 되었다.","아하시야는 사마리아에 숨었더니 예후가 찾으매 무리가 그를 예후에게로 잡아가서 죽이고 이르기를 그는 전심으로 여호와를 구하던 여호사밧의 아들이라 하고 장사하였더라 이에 아하시야의 집이 약하여 왕위를 힘으로 지키지 못하게 되니라","아하시야는 사마리아에 숨었더니 예후가 찾으매 무리가 예후에게로 잡아다가 죽이고 이르기를 저는 전심으로 여호와를 구하던 여호사밧의 아들이라 하고 장사하였더라 이에 아하시야의 집이 약하여 왕위를 지키지 못하게 되니라","아하시야는 몸을 피하여 사마리아에 숨었으나 뒤쫓아온 예후의 첩자들에게 마침내 붙들려 예후에게로 끌려가 처형되었다. 그러나 사람들은 \"온 마음으로 여호와를 섬긴 여호사밧의 손자\"라고 말하며 그를 장사지내 주었다. 아하시야의 집안에는 이제 왕이 될 만큼 나이가 찬 사람이 한 사람도 없었다.","Then he looked for Ahaziah himself. They caught him hiding in Samaria and brought him to Jehu, who put him to death. They buried him, for they said, “He was the grandson of Jehoshaphat, who sought the LORD with his whole heart.” Now the house of Ahaziah did not retain the power of kingship.","And he sought Ahaziah: and they caught him, (for he was hid in Samaria,) and brought him to Jehu: and when they had slain him, they buried him: Because, said they, he is the son of Jehoshaphat, who sought the LORD with all his heart. So the house of Ahaziah had no power to keep still the kingdom.","He then went in search of Ahaziah, and his men captured him while he was hiding in Samaria. He was brought to Jehu and put to death. They buried him, for they said, \"He was a son of Jehoshaphat, who sought the LORD with all his heart.\" So there was no one in the house of Ahaziah powerful enough to retain the kingdom.","Ipsumque perquisivit Ochoziam, et comprehenderunt eum latentem in Samaria; adductumque ad se Iehu occidit. Et sepelierunt eum, eo quod dicebant eum esse filium Iosaphat, qui quaesierat Dominum in toto corde suo. Nec erat aliquis de stirpe Ochoziae, qui posset regnare.","ויבקש את אחזיהו וילכדהו והוא מתחבא בשמרון ויבאהו אל יהוא וימתהו ויקברהו כי אמרו בן יהושפט הוא אשר דרש את יהוה בכל לבבו ואין לבית אחזיהו לעצר כח לממלכה׃"],["14","22","10","아하즈야의 어머니 아탈야는 자기 아들이 죽은 것을 보고서는, 유다 집안의 왕족을 다 죽이기 시작하였다.","4)아하지야의 어머니 아달리야는 아들이 죽는 것을 보자 곧 유다 왕가의 혈육을 모두 죽이기 시작하였다.22:10-23:21에 대해서는 2열왕 11:1-20 참조.","아하시야의 어머니 아달랴가 자기의 아들이 죽은 것을 보고 일어나 유다 집의 왕국의 씨를 모두 진멸하였으나","아하시야의 모친 아달랴가 그 아들의 죽은 것을 보고 일어나 유다 집의 왕의 씨를 진멸하였으나","아하시야가 이렇게 죽었다는 소식을 듣자, 그의 어머니 아달랴는 유다 왕가의 왕손들을 모조리 죽이게 하였다.","When Athaliah, the mother of Ahaziah, saw that her son was dead, she began to kill off the whole royal family of the house of Judah.","But when Athaliah the mother of Ahaziah saw that her son was dead, she arose and destroyed all the seed royal of the house of Judah.","When Athaliah the mother of Ahaziah saw that her son was dead, she proceeded to destroy the whole royal family of the house of Judah.","Athalia autem mater eius videns quod mortuus esset filius suus surrexit et interfecit omnem stirpem regiam domus Iudae.","ועתליהו אם אחזיהו ראתה כי מת בנה ותקם ותדבר את כל זרע הממלכה לבית יהודה׃"],["14","22","11","그러자 임금의 딸 여호세바가 살해될 왕자들 가운데에서 아하즈야의 아들 요아스를 몰래 빼내어, 유모와 함께 침실에 데려다 놓았다. 여호람 임금의 딸이며 여호야다 사제의 아내인 여호세바가 이렇게 아탈야에게서 요아스를 숨겨, 아탈야가 그를 죽이지 못하게 하였다. 여호세바는 아하즈야의 누이였던 것이다.","다른 왕자들은 모두 살해되었으나 아하지야의 아들 요아스만은 5)여호사브앗이 몰래 빼내다가 유모와 함께 자기 침실에 숨겨두었으므로 아달리야의 손에 죽지 않았다. 여호사브앗은 여호람 왕의 딸이요 여호야다 사제의 아내였다. 그러니 아하지야의 누이이기도 하였다. 여호세바일 수도 있다(2열왕 11:2).","왕의 딸 여호사브앗이 아하시야의 아들 요아스를 왕자들이 죽임을 당하는 중에서 몰래 빼내어 그와 그의 유모를 침실에 숨겨 아달랴를 피하게 하였으므로 아달랴가 그를 죽이지 못하였더라 여호사브앗은 여호람 왕의 딸이요 아하시야의 누이요 제사장 여호야다의 아내이더라","왕의 딸 여호사브앗이 아하시야의 아들 요아스를 왕자들의 죽임을 당하는 중에서 도적하여 내고 저와 그 유모를 침실에 숨겨 아달랴를 피하게 한고로 아달랴가 저를 죽이지 못하였더라 여호사브앗은 여호람왕의 딸이요 아하시야의 누이요 제사장 여호야다의 아내더라","여호람의 딸 여호사브앗은 아하시야의 막내 아들 요아스를 몰래 데려다가 침대를 보관하는 성전의 창고 속에 유모와 함께 숨겨 놓았다. 여호사브앗은 아하시야의 누이로서 제사장 여호야다의 아내요, 요아스에게는 고모가 되었다. 이리하여 요아스는 다른 왕손들과 함께 죽지 않았다.","But Jehosheba, a daughter of the king, took Joash, Ahaziah’s son, and spirited him away from among the king’s sons who were about to be slain, and put him and his nurse in a bedroom. In this way Jehosheba, the daughter of King Jehoram, a sister of Ahaziah and wife of Jehoiada the priest, concealed the child from Athaliah, so that she did not put him to death.","But Jehoshabeath, the daughter of the king, took Joash the son of Ahaziah, and stole him from among the king's sons that were slain, and put him and his nurse in a bedchamber. So Jehoshabeath, the daughter of king Jehoram, the wife of Jehoiada the priest, (for she was the sister of Ahaziah,) hid him from Athaliah, so that she slew him not.","But Jehosheba, the daughter of King Jehoram, took Joash son of Ahaziah and stole him away from among the royal princes who were about to be murdered and put him and his nurse in a bedroom. Because Jehosheba, the daughter of King Jehoram and wife of the priest Jehoiada, was Ahaziah's sister, she hid the child from Athaliah so she could not kill him.","Porro Iosabeth filia regis tulit Ioas filium Ochoziae et furata est eum de medio filiorum regis, cum interficerentur, absconditque cum nutrice sua in cubiculo lectulorum. Iosabeth autem, quae absconderat eum, erat filia regis Ioram, uxor Ioiadae pontificis, soror Ochoziae; et idcirco Athalia non interfecit eum.","ותקח יהושבעת בת המלך את יואש בן אחזיהו ותגנב אתו מתוך בני המלך המומתים ותתן אתו ואת מינקתו בחדר המטות ותסתירהו יהושבעת בת המלך יהורם אשת יהוידע הכהן כי היא היתה אחות אחזיהו מפני עתליהו ולא המיתתהו׃"],["14","22","12","아탈야가 나라를 다스리는 여섯 해 동안, 요아스는 그들과 함께 하느님의 집에서 숨어 지냈다.","아달리야가 나라를 다스리는 육 년 동안 요아스는 그들과 함께 하느님의 성전 안에 숨어 살았다.","요아스가 그들과 함께 하나님의 전에 육 년을 숨어 있는 동안에 아달랴가 나라를 다스렸더라","요아스가 저희와 함께 하나님의 전에 육년을 숨어 있는 동안에 아달랴가 나라를 다스렸더라","아달랴가 유다를 다스리는 동안, 요아스는 이렇게 6년 동안이나 성전 안에서 숨어 살았다.","For six years he remained hidden with them in the house of God, while Athaliah ruled as queen over the land.","And he was with them hid in the house of God six years: and Athaliah reigned over the land.","He remained hidden with them at the temple of God for six years while Athaliah ruled the land.","Fuit ergo cum eis in domo Dei absconditus sex annis, quibus regnavit Athalia super terram.","ויהי אתם בבית האלהים מתחבא שש שנים ועתליה מלכת על הארץ׃"],["14","23","1","칠 년째 되던 해에 여호야다가 용기를 내어, 백인대장들, 곧 여로함의 아들 아자르야, 여호하난의 아들 이스마엘, 오벳의 아들 아자르야, 아타야의 아들 마아세야, 지크리의 아들 엘리사팟과 계약을 체결하였다.","그러나 칠 년째 되던 해에 여호야다는 용기를 내어 여로함의 아들 아자리야, 여호하난의 아들 이스마엘, 오벳의 아들 아자리야, 아다야의 아들 마아세야, 지그리의 아들 엘리사밧 등과 내통하였다. 이들은 모두 백인대장이었다.","제칠년에 여호야다가 용기를 내어 백부장 곧 여로함의 아들 아사랴와 여호하난의 아들 이스마엘과 오벳의 아들 아사랴와 아다야의 아들 마아세야와 시그리의 아들 엘리사밧 등과 더불어 언약을 세우매","제 칠년에 여호야다가 세력을 내어 백부장 곧 여로함의 아들 아사랴와 여호하난의 아들 이스마엘과 오벳의 아들 아사랴와 아다야의 아들 마아세야와 시그리의 아들 엘리사밧 등으로 더불어 언약을 세우매","아달랴가 나라를 다스린 지 7년째 되는 해에 제사장 여호야다가 정치를 바로잡기로 결심하고, 유다의 군대 지휘관 다섯 명과 거사를 약속하였는데, 그들의 이름은 다음과 같았다. 여로함의 아들 아사랴, 여호하난의 아들 이스마엘, 오벳의 아들 아사랴, 아다야의 아들 마아세야, 시그리의 아들 엘리사밧.","In the seventh year, Jehoiada took courage and brought into covenant with himself the captains: Azariah, son of Jehoram; Ishmael, son of Jehohanan; Azariah, son of Obed; Maaseiah, son of Adaiah; and Elishaphat, son of Zichri.","And in the seventh year Jehoiada strengthened himself, and took the captains of hundreds, Azariah the son of Jeroham, and Ishmael the son of Jehohanan, and Azariah the son of Obed, and Maaseiah the son of Adaiah, and Elishaphat the son of Zichri, into covenant with him.","In the seventh year Jehoiada showed his strength. He made a covenant with the commanders of units of a hundred: Azariah son of Jeroham, Ishmael son of Jehohanan, Azariah son of Obed, Maaseiah son of Adaiah, and Elishaphat son of Zicri.","Anno autem septimo confor tatus Ioiada assumpsit centu riones, Azariam videlicet filium Ieroham et Ismael filium Iohanan, Azariam quoque filium Obed et Maasiam filium Adaiae et Elisaphat filium Zechri, et iniit cum eis foedus.","ובשנה השבעית התחזק יהוידע ויקח את שרי המאות לעזריהו בן ירחם ולישמעאל בן יהוחנן ולעזריהו בן עובד ואת מעשיהו בן עדיהו ואת אלישפט בן זכרי עמו בברית׃"],["14","23","2","그들은 유다 땅을 돌아다니며, 유다의 모든 성읍에서 레위인들과 이스라엘 가문의 우두머리들을 모아 예루살렘으로 오게 하였다.","그들은 유다 전국을 돌아다니며 유다 모든 성읍에 사는 레위인과 이스라엘 각 가문의 어른들을 모았다. 예루살렘에 도착한","그들이 유다를 두루 다니며 유다 모든 고을에서 레위 사람들과 이스라엘 족장들을 모아 예루살렘에 이른지라","저희가 유다로 두루 다니며 유다 모든 고을로서 레위 사람과 이스라엘 족장들을 모아 예루살렘에 이른지라","이 장군들은 유다의 성읍들을 두루 돌아다니면서 레위 사람들과 이스라엘의 족장들을 모아 예루살렘으로 데려왔다.","They journeyed about Judah, gathering the Levites from all the cities of Judah and also the heads of the Israelite families, and they came to Jerusalem.","And they went about in Judah, and gathered the Levites out of all the cities of Judah, and the chief of the fathers of Israel, and they came to Jerusalem.","They went throughout Judah and gathered the Levites and the heads of Israelite families from all the towns. When they came to Jerusalem,","Qui circumeuntes Iudam congregaverunt Levitas de cunctis urbibus Iudae et principes familiarum Israel veneruntque in Ierusalem.","ויסבו ביהודה ויקבצו את הלוים מכל ערי יהודה וראשי האבות לישראל ויבאו אל ירושלם׃"],["14","23","3","그들 온 회중이 하느님의 집에서 임금과 계약을 맺자, 여호야다가 그들에게 말하였다. “여기에 왕자님께서 계십니다. 주님께서 다윗의 자손들을 두고 말씀하신 대로 이분께서 임금이 되셔야 합니다.","이들 온 회중은 하느님의 성전에서 왕과 계약을 맺었다. 여호야다가 그들에게 말하였다. \"보아라, 여기에 왕세자가 계시다. 야훼께서 다윗의 후손을 두고 하신 말씀을 따라 이분을 왕으로 모셔라.","온 회중이 하나님의 전에서 왕과 언약을 세우매 여호야다가 무리에게 이르되 여호와께서 다윗의 자손에게 대하여 말씀하신 대로 왕자가 즉위하여야 할지니","온 회중이 하나님의 전에서 왕과 언약을 세우매 여호야다가 무리에게 이르되 여호와께서 다윗의 자손에게 대하여 말씀하신대로 왕자가 즉위하여야 할찌니","그리고 성전에 모여 요아스를 왕으로 모실 것을 결의하였다. 이때에 여호야다가 사람들 앞에서 이렇게 말하였다. \"아하시야왕의 아드님이 여기에 계십니다. 이제는 이분이 왕위를 이어받을 때입니다. 다윗의 후손이 언제까지나 이 나라를 다스리게 하시겠다고 하신 여호와의 말씀에 따라야 합니다.","The whole assembly made a covenant with the king in the house of God. Jehoiada said to them: “Here is the king’s son who must reign, as the LORD promised concerning the sons of David.","And all the congregation made a covenant with the king in the house of God. And he said unto them, Behold, the king's son shall reign, as the LORD hath said of the sons of David.","the whole assembly made a covenant with the king at the temple of God. Jehoiada said to them, \"The king's son shall reign, as the LORD promised concerning the descendants of David.","Iniit igitur omnis congregatio pactum in domo Dei cum rege. Dixitque ad eos Ioiada:  “Ecce filius regis regnabit, sicut locutus est Dominus super filios David.","ויכרת כל הקהל ברית בבית האלהים עם המלך ויאמר להם הנה בן המלך ימלך כאשר דבר יהוה על בני דויד׃"],["14","23","4","여러분이 할 일은 이렇습니다. 여러분 가운데 안식일 당번인 사제들과 레위인들의 삼분의 일은 문지방을 지키고,","이제 너희는 이렇게 하여라. 안식일에 근무하는 너희 사제와 레위인들 가운데 삼분의 일은 현관문을 지키고","이제 너희는 이와 같이 행하라 너희 제사장들과 레위 사람들 곧 안식일에 당번인 자들의 삼분의 일은 문을 지키고","이제 너희는 이와 같이 행하라 너희 제사장과 레위 사람 곧 안식일에 입번한 자의 삼분 일은 문을 지키고","그러니 이제 이렇게 합시다. 다음 안식일에 직무를 수행하러 오는 모든 제사장과 레위 사람의 3분의 1은 모두 성전의 출입구를 지키시오.","This is what you must do: a third of your number, both priests and Levites, who come on duty on the sabbath must guard the thresholds,","This is the thing that ye shall do; A third part of you entering on the sabbath, of the priests and of the Levites, shall be porters of the doors;","Now this is what you are to do: A third of you priests and Levites who are going on duty on the Sabbath are to keep watch at the doors,","Hoc est ergo, quod facietis.","זה הדבר אשר תעשו השלשית מכם באי השבת לכהנים וללוים לשערי הספים׃"],["14","23","5","다른 삼분의 일은 왕궁을, 나머지 삼분의 일은 ‘초석 대문’을 지키십시오. 그리고 다른 모든 백성은 주님의 집 뜰에 모이십시오.","다른 삼분의 일은 왕궁을 지키며 나머지 삼분의 일은 성문을 지키고 일반 백성은 야훼의 성전 뜰에 모여라.","삼분의 일은 왕궁에 있고 삼분의 일은 기초문에 있고 백성들은 여호와의 전 뜰에 있을지라","삼분 일은 왕궁에 있고 삼분 일은 기초문에 있고 백성들은 여호와의 전 뜰에 있을찌라","또 3분의 1은 왕궁을 지키고, 마지막 3분의 1은 기초문을 지키시오. 그리고 성전에 모인 백성은 모두 성전의 안마당을 차지하고 있으시오.","another third must be at the king’s house, and the final third at the Foundation Gate, when all the people will be in the courts of the LORD’s house.","And a third part shall be at the king's house; and a third part at the gate of the foundation: and all the people shall be in the courts of the house of the LORD.","a third of you at the royal palace and a third at the Foundation Gate, and all the other men are to be in the courtyards of the temple of the LORD.","Tertia pars vestrum, qui veniunt ad sabbatum sacerdotum et Levitarum et ianitorum, erit in portis, tertia vero pars ad domum regis et tertia in porta, quae appellatur Fundamenti; omne vero reliquum vulgus sit in atriis domus Domini.","והשלשית בבית המלך והשלשית בשער היסוד וכל העם בחצרות בית יהוה׃"],["14","23","6","사제들과 그들을 시중드는 레위인들 말고는 아무도 주님의 집에 들어가지 못합니다. 그들은 거룩하기 때문에 들어갈 수 있지만, 다른 모든 백성은 주님의 명령을 따라야 합니다.","아무도 야훼의 성전 안으로는 들어가지 못한다. 거기에는 사제들과 그들을 돕는 레위인들만이 들어갈 수 있는 곳이다. 그들은 성별된 사람이므로 들어갈 수 있다. 일반 백성은 모두 야훼께서 분부하신 규례를 지키도록 하여라.","제사장들과 수종 드는 레위 사람들은 거룩한즉 여호와의 전에 들어오려니와 그 외의 다른 사람은 들어오지 못할 것이니 모든 백성은 여호와께 지켜야 할 바를 지킬지며","제사장과 수종드는 레위 사람은 거룩한즉 여호와의 전에 들어오려니와 그 외의 다른 사람은 들어오지 못할 것이니 모든 백성은 여호와의 명하신 바를 지킬찌며","성전에 들어와 직무를 수행하도록 성별된 제사장들과 레위 사람들 밖에는 어느 누구도 성전 안으로 들어와서는 안 됩니다. 모든 백성들은 여호와께서 금지하신 이 법을 엄수해야합니다.","Let no one enter the LORD’s house except the priests and those Levites who are ministering. They may enter because they are holy; but all the other people must observe the prescriptions of the LORD.","But let none come into the house of the LORD, save the priests, and they that minister of the Levites; they shall go in, for they are holy: but all the people shall keep the watch of the LORD.","No one is to enter the temple of the LORD except the priests and Levites on duty; they may enter because they are consecrated, but all the other men are to guard what the LORD has assigned to them.","Nec quisquam alius ingrediatur domum Domini, nisi sacerdotes et qui ministrant de Levitis; ipsi tantummodo ingrediantur, quia sanctificati sunt. Et omne reliquum vulgus observet observationem Domini.","ואל יבוא בית יהוה כי אם הכהנים והמשרתים ללוים המה יבאו כי קדש המה וכל העם ישמרו משמרת יהוה׃"],["14","23","7","레위인들은 저마다 무기를 손에 들고 임금님을 에워싸십시오. 이 집에 들어오는 자는 누구든지 죽여야 합니다. 임금님께서 들어오고 나가실 때에도 곁에 있어야 합니다.”","누구든지 성전으로 들어가려는 자는 죽여라. 레위인들은 각자 무기를 들고 임금님을 호위하여라. 어디로 가시든지 임금님 곁을 떠나지 마라.\"","레위 사람들은 각각 손에 무기를 잡고 왕을 호위하며 다른 사람이 성전에 들어오거든 죽이고 왕이 출입할 때에 경호할지니라 하니","레위 사람은 각각 손에 병기를 잡고 왕을 호위하며 다른 사람이 전에 들어 오거든 죽이고 왕의 출입할 때에 시위할찌니라","레위 사람들은 손에 무기를 들고 빈틈없이 왕을 둘러싸 경호하며, 왕이 움직이는 대로 항상 붙어 다니시오. 그리고 성전의 구역 안으로 침투하는 자가 있거든 누구든지 즉시 잡아 죽이시오!\"","The Levites shall surround the king on all sides, each with drawn weapon. Whoever tries to enter the house is to be killed. Stay with the king wherever he goes.”","And the Levites shall compass the king round about, every man with his weapons in his hand; and whosoever else cometh into the house, he shall be put to death: but be ye with the king when he cometh in, and when he goeth out.","The Levites are to station themselves around the king, each man with his weapons in his hand. Anyone who enters the temple must be put to death. Stay close to the king wherever he goes.\"","Levitae autem circumdent regem habentes singuli arma sua in manu. Et si quis alius ingressus fuerit templum, interficiatur. Sintque cum rege et intrante et egrediente “.","והקיפו הלוים את המלך סביב איש וכליו בידו והבא אל הבית יומת והיו את המלך בבאו ובצאתו׃"],["14","23","8","레위인들과 온 유다 사람들은 여호야다 사제가 명령한 대로 다 하였다. 여호야다 사제가 근무조들을 해산시키지 않았기 때문에, 그들은 저마다 안식일 당번인 부하들뿐만 아니라 안식일 비번인 부하들까지 데려왔다.","레위인들과 온 유다인들은 사제 여호야다의 명령을 따랐다. 사제 여호야다가 모든 반에 비상 근무령을 내렸기 때문에 장군들은 안식일 근무반과 안식일 비번반을 모두 출두시켰다.","레위 사람들과 모든 유다 사람들이 제사장 여호야다가 명령한 모든 것을 준행하여 각기 수하에 안식일에 당번인 자와 안식일에 비번인 자들을 거느리고 있었으니 이는 제사장 여호야다가 비번인 자들을 보내지 아니함이더라","레위 사람과 유다 무리가 제사장 여호야다의 모든 명한 바를 준행하여 각기 수하의 안식일에 입번할 자와 안식일에 출번할 자를 거느리고 있으니 이는 제사장 여호야다가 출번하는 자를 보내지 아니함이더라","레위 사람들과 그 밖에 성전에 모인 사람들이 다 여호야다 제사장의 지시를 정확하게 이행하였다. 이때 그들은 누구나 자기 부하들을 모두 데리고 있었다. 안식일에 직무를 맡은 이들 뿐아니라, 직무를 맡지 않은 이들도 모두 성전에서 대기하도록 여호야다가 비상 근무령을 내렸기 때문이다.","The Levites and all Judah did just as Jehoiada the priest commanded. Each took his troops, both those going on duty for the week and those going off duty that week, since Jehoiada the priest had not dismissed any of the divisions.","So the Levites and all Judah did according to all things that Jehoiada the priest had commanded, and took every man his men that were to come in on the sabbath, with them that were to go out on the sabbath: for Jehoiada the priest dismissed not the courses.","The Levites and all the men of Judah did just as Jehoiada the priest ordered. Each one took his men--those who were going on duty on the Sabbath and those who were going off duty--for Jehoiada the priest had not released any of the divisions.","Fecerunt igitur Levitae et universus Iuda iuxta omnia, quae praeceperat Ioiada pontifex; et assumpserunt singuli viros suos, qui veniebant sabbato cum his, qui sabbato egressuri erant: siquidem Ioiada pontifex non dimisit abire turmas, quae sibi per singulas hebdomadas succedere consueverant.","ויעשו הלוים וכל יהודה ככל אשר צוה יהוידע הכהן ויקחו איש את אנשיו באי השבת עם יוצאי השבת כי לא פטר יהוידע הכהן את המחלקות׃"],["14","23","9","여호야다 사제는 하느님의 집에 보관된 다윗 임금의 창과 작은 방패와 그 밖의 작은 병기를 백인대장들에게 내 주었다.","사제 여호야다는 다윗 왕이 하느님의 성전에 마련해 둔 창과 긴 방패, 둥근 방패를 백인대장들에게 나누어주었다.","제사장 여호야다가 하나님의 전 안에 있는 다윗 왕의 창과 큰 방패와 작은 방패를 백부장들에게 주고","제사장 여호야다가 하나님의 전 안에 있는 다윗왕의 창과 큰 방패와 작은 방패를 백부장들에게 주고","제사장은 지휘관들에게 창과 큰 방패와 작은 방패를 내주었다. 이 무기들은 본래 다윗왕이 보관해 둔 것으로서 지금까지 성전에 있었다.","Jehoiada the priest gave to the captains the spears, shields, and bucklers of King David which were in the house of God.","Moreover Jehoiada the priest delivered to the captains of hundreds spears, and bucklers, and shields, that had been king David's, which were in the house of God.","Then he gave the commanders of units of a hundred the spears and the large and small shields that had belonged to King David and that were in the temple of God.","Deditque Ioiada sacerdos centurionibus lanceas clipeosque et peltas regis David, quae erant in domo Dei.","ויתן יהוידע הכהן לשרי המאות את החניתים ואת המגנות ואת השלטים אשר למלך דויד אשר בית האלהים׃"],["14","23","10","그는 또 저마다 제 병기를 손에 든 백성을 모두 주님의 집 남쪽에서 북쪽까지 제단과 주님의 집에 배치하여, 임금을 에워싸게 하였다.","그리고 전군에게 무기를 들게 하고 성전 남쪽과 북쪽 전면에 배치하여 제단과 성전을 지키고 왕을 둘러싸게 하였다.","또 백성들에게 각각 손에 무기를 잡고 왕을 호위하되 성전 오른쪽에서부터 성전 왼쪽까지 제단과 성전 곁에 서게 하고","또 백성들로 각각 손에 병기를 잡고 왕을 호위하되 전 우편에서부터 전 좌편까지 단과 전 곁에 서게 하고","모든 군인들이 무기를 손에 들자, 여호야다가 그들을 성전 앞에 배치한 뒤 성전의 남쪽 모서리에서부터 번제단을 지나서 성전의 북쪽 모서리에 이르기까지 반원을 그으며 늘어서서 사방으로 왕을 에워싸게 하였다.","He stationed all the people, each with spear in hand, from the southern to the northern limit of the enclosure, surrounding the altar and the temple on the king’s behalf.","And he set all the people, every man having his weapon in his hand, from the right side of the temple to the left side of the temple, along by the altar and the temple, by the king round about.","He stationed all the men, each with his weapon in his hand, around the king--near the altar and the temple, from the south side to the north side of the temple.","Constituitque omnem populum tenentium tela a parte templi dextra usque ad partem templi sinistram coram altari et templo per circuitum regis.","ויעמד את כל העם ואיש שלחו בידו מכתף הבית הימנית עד כתף הבית השמאלית למזבח ולבית על המלך סביב׃"],["14","23","11","그때에 사람들이 왕자를 데리고 나와, 왕관을 씌우고 증언서를 주면서 그를 임금으로 세웠다. 여호야다와 그의 아들들이 왕자에게 기름을 붓고, “임금님 만세!” 하고 외쳤다.","그런 다음 왕세자를 나오게 하고는 면류관을 얹고 율법책을 주고 그를 왕으로 삼았다. 여호야다는 그의 아들들과 함께 그에게 기름을 붓고는 \"임금님 만세!\" 하고 외쳤다.","무리가 왕자를 인도해 내어 면류관을 씌우며 율법책을 주고 세워 왕으로 삼을새 여호야다와 그의 아들들이 그에게 기름을 붓고 이르기를 왕이여 만세수를 누리소서 하니라","무리가 왕자를 인도하여 내어 면류관을 씌우며 율법 책을 주고 세워 왕을 삼을쌔 여호야다와 그 아들들이 저에게 기름을 붓고 모두 왕의 만세를 부르니라","그러고 나서 여호야다는 자기의 아들들과 함께 왕자를 모셔다가 왕으로 삼았다. 그들은 요아스에게 왕관을 씌우고 왕의 조약문을 넘겨 주었다. 제사장 여호야다가 아들들을 거느리고 요아스에게 기름을 붓자 백성들은 \"임금님 만세!\" 하고 크게 외쳤다.","Then they brought out the king’s son and put the crown and the testimony upon him, and proclaimed him king. Jehoiada and his sons anointed him, and they cried, “Long live the king!”","Then they brought out the king's son, and put upon him the crown, and gave him the testimony, and made him king. And Jehoiada and his sons anointed him, and said, God save the king.","Jehoiada and his sons brought out the king's son and put the crown on him; they presented him with a copy of the covenant and proclaimed him king. They anointed him and shouted, \"Long live the king!\"","Et eduxerunt filium regis et dederunt ei diadema et testimonium et constituerunt eum regem. Unxerunt quoque illum Ioiada pontifex et filii eius; imprecatique sunt ei atque dixerunt:  “Vivat rex! “.","ויוציאו את בן המלך ויתנו עליו את הנזר ואת העדות וימליכו אתו וימשחהו יהוידע ובניו ויאמרו יחי המלך׃"],["14","23","12","백성이 뛰어다니는 소리와 임금을 찬양하는 소리를 들은 아탈야가 백성이 모인 주님의 집으로 가서","아달리야가 백성들이 기뻐 뛰며 왕을 찬양하는 소리를 듣고 백성들이 모인 야훼의 성전에 나가보니,","아달랴가 백성들이 뛰며 왕을 찬송하는 소리를 듣고 여호와의 전에 들어가서 백성에게 이르러","아달랴가 백성들이 분주하며 왕을 찬송하는 소리를 듣고 여호와의 전에 들어가서 백성에게 이르러","온 백성이 성전으로 몰려가 새 왕을 축하하며 환호성을 올리자, 아달랴도 그 소리를 듣고 성전으로 들어가 군중 속에서","When Athaliah heard the noise of the people running and acclaiming the king, she came before them in the house of the LORD.","Now when Athaliah heard the noise of the people running and praising the king, she came to the people into the house of the LORD:","When Athaliah heard the noise of the people running and cheering the king, she went to them at the temple of the LORD.","Quod cum audisset Athalia, vocem scilicet currentium atque laudantium regem, ingressa est ad populum in templum Domini.","ותשמע עתליהו את קול העם הרצים והמהללים את המלך ותבוא אל העם בית יהוה׃"],["14","23","13","보니, 임금이 입구에 있는 그의 기둥 곁에 서 있고 대신들과 나팔수들이 임금을 모시고 서 있었다. 또 온 나라 백성이 기뻐하는 가운데 쇠 나팔 소리가 울려 퍼지고, 성가 책임자들이 악기에 맞추어 찬양 노래를 이끌고 있었다. 그래서 아탈야는 옷을 찢으며, “반역이다! 반역!” 하고 외쳤다.","왕이 군지휘관들과 나팔수들의 호위를 받으며 문 어귀 기둥 곁에 서 있고, 지방민들이 기뻐하는 가운데 나팔 소리 울려 퍼지며 합창대는 악기에 맞추어 노래를 부르고 있지 않는가! 아달리야는 옷을 찢으며 \"반역이다, 반역이다!\" 하고 외쳤다.","보매 왕이 성전 문 기둥 곁에 섰고 지휘관들과 나팔수들이 왕의 곁에 모셔 서 있으며 그 땅의 모든 백성들이 즐거워하여 나팔을 불며 노래하는 자들은 주악하며 찬송을 인도하는지라 이에 아달랴가 그의 옷을 찢으며 외치되 반역이로다 반역이로다 하매","보매 왕이 전 문 기둥 곁에 섰고 장관들과 나팔수가 왕의 곁에 모셨으며 국민들이 즐거워하여 나팔을 불며 노래하는 자는 주악하며 찬송을 인도하는지라 이에 아달랴가 옷을 찢으며 외치되 반역이로다 반역이로다 하매","바라보니 성전 입구 왕의 자리에 요아스가 서 있고 그의 둘레를 백성의 지도자들과 나팔수들이 에워싸고 있었다. 성전의 가수들도 그곳에 서서 여러 가지 악기로 새 왕을 위하여 축하하는 노래를 연주하였고, 온 백성은 기뻐서 계속 환호성을 올렸다. 이에 아달랴가 입고 있던 옷을 갈기갈기 찢으며 \"반역이다! 반역이다!\" 하고 외쳤다.","When she saw the king standing by his column at the entrance, the captains and the trumpeters near the king, and all the people of the land rejoicing and blowing trumpets, while the singers with their musical instruments were leading the acclaim, Athaliah tore her garments, saying, “Treason! treason!”","And she looked, and, behold, the king stood at his pillar at the entering in, and the princes and the trumpets by the king: and all the people of the land rejoiced, and sounded with trumpets, also the singers with instruments of musick, and such as taught to sing praise. Then Athaliah rent her clothes, and said, Treason, Treason.","She looked, and there was the king, standing by his pillar at the entrance. The officers and the trumpeters were beside the king, and all the people of the land were rejoicing and blowing trumpets, and singers with musical instruments were leading the praises. Then Athaliah tore her robes and shouted, \"Treason! Treason!\"","Cumque vidisset regem stantem super gradum suum in introitu et principes tubasque circa eum omnemque populum terrae gaudentem atque clangentem tubis cantoresque cum diversi generis organis signum dantes ad laudandum, scidit vestimenta sua et ait:  “Coniuratio, coniuratio! “.","ותרא והנה המלך עומד על עמודו במבוא והשרים והחצצרות על המלך וכל עם הארץ שמח ותוקע בחצצרות והמשוררים בכלי השיר ומודיעים להלל ותקרע עתליהו את בגדיה ותאמר קשר קשר׃"],["14","23","14","그때에 여호야다 사제가 군대를 거느린 백인대장들을 이끌고 나와 그들에게 분부하였다. “저 여자를 대열 밖으로 끌어내시오. 그를 따르는 자가 있거든 칼로 쳐 죽이시오.” 여호야다 사제는 이미 “주님의 집에서 그 여자를 죽이지 마라.” 하고 말해 두었던 것이다.","그러자 사제 여호야다가 군대를 거느린 백인대장들에게 명령하였다. \"저 계집을 밖으로 끌어내다가 칼로 쳐죽여라. 따르는 자가 있거든 함께 쳐죽여라.\" 사제 여호야다는 그 여자를 야훼의 성전 안에서 죽여서는 안 된다고 생각했던 것이다.","제사장 여호야다가 군대를 거느린 백부장들을 불러내어 이르되 반열 밖으로 몰아내라 그를 따르는 자는 칼로 죽이라 하니 제사장의 이 말은 여호와의 전에서는 그를 죽이지 말라 함이라","제사장 여호야다가 군대를 거느린 백부장들을 불러내어 명하여 가로되 반렬 밖으로 몰아내라 무릇 저를 따르는 자는 칼로 죽이라 하니 제사장의 이 말은 여호와의 전에서는 저를 죽이지 말라 함이라","여호야다 제사장이 성전의 경비를 맡은 군대 지휘관을 불러 명령하였다. \"저 여인을 군중 속에서 데리고 나가시오! 누구든지 저 여인의 편에 서는 사람이 있으면 칼로 쳐죽이시오!\" 그러나 성전 안에서 죽이는 것만은 금하였다.","Then Jehoiada the priest brought out the captains in command of the force: “Escort her with a guard detail. If anyone follows her, let him die by the sword.” For the priest had said, “You must not put her to death in the house of the LORD.”","Then Jehoiada the priest brought out the captains of hundreds that were set over the host, and said unto them, Have her forth of the ranges: and whoso followeth her, let him be slain with the sword. For the priest said, Slay her not in the house of the LORD.","Jehoiada the priest sent out the commanders of units of a hundred, who were in charge of the troops, and said to them: \"Bring her out between the ranks and put to the sword anyone who follows her.\" For the priest had said, \"Do not put her to death at the temple of the LORD.\"","Praecepit autem Ioiada pontifex centurionibus, qui erant super exercitum, dicens:  “Educite illam extra saepta templi! Qui autem sequetur eam, interficiatur foris gladio! “. Dixerat enim sacerdos:  “Non occidetis eam in domo Domini! “.","ויוצא יהוידע הכהן את שרי המאות פקודי החיל ויאמר אלהם הוציאוה אל מבית השדרות והבא אחריה יומת בחרב כי אמר הכהן לא תמיתוה בית יהוה׃"],["14","23","15","그들은 그 여자를 체포하였다. 그러고 나서 아탈야가 왕궁의 ‘말 문’ 입구에 들어서자, 거기에서 그 여자를 죽였다.","사람들은 그 여자를 왕궁으로 끌어내어 군마 출입문 부근에서 죽였다.","이에 무리가 그에게 길을 열어 주고 그가 왕궁 말문 어귀에 이를 때에 거기서 죽였더라","이에 무리가 길을 열어 주고 저가 왕궁 마문 어귀에 이를 때에 거기서 죽였더라","군인들이 아달랴를 붙잡아 끌고 나가 말들이 궁중으로 들어가는 대문에 이르러 죽여 버렸다.","So they seized her, and when she reached the Horse Gate of the royal palace, they put her to death.","So they laid hands on her; and when she was come to the entering of the horse gate by the king's house, they slew her there.","So they seized her as she reached the entrance of the Horse Gate on the palace grounds, and there they put her to death.","Et imposuerunt ei manus; cumque intrasset portam Equorum domus regis, interfecerunt eam ibi.","וישימו לה ידים ותבוא אל מבוא שער הסוסים בית המלך וימיתוה שם׃"],["14","23","16","여호야다는 자신과 온 백성과 임금 사이에 계약을 맺고, 주님의 백성이 되기로 하였다.","그런 다음 여호야다는 야훼와 온 백성과 왕 사이에 계약을 맺어 야훼의 백성이 되기로 하였다.","여호야다가 자기와 모든 백성과 왕 사이에 언약을 세워 여호와의 백성이 되리라 한지라","여호야다가 자기와 뭇 백성과 왕의 사이에 언약을 세워 여호와의 백성이 되리라 한지라","여호야다는 유다 백성에게 여호와의 백성이 되겠다는 계약을 갱신시키는 첫 조치로 온 백성과 왕에게 여호와만을 섬기며 살겠다는 맹세를 시키고, 그것을 계약으로 체결하였다. 그 조치는 아달랴 때문에 들어온 바알신을 유다에서 완전히 뿌리 뽑기 위한 것이었다.","Then Jehoiada made a covenant between himself and all the people and the king, that they should be the LORD’s people.","And Jehoiada made a covenant between him, and between all the people, and between the king, that they should be the LORD's people.","Jehoiada then made a covenant that he and the people and the king would be the LORD'S people.","Pepigit autem Ioiada foedus inter se universumque populum et regem, ut esset populus Domini.","ויכרת יהוידע ברית בינו ובין כל העם ובין המלך להיות לעם ליהוה׃"],["14","23","17","그 뒤에 온 백성이 바알 신전에 몰려가 그것을 허물고, 바알 제단들과 그 상들을 부수었다. 그들은 또 바알의 사제 마탄을 제단 앞에서 죽였다.","온 백성이 바알의 신전으로 가서 거기에 있는 제단들을 헐고 우상들을 부수고 바알의 사제 마딴을 그 제단 앞에서 죽였다.","온 국민이 바알의 신당으로 가서 그 신당을 부수고 그의 제단들과 형상들을 깨뜨리고 그 제단 앞에서 바알의 제사장 맛단을 죽이니라","온 국민이 바알의 당으로 가서 그 당을 훼파하고 그 단들과 우상들을 깨뜨리고 그 단 앞에서 바알의 제사장 맛단을 죽이니라","이에 온 무리가 곧 바알의 신당으로 몰려가서 건물을 허물고, 그 제단과 신상들을 박살 내었다. 바알의 제사장 맛단도 제단 앞으로 끌고가서 쳐죽였다.","Thereupon all the people went to the temple of Baal and demolished it. They shattered its altars and images completely, and killed Mattan, the priest of Baal, before the altars.","Then all the people went to the house of Baal, and brake it down, and brake his altars and his images in pieces, and slew Mattan the priest of Baal before the altars.","All the people went to the temple of Baal and tore it down. They smashed the altars and idols and killed Mattan the priest of Baal in front of the altars.","Itaque ingressus est omnis populus domum Baal et destruxerunt eam et altaria ac simulacra illius confregerunt; Matthan quoque sacerdotem Baal interfecerunt ante aras.","ויבאו כל העם בית הבעל ויתצהו ואת מזבחתיו ואת צלמיו שברו ואת מתן כהן הבעל הרגו לפני המזבחות׃"],["14","23","18","여호야다는 주님의 집 관리를 레위인 사제들의 손에 맡겼다. 이 레위인 사제들에게 다윗은 모세의 법에 쓰인 대로 주님의 집에서 임무를 맡아 주님께 번제물을 바치고, 또 자기 지시에 따라 기뻐 노래하며 그 일을 하게 하였던 것이다.","그리고 나서 여호야다는 야훼의 성전 일을 다윗이 했던 대로 레위인 사제들에게 맡겼다. 다윗은 야훼의 성전을 그들에게 맡겨 모세의 법에 기록되어 있는 대로 기뻐 노래하며 야훼께 번제를 드리도록 손수 절차를 제정해 주었던 것이다.","여호야다가 여호와의 전의 직원들을 세워 레위 제사장의 수하에 맡기니 이들은 다윗이 전에 그들의 반열을 나누어서 여호와의 전에서 모세의 율법에 기록한 대로 여호와께 번제를 드리며 다윗이 정한 규례대로 즐거이 부르고 노래하게 하였던 자들이더라","여호야다가 여호와의 전의 직원을 세워 제사장 레위 사람의 수하에 맡기니 이들은 다윗이 전에 그 반차를 나누어서 여호와의 전에서 모세의 율법에 기록한대로 여호와께 번제를 드리며 자기의 정한 규례대로 즐거이 부르고 노래하게 하였던 자더라","여호야다는 레위 지파의 제사장들에게 여호와의 성전을 감독하는 직분을 맡겼다. 다윗이 일찍이 모세의 율법에 규정된 대로 번제를 드리도록 임무를 분담시켰었는데 이제 여호야다가 다시 다윗의 지시대로 그들에게 성전에서 직무를 수행한 것이다. 그래서 제사장들은 축제의 노래를 즐겁게 부르며 여호와께 제물을 바쳤다.","Then Jehoiada gave the charge of the LORD’s house into the hands of the levitical priests, to whom David had assigned turns in the LORD’s house for sacrificing the burnt offerings of the LORD, as is written in the law of Moses, with rejoicing and song, as David had provided.","Also Jehoiada appointed the offices of the house of the LORD by the hand of the priests the Levites, whom David had distributed in the house of the LORD, to offer the burnt offerings of the LORD, as it is written in the law of Moses, with rejoicing and with singing, as it was ordained by David.","Then Jehoiada placed the oversight of the temple of the LORD in the hands of the priests, who were Levites, to whom David had made assignments in the temple, to present the burnt offerings of the LORD as written in the Law of Moses, with rejoicing and singing, as David had ordered.","Constituit autem Ioiada praepositos in domo Domini sub manibus sacerdotum et Levitarum, quos distribuit David in domo Domini, ut offerrent holocausta Domino, sicut scriptum est in lege Moysi, in gaudio et canticis iuxta dispositionem David.","וישם יהוידע פקדת בית יהוה ביד הכהנים הלוים אשר חלק דויד על בית יהוה להעלות עלות יהוה ככתוב בתורת משה בשמחה ובשיר על ידי דויד׃"],["14","23","19","여호야다는 또 주님의 집 문마다 문지기들을 세워, 어떤 경우로든 부정하게 된 자는 들어가지 못하게 하였다.","또 야훼의 성전 문마다 문지기들을 세워 부정탄 사람은 아무도 들어가지 못하게 하였다.","또 문지기를 여호와의 전 여러 문에 두어 무슨 일에든지 부정한 모든 자는 들어오지 못하게 하고","또 문지기를 여호와의 전 여러 문에 두어 무릇 아무 일에든지 부정한 자는 들어오지 못하게 하고","여호야다는 성전의 입구마다 문지기들을 세워 놓아 부정한 사람은 아무도 성전에 들어가지 못하게 하였다.","Moreover, he stationed guards at the gates of the LORD’s house so that no one unclean in any respect might enter.","And he set the porters at the gates of the house of the LORD, that none which was unclean in any thing should enter in.","He also stationed doorkeepers at the gates of the LORD'S temple so that no one who was in any way unclean might enter.","Constituit quoque ianitores in portis domus Domini, ut non ingrederetur eam immundus in omni re.","ויעמד השוערים על שערי בית יהוה ולא יבא טמא לכל דבר׃"],["14","23","20","그런 다음에 그는 백인대장들과 귀족들과 백성을 다스리는 관리들과 온 나라 백성을 데려왔다. 그리고 그가 주님의 집에서 임금을 모시고 내려오자, 그들은 ‘윗대문’을 거쳐 왕궁으로 들어가 거기에서 임금을 왕좌에 앉혔다.","그리고는 백인대장들과 귀족들과 공직을 맡은 사람들과 온 지방민들을 거느리고 야훼의 성전에서 왕을 모시고 윗대문 가운데 칸을 지나 대궐로 내려가 용상에 모셨다.","백부장들과 존귀한 자들과 백성의 방백들과 그 땅의 모든 백성을 거느리고 왕을 인도하여 여호와의 전에서 내려와 윗문으로부터 왕궁에 이르러 왕을 나라 보좌에 앉히매","백부장들과 존귀한 자들과 백성의 방백들과 온 국민을 거느리고 왕을 인도하여 여호와의 전에서 내려와서 윗문으로 좇아 왕궁에 이르러 왕을 나라 보좌에 앉히매","그런 다음에 여호야다는 군대 지휘관들과 귀족들과 백성의 지도층들과 온 백성을 거느리고 요아스왕을 성전에서 모시고 윗문을 지나서 궁전으로 들어가 보좌에 앉혔다.","Then he took the captains, the nobles, the rulers among the people, and all the people of the land, and led the king out of the LORD’s house; they came within the upper gate of the king’s house, and seated the king upon the royal throne.","And he took the captains of hundreds, and the nobles, and the governors of the people, and all the people of the land, and brought down the king from the house of the LORD: and they came through the high gate into the king's house, and set the king upon the throne of the kingdom.","He took with him the commanders of hundreds, the nobles, the rulers of the people and all the people of the land and brought the king down from the temple of the LORD. They went into the palace through the Upper Gate and seated the king on the royal throne,","Assumpsitque centuriones et fortissimos viros ac principes populi et omne vulgus terrae, et fecerunt descendere regem de domo Domini et introire per medium portae Superioris in domum regis et collocaverunt eum in solio regali.","ויקח את שרי המאות ואת האדירים ואת המושלים בעם ואת כל עם הארץ ויורד את המלך מבית יהוה ויבאו בתוך שער העליון בית המלך ויושיבו את המלך על כסא הממלכה׃"],["14","23","21","그래서 온 나라 백성이 기뻐하였다. 아탈야가 칼에 맞아 죽은 뒤로 도성은 평온해졌다.","지방민들은 모두 기뻐하는데, 서울은 잠잠하기만 하였다. 아달리야는 칼에 맞아 죽었다.","그 땅의 모든 백성이 즐거워하고 성중이 평온하더라 아달랴를 무리가 칼로 죽였었더라","온 국민이 즐거워하고 성중이 평온하더라 아달랴를 무리가 칼로 죽였었더라","이렇게 아달랴를 칼로 쳐죽이고 요아스를 왕으로 세우자, 유다의 온 백성이 기뻐하고 예루살렘 도성도 평온해졌다.","All the people of the land rejoiced and the city was quiet, now that Athaliah had been slain with the sword.","And all the people of the land rejoiced: and the city was quiet, after that they had slain Athaliah with the sword.","and all the people of the land rejoiced. And the city was quiet, because Athaliah had been slain with the sword.","Laetatusque est omnis populus terrae, et urbs quievit; porro Athalia interfecta est gladio.","וישמחו כל עם הארץ והעיר שקטה ואת עתליהו המיתו בחרב׃"],["14","24","1","요아스는 일곱 살에 임금이 되어 예루살렘에서 마흔 해 동안 다스렸다. 그의 어머니 이름은 치브야인데 브에르 세바 출신이었다.","1)요아스는 일곱 살에 왕위에 올라 예루살렘에서 사십 년간 다스렸다. 그의 어머니는 브엘세바 태생으로 이름은 지비야라고 하였다.24:1-14에 대해서는 2열왕 11:21-12:15 참조.","요아스가 왕위에 오를 때에 나이가 칠 세라 예루살렘에서 사십 년 동안 다스리니라 그의 어머니의 이름은 시비아요 브엘세바 사람이더라","요아스가 위에 나아갈 때에 나이 칠세라 예루살렘에서 사십년을 치리하니라 그 모친의 이름은 시비아라 브엘세바 사람이더라","요아스는 7세에 왕이 되어 40년 동안 예루살렘에서 다스렸다. 그의 어머니는 브엘세바에서 태어난 시비아였다.","Joash was seven years old when he became king, and he reigned forty years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Zibiah, from Beer-sheba.","Joash was seven years old when he began to reign, and he reigned forty years in Jerusalem. His mother's name also was Zibiah of Beersheba.","Joash was seven years old when he became king, and he reigned in Jerusalem forty years. His mother's name was Zibiah; she was from Beersheba.","Septem annorum erat Ioas, cum regnare coepisset, et quadraginta annis regnavit in Ierusalem. Nomen matris eius Sebia de Bersabee.","בן שבע שנים יאש במלכו וארבעים שנה מלך בירושלם ושם אמו צביה מבאר שבע׃"],["14","24","2","요아스는 여호야다 사제가 살아 있는 동안 내내, 주님의 눈에 드는 옳은 일을 하였다.","요아스는 사제 여호야다의 생전에는 바른 정치를 펴서 야훼의 눈에 들었다.","제사장 여호야다가 세상에 사는 모든 날에 요아스가 여호와 보시기에 정직하게 행하였으며","제사장 여호야다가 세상에 사는 모든 날에 요아스가 여호와 보시기에 정직히 행하였으며","여호야다 제사장이 살아 있을 동안 요아스왕은 여호와의 마음에 드는 일만을 하였다. 그만큼 여호야다가 나이 어린 왕을 올바르게 섬겼다.","Joash did what was right in the LORD’s sight as long as Jehoiada the priest lived.","And Joash did that which was right in the sight of the LORD all the days of Jehoiada the priest.","Joash did what was right in the eyes of the LORD all the years of Jehoiada the priest.","Fecitque, quod bonum est coram Domino, cunctis diebus Ioiadae sacerdotis.","ויעש יואש הישר בעיני יהוה כל ימי יהוידע הכהן׃"],["14","24","3","여호야다가 그에게 두 아내를 얻어 주어, 그가 그들에게서 아들딸들을 얻었다.","요아스는 사제 여호야다가 간택해 올린 두 아내에게서 아들딸을 낳았다.","여호야다가 그를 두 아내에게 장가들게 하였더니 자녀를 낳았더라","여호야다가 왕으로 두 아내에게 장가들게 하였더니 자녀를 낳았더라","여호야다는 아달랴에게 몰살당한 왕족의 번성을 위하여 요아스에게 두 아내를 골라 주었다. 여호와께서 요아스에게 복을 주시자 그가 많은 자녀를 두었다.","Jehoiada provided him with two wives, and he became the father of sons and daughters.","And Jehoiada took for him two wives; and he begat sons and daughters.","Jehoiada chose two wives for him, and he had sons and daughters.","Accepit autem ei Ioiada uxores duas, e quibus genuit filios et filias.","וישא לו יהוידע נשים שתים ויולד בנים ובנות׃"],["14","24","4","얼마 뒤에 요아스는 주님의 집을 고칠 마음이 들어서,","얼마 뒤에 요아스는 야훼의 성전을 보수할 마음이 생겨서","그 후에 요아스가 여호와의 전을 보수할 뜻을 두고","그 후에 요아스가 여호와의 전을 중수할 뜻을 두고","얼마 지나서 요아스는 여호와의 성전을 수리하기로 결심하였다.","After some time, Joash decided to restore the house of the LORD.","And it came to pass after this, that Joash was minded to repair the house of the LORD.","Some time later Joash decided to restore the temple of the LORD.","Post quae placuit Ioas, ut instauraret domum Domini.","ויהי אחריכן היה עם לב יואש לחדש את בית יהוה׃"],["14","24","5","사제들과 레위인들을 불러 그들에게 분부하였다. “해마다 그대들 하느님의 집을 보수하려 하니, 유다의 성읍들에 나가 온 이스라엘에서 서둘러 돈을 거두어 오시오.” 그러나 레위인들은 서두르지 않았다.","사제들과 레위인들을 모아놓고 지시하였다. \"유다 성읍들에 흩어져 가서 돈을 모아다가 야훼의 성전을 매년 보수하여라. 지체하지 말고 수행하여라.\" 그러나 레위인들은 서두르지 않았다.","제사장들과 레위 사람들을 모으고 그들에게 이르되 너희는 유다 여러 성읍에 가서 모든 이스라엘에게 해마다 너희의 하나님의 전을 수리할 돈을 거두되 그 일을 빨리 하라 하였으나 레위 사람이 빨리 하지 아니한지라","제사장과 레위 사람을 모으고 저희에게 이르되 너희는 유다 여러 성읍에 가서 이스라엘 무리에게 해마다 너희 하나님의 전을 수리할 돈을 거두되 그 일을 빨리 하라 하였으나 레위 사람이 빨리 하지 아니한지라","그가 제사장들과 레위 사람들을 불러 놓고 이렇게 명하였다. \"유다 모든 성읍으로 가서 우리가 해마다 성전을 수리하는 데 쓸 돈을 백성들에게 거두시오. 당장 금년부터 실시하시오.\" 그러나 레위 사람들이 시간만 끌고 있자,","He gathered together the priests and Levites and said to them: “Go out to all the cities of Judah and gather money from all Israel that you may repair the house of your God over the years. You must hurry this project.” But the Levites did not.","And he gathered together the priests and the Levites, and said to them, Go out unto the cities of Judah, and gather of all Israel money to repair the house of your God from year to year, and see that ye hasten the matter. Howbeit the Levites hastened it not.","He called together the priests and Levites and said to them, \"Go to the towns of Judah and collect the money due annually from all Israel, to repair the temple of your God. Do it now.\" But the Levites did not act at once.","Congregavitque sacerdotes et Levitas et dixit eis:  “Egredimini ad civitates Iudae et colligite de universo Israel pecuniam ad sartatecta templi Dei vestri per singulos annos. Festinatoque hoc facite “. Porro Levitae non festinarunt.","ויקבץ את הכהנים והלוים ויאמר להם צאו לערי יהודה וקבצו מכל ישראל כסף לחזק את בית אלהיכם מדי שנה בשנה ואתם תמהרו לדבר ולא מהרו הלוים׃"],["14","24","6","그래서 요아스는 여호야다 수석 사제를 불러 놓고, “어찌하여 수석 사제께서는, 주님의 종 모세와 이스라엘 회중이 증거의 천막을 위하여 부과한 세금을 유다와 예루살렘에서 거두어들이라고 레위인들을 독촉하지 않으십니까?” 하고 물었다.","그래서 왕은 그들의 우두머리인 여호야다를 불러들여 추궁하였다. \"어찌하여 그대는 레위인들을 독촉하지 않소? 야훼의 종 모세께서 증거의 장막에 바치라고 이스라엘 회중에게 지시한 일이 있는 헌금을 유다와 예루살렘에서 거두어들이라고 했는데, 어찌하여 가만히들 있소?\"","왕이 대제사장 여호야다를 불러 이르되 네가 어찌하여 레위 사람들을 시켜서 여호와의 종 모세와 이스라엘의 회중이 성막을 위하여 정한 세를 유다와 예루살렘에서 거두게 하지 아니하였느냐 하니","왕이 대제사장 여호야다를 불러 이르되 네가 어찌하여 레위 사람을 시켜서 여호와의 종 모세와 이스라엘의 회중이 법막을 위하여 정한 세를 유다와 예루살렘에서 거두게 하지 아니하였느냐 하니","왕이 대제사장 여호야다를 불러 꾸짖었다. \"하나님의 종 모세와 그의 공동체 전체는 그 당시 이스라엘 사람들에게 성막을 위하여 세금을 내도록 임무를 부과하였소. 그런데 당신은 어째서 레위 사람들에게 유다와 예루살렘에서 성전 세금을 거두게 하지 않고 있소?\"","Then the king summoned Jehoiada, who was in charge, and said to him: “Why have you not required the Levites to bring in from Judah and Jerusalem the tax levied by Moses, the servant of the LORD, and by the assembly of Israel, for the tent of the testimony?”","And the king called for Jehoiada the chief, and said unto him, Why hast thou not required of the Levites to bring in out of Judah and out of Jerusalem the collection, according to the commandment of Moses the servant of the LORD, and of the congregation of Israel, for the tabernacle of witness?","Therefore the king summoned Jehoiada the chief priest and said to him, \"Why haven't you required the Levites to bring in from Judah and Jerusalem the tax imposed by Moses the servant of the LORD and by the assembly of Israel for the Tent of the Testimony?\"","Vocavitque rex Ioiadam principem et dixit ei:  “Quare non tibi fuit curae, ut cogeres Levitas inferre de Iuda et de Ierusalem pecuniam, quae constituta est a Moyse servo Domini, ut inferret eam omnis congregatio Israel in tabernaculum testimonii?","ויקרא המלך ליהוידע הראש ויאמר לו מדוע לא דרשת על הלוים להביא מיהודה ומירושלם את משאת משה עבד יהוה והקהל לישראל לאהל העדות׃"],["14","24","7","사악한 여자 아탈야와 그의 아들들이 하느님의 집을 부수고 들어가, 주님의 집에 있는 거룩한 것을 모두 바알들을 위하여 써 버렸던 것이다.","사악한 여자인 아달리야가 제 아들들을 시켜 하느님의 성전을 부수고 들어가 야훼의 성전에 있는 거룩한 것을 모두 바알들에게 바쳐버렸던 것이다.","이는 그 악한 여인 아달랴의 아들들이 하나님의 전을 파괴하고 또 여호와의 전의 모든 성물들을 바알들을 위하여 사용하였음이었더라","이는 그 악한 여인 아달랴의 아들들이 하나님의 전을 깨뜨리고 또 여호와의 전의 모든 성물을 바알들에게 드렸음이었더라","온갖 죄악을 저지르던 그 악한 아달랴와 그 여인의 추종자들이 여호와의 성전을 부수어 놓고 심지어 성전을 위하여 성별해 두었던 물건들까지도 훔쳐다가 바알 신당을 꾸며 놓고 있었기 때문에 이렇게 말한 것이다.","For the wicked Athaliah and her sons had damaged the house of God and had even turned over to the Baals the holy things of the LORD’s house.","For the sons of Athaliah, that wicked woman, had broken up the house of God; and also all the dedicated things of the house of the LORD did they bestow upon Baalim.","Now the sons of that wicked woman Athaliah had broken into the temple of God and had used even its sacred objects for the Baals.","Athalia enim impiissima et filii eius dissipaverunt domum Dei et de universis, quae sanctificata fuerant templo Domini, dedicaverunt Baalim “.","כי עתליהו המרשעת בניה פרצו את בית האלהים וגם כל קדשי בית יהוה עשו לבעלים׃"],["14","24","8","임금은 분부를 내려, 궤를 하나 만들어서 주님의 집 문 밖에 두게 하였다.","왕은 명령을 내려 궤 하나를 야훼의 성전 문 밖에 놓게 하고","이에 왕이 말하여 한 궤를 만들어 여호와의 전 문 밖에 두게 하고","이에 왕이 명하여 한 궤를 만들어 여호와의 전 문밖에 두게 하고","왕은 헌금궤를 만들어 성전 문밖에 세워 놓고 세금을 받도록 명령한 뒤에","At the king’s command, therefore, they made a chest, which they put outside the gate of the LORD’s house.","And at the king's commandment they made a chest, and set it without at the gate of the house of the LORD.","At the king's command, a chest was made and placed outside, at the gate of the temple of the LORD.","Praecepit ergo rex, et fecerunt arcam posueruntque eam iuxta portam domus Domini forinsecus.","ויאמר המלך ויעשו ארון אחד ויתנהו בשער בית יהוה חוצה׃"],["14","24","9","그러고 나서 유다와 예루살렘에 선포하여, 하느님의 종 모세가 광야에서 이스라엘에 부과한 세금을 주님을 위하여 가져오게 하였다.","유다와 예루살렘에 선포하여, 광야에서 하느님의 종 모세가 이스라엘 백성에게 바치라고 한 헌금을 가져다 바치게 하였다.","유다와 예루살렘에 공포하여 하나님의 종 모세가 광야에서 이스라엘에게 정한 세를 여호와께 드리라 하였더니","유다와 예루살렘에 반포하여 하나님의 종 모세가 광야에서 이스라엘에게 정한 세를 여호와께 드리라 하였더니","유다와 예루살렘 전역에 이렇게 선포하였다. \"하나님의 종 모세가 광야에서 이스라엘 백성에게 부과하였던 성전 세금을 모두 가져다 바치시오!\"","They had it proclaimed throughout Judah and Jerusalem that the tax which Moses, the servant of God, had imposed on Israel in the wilderness should be brought to the LORD.","And they made a proclamation through Judah and Jerusalem, to bring in to the LORD the collection that Moses the servant of God laid upon Israel in the wilderness.","A proclamation was then issued in Judah and Jerusalem that they should bring to the LORD the tax that Moses the servant of God had required of Israel in the desert.","Et praedicatum est in Iuda et Ierusalem, ut deferrent singuli pretium Domino, quod constituit Moyses servus Dei super Israel in deserto.","ויתנו קול ביהודה ובירושלם להביא ליהוה משאת משה עבד האלהים על ישראל במדבר׃"],["14","24","10","모든 지도자와 온 백성이 기쁘게 돈을 가져와, 궤가 가득 찰 때까지 거기에 넣었다.","관리들과 백성은 모두 즐거운 마음으로 헌금을 가지고 와서 궤가 차도록 바쳤다.","모든 방백들과 백성들이 기뻐하여 마치기까지 돈을 가져다가 궤에 던지니라","모든 방백과 백성들이 기뻐하여 마치기까지 돈을 가져다가 궤에 던진지라","그러자 이스라엘의 지도자들과 온 백성이 그 호소를 기쁘게 받아들이고, 돈을 가져다가 헌금궤를 가득히 채웠다.","All the princes and the people rejoiced; they brought what was asked and cast it into the chest until it was filled.","And all the princes and all the people rejoiced, and brought in, and cast into the chest, until they had made an end.","All the officials and all the people brought their contributions gladly, dropping them into the chest until it was full.","Laetatique sunt cuncti principes et omnis populus et ingressi contulerunt in arcam atque miserunt ita, ut impleretur.","וישמחו כל השרים וכל העם ויביאו וישליכו לארון עד לכלה׃"],["14","24","11","레위인들이 그 궤를 임금의 관리들에게 가져가 그 궤에 돈이 많은 것을 보이면, 그때마다 임금의 서기관과 수석 사제의 관리가 와서 궤를 비우고 돈을 가져갔다. 그런 다음에 레위인들이 다시 궤를 제자리에 가져다 놓았다. 그들은 이 일을 날마다 거듭하여 많은 돈을 모았다.","레위인들이 그 궤를 왕궁 사무실에 가져다가 돈이 가득 차 있는 것을 보이면, 왕의 비서와 대사제의 대리가 와서 궤를 비우고 그 궤를 제자리에 도로 갖다 두었다. 이렇게 날마다 계속하여 많은 돈을 모았다.","레위 사람들이 언제든지 궤를 메고 왕의 관리에게 가지고 가서 돈이 많은 것을 보이면 왕의 서기관과 대제사장에게 속한 관원이 와서 그 궤를 쏟고 다시 그 곳에 가져다 두었더라 때때로 이렇게 하여 돈을 많이 거두매","언제든지 레위 사람들이 궤를 메고 왕의 유사에게 가서 돈이 많은 것을 보면 왕의 서기관과 대제사장에게 속한 아전이 와서 그 궤를 쏟고 다시 그 처소에 갖다 두었더라 때때로 이렇게하여 돈을 많이 거두매","레위 사람들은 왕의 지시에 따라 매일 헌금궤를 관리하였다. 헌금궤에 돈이 가득해지면 왕의 서기관과 대제사장의 비서가 와서 함께 궤를 열어 헌금을 꺼내고 빈 궤를 다시 제자리에 놓았다. 이렇게 하여 아주 많은 돈을 거두었다.","Whenever the chest was brought to the royal officials by the Levites and they noticed that there was a large amount of money, the royal scribe and an overseer for the chief priest would come up, empty the chest, and then take it back and return it to its place. This they did day after day until they had collected a large sum of money.","Now it came to pass, that at what time the chest was brought unto the king's office by the hand of the Levites, and when they saw that there was much money, the king's scribe and the high priest's officer came and emptied the chest, and took it, and carried it to his place again. Thus they did day by day, and gathered money in abundance.","Whenever the chest was brought in by the Levites to the king's officials and they saw that there was a large amount of money, the royal secretary and the officer of the chief priest would come and empty the chest and carry it back to its place. They did this regularly and collected a great amount of money.","Cumque tempus esset, ut deferrent arcam ad magistratus regis per manus Levitarum, et viderent multam esse pecuniam, ingrediebatur scriba regis et quem primus sacerdos constituerat, effundebantque pecuniam, quae erat in arca; porro arcam reportabant ad locum suum. Sicque faciebant per singula tempora, et congregata est infinita pecunia,","ויהי בעת יביא את הארון אל פקדת המלך ביד הלוים וכראותם כי רב הכסף ובא סופר המלך ופקיד כהן הראש ויערו את הארון וישאהו וישיבהו אל מקמו כה עשו ליום ביום ויאספו כסף לרב׃"],["14","24","12","임금과 여호야다는 그 돈을 주님의 집 보수를 맡은 이들에게 주고, 그 돈으로 그들이 석수들과 목수들을 고용하여 주님의 집을 고치게 하였다. 또한 쇠와 청동을 다루는 일꾼들을 고용하여 주님의 집을 보수하게 하였다.","왕과 여호야다는 그것을 야훼의 성전 공사 감독에게 넘겨 석수와 목수를 고용하여 야훼의 성전을 복원하고 쇠나 놋쇠를 다루는 대장장이도 고용하여 야훼의 성전을 보수하게 하였다.","왕과 여호야다가 그 돈을 여호와의 전 감독자에게 주어 석수와 목수를 고용하여 여호와의 전을 보수하며 또 철공과 놋쇠공을 고용하여 여호와의 전을 수리하게 하였더니","왕과 여호야다가 그 돈을 여호와의 전 간역자에게 주어 석수와 목수를 고용하여 여호와의 전을 중수하며 또 철공장과 놋공장을 고용하여 여호와의 전을 수리하게 하였더니","이에 요아스왕과 여호야다 대제사장은 공사를 맡은 책임자들에게 그 돈을 넘겨 주어 석수와 목수를 고용하여 성전을 중수하고 쇠와 구리를 다루는 장인들을 고용하여 성전을 보수하게 하였다.","Then the king and Jehoiada gave it to the workers in charge of the labor on the LORD’s house, who hired masons and carpenters to restore the LORD’s house, and also iron- and bronze-smiths to repair it.","And the king and Jehoiada gave it to such as did the work of the service of the house of the LORD, and hired masons and carpenters to repair the house of the LORD, and also such as wrought iron and brass to mend the house of the LORD.","The king and Jehoiada gave it to the men who carried out the work required for the temple of the LORD. They hired masons and carpenters to restore the LORD'S temple, and also workers in iron and bronze to repair the temple.","quam dederunt rex et Ioiada his, qui praeerant operibus domus Domini. At illi conducebant ex ea caesores lapidum et artifices operum singulorum, ut instaurarent domum Domini, fabros quoque ferri et aeris, ut domus Dei fulciretur.","ויתנהו המלך ויהוידע אל עושה מלאכת עבודת בית יהוה ויהיו שכרים חצבים וחרשים לחדש בית יהוה וגם לחרשי ברזל ונחשת לחזק את בית יהוה׃"],["14","24","13","일을 맡은 사람들이 제대로 일을 하여 보수 공사가 그들의 손에서 잘 진행되었다. 그래서 그들은 하느님의 집을 원래대로 복구시켜 견고하게 만들었다.","감독들의 지시를 따라 성전 복원 공사는 진전되어 도본대로 하느님의 성전이 튼튼히 서게 되었다.","기술자들이 맡아서 수리하는 공사가 점점 진척되므로 하나님의 전을 이전 모양대로 견고하게 하니라","공장들이 맡아서 수리하는 역사가 점점 진취되므로 하나님의 전을 이전 모양대로 견고케 하니라","모두들 부지런히 성전을 보수하여 순조롭게 공사가 진척되었다. 그리고 마침내 성전을 본래대로 아름답고 튼튼하게 보수하여 놓았다.","The workers labored, and the task of restoration progressed under their hands. They restored the house of God according to its original form, and reinforced it.","So the workmen wrought, and the work was perfected by them, and they set the house of God in his state, and strengthened it.","The men in charge of the work were diligent, and the repairs progressed under them. They rebuilt the temple of God according to its original design and reinforced it.","Egeruntque operarii, et obducebatur cicatrix operi per manus eorum, ac suscitaverunt domum Domini in statum pristinum et firme eam stare fecerunt.","ויעשו עשי המלאכה ותעל ארוכה למלאכה בידם ויעמידו את בית האלהים על מתכנתו ויאמצהו׃"],["14","24","14","그들이 일을 마치고 임금과 여호야다에게 남은 돈을 가져오니, 임금은 그것으로 주님의 집을 위한 기물들, 곧 예배와 번제물을 바칠 때 쓰는 기물들과 대접들과 금은 기물들을 만들게 하였다. 여호야다가 살아 있는 동안 내내 주님의 집에서는 늘 번제물이 바쳐졌다.","일이 끝난 뒤에 남은 돈을 왕과 여호야다에게 바치니, 그것으로 번제를 드리며 예배할 때에 쓰는 야훼의 성전 기구들, 그릇, 잔 등 금은 기구들을 만들었다. 여호야다가 죽을 때까지 야훼의 성전에서 번제를 드리는 일이 중단되지 않았다.","공사를 마친 후에 그 남은 돈을 왕과 여호야다 앞으로 가져왔으므로 그것으로 여호와의 전에 쓸 그릇을 만들었으니 곧 섬겨 제사 드리는 그릇이며 또 숟가락과 금은 그릇들이라 여호야다가 세상에 사는 모든 날에 여호와의 전에 항상 번제를 드렸더라","필역한 후에 그 남은 돈을 왕과 여호야다의 앞으로 가져온고로 그것으로 여호와의 전에 쓸 그릇을 만들었으니 곧 섬겨 제사 드리는 그릇이며 또 숟가락과 금, 은그릇들이라 여호야다가 세상에 사는 모든 날에 여호와의 전에 항상 번제를 드렸더라","성전 보수 공사가 완전히 끝나자 공사 책임자는 남은 돈을 왕과 제사장에게 되돌려주었다. 여호야다는 그 돈을 기자고 성전 기구들, 곧 하나님께 예배를 드리며 제물을 바칠 때에 필요한 접시와 금그릇과 은그릇들을 제작하였다. 여호야다가 살아 있는 동안에는 여호와의 성전에서 규칙적으로 드리는 번제물이 끊어지지 않았다.","After they had finished, they brought the rest of the money to the king and to Jehoiada, who had it made into utensils for the house of the LORD, utensils for the service and the burnt offerings, and basins and other gold and silver utensils. They sacrificed burnt offerings in the LORD’s house continually all the days of Jehoiada.","And when they had finished it, they brought the rest of the money before the king and Jehoiada, whereof were made vessels for the house of the LORD, even vessels to minister, and to offer withal, and spoons, and vessels of gold and silver. And they offered burnt offerings in the house of the LORD continually all the days of Jehoiada.","When they had finished, they brought the rest of the money to the king and Jehoiada, and with it were made articles for the LORD'S temple: articles for the service and for the burnt offerings, and also dishes and other objects of gold and silver. As long as Jehoiada lived, burnt offerings were presented continually in the temple of the LORD.","Cumque haec complessent, detulerunt coram rege et Ioiada reliquam partem pecuniae, de qua facta sunt vasa templi in ministerium et ad holocausta, phialae quoque et cetera vasa aurea et argentea. Et offerebantur holocausta in domo Domini iugiter cunctis diebus Ioiadae.","וככלותם הביאו לפני המלך ויהוידע את שאר הכסף ויעשהו כלים לבית יהוה כלי שרת והעלות וכפות וכלי זהב וכסף ויהיו מעלים עלות בבית יהוה תמיד כל ימי יהוידע׃"],["14","24","15","여호야다는 늙어 나이가 차서 죽었다. 죽을 때에 그의 나이는 백서른 살이었다.","여호야다는 백삼십 년 살고 나이 많아 죽었다.","여호야다가 나이가 많고 늙어서 죽으니 죽을 때에 백삼십 세라","여호야다가 나이 많고 늙어서 죽으니 죽을 때에 일백삼십세라","여호야다가 만족한 삶을 누리며 아주 오래 살다가 죽으니 그의 나이 130세였다.","Jehoiada grew old, full of years, and died; he was a hundred and thirty years old.","But Jehoiada waxed old, and was full of days when he died; an hundred and thirty years old was he when he died.","Now Jehoiada was old and full of years, and he died at the age of a hundred and thirty.","Senuit autem Ioiada plenus dierum et mortuus est cum centum triginta esset annorum.","ויזקן יהוידע וישבע ימים וימת בן מאה ושלשים שנה במותו׃"],["14","24","16","그는 이스라엘에서, 그리고 하느님과 그분의 집을 위하여 좋은 일을 하였으므로, 사람들이 그를 임금들과 함께 다윗 성에 묻었다.","하느님을 섬기고 성전을 보살펴서 이스라엘에게 복될 일을 하였다고 해서 사람들은 그를 다윗 성 왕실 묘지에 모셨다.","무리가 다윗 성 여러 왕의 묘실 중에 장사하였으니 이는 그가 이스라엘과 하나님과 그의 성전에 대하여 선을 행하였음이더라","무리가 다윗성 열왕의 묘실 중에 장사하였으니 이는 저가 이스라엘과 하나님과 그 전에 대하여 선을 행하였음이더라","백성들은 이스라엘에서 하나님과 성전을 위하여 많은 업적을 남긴 여호야다를 왕들이 묻히는 다윗성에 안장하였다.","They buried him in the City of David with the kings, because of the good he had done in Israel, especially for God and his house.","And they buried him in the city of David among the kings, because he had done good in Israel, both toward God, and toward his house.","He was buried with the kings in the City of David, because of the good he had done in Israel for God and his temple.","Sepelieruntque eum in civitate David cum regibus, eo quod fecisset bonum in Israel cum Deo et cum domo eius.","ויקברהו בעיר דויד עם המלכים כי עשה טובה בישראל ועם האלהים וביתו׃"],["14","24","17","여호야다가 죽은 다음, 유다의 대신들이 와서 임금에게 경배하자, 그때부터 임금은 그들의 말을 듣게 되었다.","여호야다가 죽은 뒤에 유다 고관들이 왕 앞에 나와 엎드리니 그 때부터 왕은 그들의 말을 듣게 되었다.","여호야다가 죽은 후에 유다 방백들이 와서 왕에게 절하매 왕이 그들의 말을 듣고","여호야다가 죽은 후에 유다 방백들이 와서 왕에게 절하매 왕이 그의 말을 듣고","여호야다가 죽은 다음 유다의 지도층들이 요아스왕을 찾아와서 아첨하였다. 왕이 그들의 맡을 듣고","After the death of Jehoiada, the princes of Judah came and paid homage to the king; then the king listened to them.","Now after the death of Jehoiada came the princes of Judah, and made obeisance to the king. Then the king hearkened unto them.","After the death of Jehoiada, the officials of Judah came and paid homage to the king, and he listened to them.","Postquam autem obiit Ioiada, ingressi sunt principes Iudae et adoraverunt regem, qui delinitus obsequiis eorum acquievit eis.","ואחרי מות יהוידע באו שרי יהודה וישתחוו למלך אז שמע המלך אליהם׃"],["14","24","18","그들은 주 저희 조상들의 하느님의 집을 저버리고, 아세라 목상과 다른 우상들을 섬겼다. 이 죄 때문에 유다와 예루살렘에 진노가 내렸다.","그들은 선조들의 하느님 야훼의 성전을 찾지 아니하고 아세라 목상과 돌 우상을 섬겼다. 이 죄 때문에 하느님의 진노가 유다와 예루살렘에 내리게 되었다.","그의 조상들의 하나님 여호와의 전을 버리고 아세라 목상과 우상을 섬겼으므로 그 죄로 말미암아 진노가 유다와 예루살렘에 임하니라","그 열조의 하나님 여호와의 전을 버리고 아세라 목상과 우상을 섬긴고로 이 죄로 인하여 진노가 유다와 예루살렘에 임하니라","거짓된 신하들에게 속기 시작하니 유다 백성들도 여호와의 성전에 가서 조상들의 하나님에게 경배하는 일을 그만 두고 음행을 조장하는 아세라 목상과 바알의 신상들을 다시 섬겼다. 유다 백성이 이렇게 주님 앞에서 죄를 저지르자, 주께서 유다와 예루살렘을 향하여 분노하셨다.","They abandoned the house of the LORD, the God of their ancestors, and began to serve the asherahs and the idols; and because of this crime of theirs, wrath came upon Judah and Jerusalem.","And they left the house of the LORD God of their fathers, and served groves and idols: and wrath came upon Judah and Jerusalem for this their trespass.","They abandoned the temple of the LORD, the God of their fathers, and worshiped Asherah poles and idols. Because of their guilt, God's anger came upon Judah and Jerusalem.","Et dereliquerunt templum Domini, Dei patrum suorum, servieruntque palis et sculptilibus, et facta est ira contra Iudam et Ierusalem propter hoc peccatum.","ויעזבו את בית יהוה אלהי אבותיהם ויעבדו את האשרים ואת העצבים ויהי קצף על יהודה וירושלם באשמתם זאת׃"],["14","24","19","주님께서는 그들을 당신께 돌아오게 하시려고 그들에게 예언자들을 보내셨다. 이 예언자들이 그들을 거슬러 증언하였지만, 그들은 귀를 기울이지 않았다.","야훼께서 그들을 당신께로 돌아오게 하시려고 예언자들을 보내시어 타이르셨지만, 사람들은 그 소리를 귀담아듣지 않았다.","그러나 여호와께서 그들에게 선지자를 보내사 다시 여호와에게로 돌아오게 하려 하시매 선지자들이 그들에게 경고하였으나 듣지 아니하니라","그러나 여호와께서 선지자를 저에게 보내사 다시 자기에게로 돌아오게 하려 하시매 선지자들이 저에게 경계하나 듣지 아니하니라","여호와께서 예언자들을 보내어 우상을 버리고 돌아오도록 경고하셨으나 한 사람도 예언자들의 말에 귀를 기울이지 않자","Although prophets were sent to them to turn them back to the LORD and to warn them, the people would not listen.","Yet he sent prophets to them, to bring them again unto the LORD; and they testified against them: but they would not give ear.","Although the LORD sent prophets to the people to bring them back to him, and though they testified against them, they would not listen.","Mittebatque eis prophetas, ut reverterentur ad Dominum, quos protestantes illi audire nolebant.","וישלח בהם נבאים להשיבם אל יהוה ויעידו בם ולא האזינו׃"],["14","24","20","그때에 여호야다 사제의 아들 즈카르야가 하느님의 영에 사로잡혀, 백성 앞에 나서서 말하였다. “하느님께서 이렇게 말씀하십니다. ‘너희는 어찌하여 주님의 계명을 어기느냐? 그렇게 해서는 너희가 잘될 리 없다. 너희가 주님을 저버렸으니 주님도 너희를 저버렸다.’”","여호야다의 아들 사제 즈가리야가 하느님의 영에 사로잡혀 백성들 앞에 나서서 말하였다. \"하느님께서 말씀하신다. '어찌하여 너희는 야훼의 계명을 어기느냐? 그리하여 만사를 그르치느냐? 너희가 야훼를 버렸으니, 야훼도 너희를 버리리라.'\"","이에 하나님의 영이 제사장 여호야다의 아들 스가랴를 감동시키시매 그가 백성 앞에 높이 서서 그들에게 이르되 하나님이 이같이 말씀하시기를 너희가 어찌하여 여호와의 명령을 거역하여 스스로 형통하지 못하게 하느냐 하셨나니 너희가 여호와를 버렸으므로 여호와께서도 너희를 버리셨느니라 하나","이에 하나님의 신이 제사장 여호야다의 아들 스가랴를 감동시키시매 저가 백성 앞에 높이 서서 저희에게 이르되 여호와께서 말씀하시기를 너희가 어찌하여 여호와의 명령을 거역하여 스스로 형통치 못하게 하느냐 하셨나니 너희가 여호와를 버린고로 여호와께서도 너희를 버리셨느니라 하나","마침내 하나님의 영이 여호야다의 아들인 제사장 스가랴에게 임하였다. 그가 성령에 감동되어 백성 앞으로 나가 외쳤다. \"여호와 하나님께서 전하는 말씀이다. \"너희가 왜 나의 계명을 어기고 스스로 재앙을 불러들이느냐? 너희가 나를 버렸으니, 이제 나도 너희를 버리겠다!\"","Then the spirit of God clothed Zechariah, son of Jehoiada the priest. He took his stand above the people and said to them: “Thus says God, Why are you transgressing the LORD’s commands, so that you cannot prosper? Because you have abandoned the LORD, he has abandoned you.”","And the Spirit of God came upon Zechariah the son of Jehoiada the priest, which stood above the people, and said unto them, Thus saith God, Why transgress ye the commandments of the LORD, that ye cannot prosper? because ye have forsaken the LORD, he hath also forsaken you.","Then the Spirit of God came upon Zechariah son of Jehoiada the priest. He stood before the people and said, \"This is what God says: 'Why do you disobey the LORD'S commands? You will not prosper. Because you have forsaken the LORD, he has forsaken you.'\"","Spiritus itaque Dei induit Zachariam filium Ioiadae sacerdotis; et stetit in conspectu populi et dixit eis:  “Haec dicit Deus: Quare transgredimini praecepta Domini, quod vobis non proderit? Quia dereliquistis Dominum, ipse dereliquit vos “.","ורוח אלהים לבשה את זכריה בן יהוידע הכהן ויעמד מעל לעם ויאמר להם כה אמר האלהים למה אתם עברים את מצות יהוה ולא תצליחו כי עזבתם את יהוה ויעזב אתכם׃"],["14","24","21","그러나 사람들은 그를 거슬러 음모를 꾸미고, 임금의 명령에 따라 주님의 집 뜰에서 그에게 돌을 던져 죽였다.","그러자 사람들은 한 덩어리가 되어 왕명을 따라 그를 야훼의 성전 마당에서 돌로 쳐죽였다.","무리가 함께 꾀하고 왕의 명령을 따라 그를 여호와의 전 뜰 안에서 돌로 쳐죽였더라","무리가 함께 꾀하고 왕의 명을 좇아 여호와의 전 뜰안에서 돌로 쳐 죽였더라","그러자 무리가 모여 저런 자는 죽여 버려야 한다고 의논을 하고, 왕의 허락을 얻어 스가랴를 성전뜰에서 돌로 쳐죽였다.","But they conspired against him, and at the king’s command they stoned him in the court of the house of the LORD.","And they conspired against him, and stoned him with stones at the commandment of the king in the court of the house of the LORD.","But they plotted against him, and by order of the king they stoned him to death in the courtyard of the LORD'S temple.","Qui coniuraverunt adversus eum et lapidaverunt eum iuxta regis imperium in atrio domus Domini.","ויקשרו עליו וירגמהו אבן במצות המלך בחצר בית יהוה׃"],["14","24","22","요아스 임금은 이렇게 즈카르야의 아버지 여호야다가 자기에게 바친 충성을 기억하지 않고, 그의 아들을 죽였다. 즈카르야는 죽으면서, “주님께서 보고 갚으실 것이다.” 하고 말하였다.","요아스 왕은 여호야다에게 입은 은덕을 저버리고 그의 아들을 죽였던 것이다. 즈가리야는 죽으면서 외쳤다. \"야훼께서 굽어보시고 갚으시리라.\"","요아스 왕이 이와 같이 스가랴의 아버지 여호야다가 베푼 은혜를 기억하지 아니하고 그의 아들을 죽이니 그가 죽을 때에 이르되 여호와는 감찰하시고 신원하여 주옵소서 하니라","요아스왕이 이와 같이 스가랴의 아비 여호야다의 베푼 은혜를 생각지 아니하고 그 아들을 죽이니 저가 죽을 때에 이르되 여호와는 감찰하시고 신원하여 주옵소서 하니라","요아스왕이 여호야다가 자기에게 베풀었던 은혜를 모두 잊고 그의 아들 스가랴를 죽이니, 스가랴가 돌에 맞아 죽으면서 이렇게 외쳤다. \"여호와께서는 내려다 보시고 나의 원통함을 갚아주소서!\"","Thus King Joash was unmindful of the devotion shown him by Jehoiada, Zechariah’s father, and killed the son. As he was dying, he said, “May the LORD see and avenge.”","Thus Joash the king remembered not the kindness which Jehoiada his father had done to him, but slew his son. And when he died, he said, The LORD look upon it, and require it.","King Joash did not remember the kindness Zechariah's father Jehoiada had shown him but killed his son, who said as he lay dying, \"May the LORD see this and call you to account.\"","Et non est recordatus Ioas rex misericordiae, quam fecerat Ioiada pater illius secum, sed interfecit filium eius. Qui cum moreretur, ait:  “Videat Dominus et requirat! “.","ולא זכר יואש המלך החסד אשר עשה יהוידע אביו עמו ויהרג את בנו וכמותו אמר ירא יהוה וידרש׃"],["14","24","23","그해가 끝나갈 무렵, 아람 군대가 요아스를 치러 올라왔다. 그들은 유다와 예루살렘에 들어와 백성 가운데에서 관리들을 모두 죽이고, 모든 전리품을 다마스쿠스 임금에게 보냈다.","그 해가 바뀔 무렵에 시리아 군이 요아스를 치러왔다. 그들은 유다와 예루살렘에 이르러 군대 지휘관들을 다 죽이고 닥치는 대로 약탈하여 다마스쿠스에 있는 저희 왕에게 보내었다.","일 주년 말에 아람 군대가 요아스를 치려고 올라와서 유다와 예루살렘에 이르러 백성 중에서 모든 방백들을 다 죽이고 노략한 물건을 다메섹 왕에게로 보내니라","일주년 후에 아람 군대가 요아스를 치려하여 올라와서 유다와 예루살렘에 이르러 백성 중에서 그 모든 방백을 멸절하고 노략한 물건을 다메섹 왕에게로 보내니라","그 해가 다 갈 즈음에 아람 군대가 요아스를 치러 유다와 예루살렘으로 밀고 들어왔다. 그들은 유다의 지도층을 모조리 잡아 죽이고 재산을 약탈하여 다메섹에 있는 아람 왕에게로 가져갔다.","At the turn of the year a force of Arameans came up against Joash. They invaded Judah and Jerusalem, killed all the princes of the people, and sent all their spoil to the king of Damascus.","And it came to pass at the end of the year, that the host of Syria came up against him: and they came to Judah and Jerusalem, and destroyed all the princes of the people from among the people, and sent all the spoil of them unto the king of Damascus.","At the turn of the year, the army of Aram marched against Joash; it invaded Judah and Jerusalem and killed all the leaders of the people. They sent all the plunder to their king in Damascus.","Cumque evolutus esset annus, ascendit contra eum exercitus Syriae venitque in Iudam et Ierusalem et exterminaverunt cunctos principes populi atque universam praedam miserunt regi Damascum.","ויהי לתקופת השנה עלה עליו חיל ארם ויבאו אל יהודה וירושלם וישחיתו את כל שרי העם מעם וכל שללם שלחו למלך דרמשק׃"],["14","24","24","아람 군대는 얼마 안 되는 수로 쳐들어왔지만, 유다 백성이 주 저희 조상들의 하느님을 저버렸으므로, 주님께서는 그토록 많은 군사를 아람 군대의 손에 넘기셨다. 이렇게 그들은 요아스에게 내려진 판결을 집행하였다.","침입군 병력은 많지 않았지만, 야훼께서는 이 백성이 자기네 선조의 하느님인 당신을 저버린 일을 못마땅하게 여기시어 그토록 많은 대군을 적군에게 맡기셨던 것이다.","아람 군대가 적은 무리로 왔으나 여호와께서 심히 큰 군대를 그들의 손에 넘기셨으니 이는 유다 사람들이 그들의 조상들의 하나님 여호와를 버렸음이라 이와 같이 아람 사람들이 요아스를 징벌하였더라","아람 군대가 적은 무리로 왔으나 여호와께서 심히 큰 군대를 그 손에 붙이셨으니 이는 유다 사람이 그 열조의 하나님 여호와를 버렸음이라 이와 같이 아람 사람이 요아스를 징벌하였더라","아람 군대가 소수에 불과하였는데도 유다의 대군을 무찌를 수 있었다. 여호와께서 그들의 편이 되셔서 유다군을 그들의 손에 넘겨 주셨기 때문이다. 유다 백성이 그들의 조상의 하나님을 버리고 떠나자 주께서도 그들을 버리고 아람군 편이 되셨던 것이다. 그리고 아람군은 주님의 편이 되어 요아스에게 여호와의 심판을 수행한 것이다.","Though the Aramean force was small, the LORD handed over a very large force into their power, because Judah had abandoned the LORD, the God of their ancestors. So judgment was meted out to Joash.","For the army of the Syrians came with a small company of men, and the LORD delivered a very great host into their hand, because they had forsaken the LORD God of their fathers. So they executed judgment against Joash.","Although the Aramean army had come with only a few men, the LORD delivered into their hands a much larger army. Because Judah had forsaken the LORD, the God of their fathers, judgment was executed on Joash.","Et certe, cum permodicus venisset numerus Syrorum, tradidit Dominus manibus eorum exercitum magnum valde, eo quod reliquissent Dominum, Deum patrum suorum; in Ioas quoque ignominiosa exercuere iudicia.","כי במצער אנשים באו חיל ארם ויהוה נתן בידם חיל לרב מאד כי עזבו את יהוה אלהי אבותיהם ואת יואש עשו שפטים׃"],["14","24","25","아람 군대는 요아스에게 심한 상처를 입히고 물러갔다. 그러자 요아스가 여호야다 사제의 아들을 죽인 일 때문에, 그의 신하들이 모반을 일으켜 그를 침상에서 살해하였다. 요아스는 이렇게 죽고 말았다. 사람들은 그를 다윗 성에 묻기는 하였지만, 임금들의 무덤에는 묻지 않았다.","시리아 군은 요아스에게 심한 상처를 입히고 물러갔다. 그의 신하들은 그가 여호야다의 아들 즈가리야 사제를 죽인 일에 반감을 품고 반란을 일으켜 침상에 누워 있는 그를 죽였다. 그리고는 다윗 성 안에 안장하면서도 왕실 묘지를 쓰지는 않았다.","요아스가 크게 부상하매 적군이 그를 버리고 간 후에 그의 신하들이 제사장 여호야다의 아들들의 피로 말미암아 반역하여 그를 그의 침상에서 쳐죽인지라 다윗 성에 장사하였으나 왕들의 묘실에는 장사하지 아니하였더라","요아스가 크게 상하매 적군이 버리고 간 후에 그 신복들이 제사장 여호야다의 아들들의 피로 인하여 모반하여 그 침상에서 쳐 죽인지라 다윗성에 장사하였으나 열왕의 묘실에는 장사하지 아니 하였더라","아람의 군대는 철수하면서 중상을 입은 요아스를 그대로 남겨 두었다. 그러자 제사장 여호야다의 아들을 살해한 일로 해서 요아스를 미워하던 신하들이 이 기회를 이용하여 병상에 누워 있는 그를 쳐죽였다. 그는 다윗성에 장사되었으나 선왕들의 무덤에 안장되지는 못하였다.","After the Arameans had departed from him, abandoning him to his many injuries, his servants conspired against him because of the murder of the son of Jehoiada the priest. They killed him on his sickbed. He was buried in the City of David, but not in the tombs of the kings.","And when they were departed from him, (for they left him in great diseases,) his own servants conspired against him for the blood of the sons of Jehoiada the priest, and slew him on his bed, and he died: and they buried him in the city of David, but they buried him not in the sepulchres of the kings.","When the Arameans withdrew, they left Joash severely wounded. His officials conspired against him for murdering the son of Jehoiada the priest, and they killed him in his bed. So he died and was buried in the City of David, but not in the tombs of the kings.","Et abeuntes dimiserunt eum in languoribus magnis. Coniuraverunt autem contra eum servi sui in ultionem sanguinis filii Ioiadae sacerdotis et occiderunt eum in lectulo suo, et mortuus est. Sepelieruntque eum in civitate David, sed non in sepulcris regum.","ובלכתם ממנו כי עזבו אתו במחליים רבים התקשרו עליו עבדיו בדמי בני יהוידע הכהן ויהרגהו על מטתו וימת ויקברהו בעיר דויד ולא קברהו בקברות המלכים׃"],["14","24","26","그를 거슬러 모반을 일으킨 사람들은, 암몬 여자 시므앗의 아들 자밧과 모압 여자 시므릿의 아들 여호자밧이었다.","그에게 반란을 일으킨 사람은 암몬 여인 시므앗의 아들 자밧과 모압 여인 시므릿의 아들 여호자밧이었다.","반역한 자들은 암몬 여인 시므앗의 아들 사밧과 모압 여인 시므릿의 아들 여호사밧이더라","모반한 자는 암몬 여인 시므앗의 아들 사밧과 모압 여인 시므릿의 아들 여호사밧이더라","이 모반을 일으킨 사람은 암몬 여인 시므앗의 아들 사밧과 모압 여인 시므릿의 아들 여호사밧이었다.","Those who conspired against him were Zabad, son of Shimeath from Ammon, and Jehozabad, son of Shimrith from Moab.","And these are they that conspired against him; Zabad the son of Shimeath an Ammonitess, and Jehozabad the son of Shimrith a Moabitess.","Those who conspired against him were Zabad, son of Shimeath an Ammonite woman, and Jehozabad, son of Shimrith a Moabite woman.","Insidiati vero sunt ei Zabad filius Semath Ammanitidis et Iozabad filius Semarith Moabitidis.","ואלה המתקשרים עליו זבד בן שמעת העמונית ויהוזבד בן שמרית המואבית׃"],["14","24","27","요아스의 아들들 이야기와 요아스에 관한 많은 신탁, 그리고 하느님의 집을 재건한 일들은 ‘임금들의 실록 주석서’에 쓰여 있다. 그의 아들 아마츠야가 그 뒤를 이어 임금이 되었다.","그의 아들들 이야기, 그를 쳐서 이르신 하느님의 많은 말씀, 하느님의 성전을 재건한 일들이 왕조 역사서에 기록되어 있다. 그의 아들 아마지야가 뒤를 이어 왕위에 올랐다.","요아스의 아들들의 사적과 요아스가 중대한 경책을 받은 것과 하나님의 전을 보수한 사적은 다 열왕기 주석에 기록되니라 그의 아들 아마샤가 대신하여 왕이 되니라","요아스의 아들들의 사적과 요아스의 중대한 경책을 받은 것과 하나님의 전 중수한 사적은 다 열왕기 주석에 기록되니라 그 아들 아마샤가 대신하여 왕이 되니라","요아스왕의 아들들의 명단이나 그를 규탄한 많은 예언자들의 말씀, 그리고 성전 보수에 관한 일들은 모두 역대 왕들의 행적을 기록한 열왕기의 주석책 속에 기록되어 있다. 요아스의 아들 아마샤가 그의 뒤를 이어 왕위에 올랐다.","An account of his sons, the great tribute imposed on him, and his rebuilding of the house of God is written in the midrash of the book of the kings. His son Amaziah succeeded him as king.","Now concerning his sons, and the greatness of the burdens laid upon him, and the repairing of the house of God, behold, they are written in the story of the book of the kings. And Amaziah his son reigned in his stead.","The account of his sons, the many prophecies about him, and the record of the restoration of the temple of God are written in the annotations on the book of the kings. And Amaziah his son succeeded him as king.","Porro de filiis eius, de summa tributi, quod impositum fuerat sub eo, et de instauratione domus Dei scriptum est in commentariis libri regum. Regnavitque Amasias filius eius pro eo.","ובניו ורב המשא עליו ויסוד בית האלהים הנם כתובים על מדרש ספר המלכים וימלך אמציהו בנו תחתיו׃"],["14","25","1","아마츠야는 스물다섯 살에 임금이 되어, 예루살렘에서 스물아홉 해 동안 다스렸다. 그의 어머니 이름은 여호아딴인데 예루살렘 출신이었다.","1)아마지야는 이십오 세에 왕위에 올라 예루살렘에서 이십구 년간 다스렸다. 그의 어머니는 예루살렘 출신으로 이름은 여호아딴이라 하였다.25:1-4에 대해서는 2열왕 14:1-6 참조.","아마샤가 왕위에 오를 때에 나이가 이십오 세라 예루살렘에서 이십구 년 동안 다스리니라 그의 어머니의 이름은 여호앗단이요 예루살렘 사람이더라","아마샤가 위에 나아갈 때에 나이 이십 오세라 예루살렘에서 이십 구년을 치리하니라 그 모친의 이름은 여호앗단이라 예루살렘 사람이더라","아마샤는 25세에 왕이 되어 29년 동안 예루살렘에서 다스렸다. 그의 어머니는 예루살렘 사람 여호앗단이었다.","Amaziah was twenty-five years old when he became king, and he reigned twenty-nine years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Jehoaddan, from Jerusalem.","Amaziah was twenty and five years old when he began to reign, and he reigned twenty and nine years in Jerusalem. And his mother's name was Jehoaddan of Jerusalem.","Amaziah was twenty-five years old when he became king, and he reigned in Jerusalem twenty-nine years. His mother's name was Jehoaddin; she was from Jerusalem.","Viginti quinque annorum erat Amasias, cum regnare coepisset, et viginti novem annis regnavit in Ierusalem. Nomen matris eius Ioaden de Ierusalem.","בן עשרים וחמש שנה מלך אמציהו ועשרים ותשע שנה מלך בירושלם ושם אמו יהועדן מירושלים׃"],["14","25","2","그는 주님의 눈에 드는 옳은 일을 하였지만, 한결같은 마음으로 하지는 않았다.","그는 마음을 다 쏟지는 못했지만, 야훼의 눈에 들도록 바른 정치를 폈다.","아마샤가 여호와께서 보시기에 정직하게 행하기는 하였으나 온전한 마음으로 행하지 아니하였더라","아마샤가 여호와 보시기에 정직히 행하기는 하였으나 온전한 마음으로 행치 아니하였더라","아마샤는 여호와의 마음에 맞는 일을 하였으나, 온전한 마음으로 여호와를 섬기지는 않았다.","He did what was right in the LORD’s sight, though not wholeheartedly.","And he did that which was right in the sight of the LORD, but not with a perfect heart.","He did what was right in the eyes of the LORD, but not wholeheartedly.","Fecitque bonum in conspectu Domini, verumtamen non in corde perfecto.","ויעש הישר בעיני יהוה רק לא בלבב שלם׃"],["14","25","3","그는 자기 왕권이 튼튼해지자 부왕을 시해한 신하들을 죽였다.","그는 왕권이 튼튼하게 되자 부왕을 죽인 신하들을 처형하였다.","그의 나라가 굳게 서매 그의 부왕을 죽인 신하들을 죽였으나","그 나라가 굳게 서매 그 부왕을 죽인 신복들을 죽였으나","그는 왕위에 올라 통치권을 굳게 잡은 다음 아버지 요아스를 죽인 신하들을 색출하여 처단하였다.","When he had the kingdom firmly in hand, he struck down the officials who had struck down the king, his father.","Now it came to pass, when the kingdom was established to him, that he slew his servants that had killed the king his father.","After the kingdom was firmly in his control, he executed the officials who had murdered his father the king.","Cumque roboratum sibi videret imperium, iugulavit servos suos, qui occiderant regem patrem suum,","ויהי כאשר חזקה הממלכה עליו ויהרג את עבדיו המכים את המלך אביו׃"],["14","25","4","그러나 모세의 율법서에 쓰인 대로, 그들의 자손들은 죽이지 않았다. 거기에서 주님께서는 “아버지가 아들 때문에 처형되어서도 안 되고, 아들이 아버지 때문에 처형되어서도 안 된다. 사람은 저마다 자기 죄에 따라 처형되어야 한다.” 하고 명령하셨다.","그러나 그 아들들은 죽이지 않았다. 그는 모세의 법전에 기록되어 있는 야훼의 명령을 따랐던 것이다. \"자식의 잘못 때문에 아비를 죽이지 못하고 아비의 잘못 때문에 자식을 죽이지 못한다. 죽을 사람은 죄지은 바로 그 사람이다.\"","그들의 자녀들은 죽이지 아니하였으니 이는 모세의 율법책에 기록된 대로 함이라 곧 여호와께서 명령하여 이르시기를 자녀로 말미암아 아버지를 죽이지 말 것이요 아버지로 말미암아 자녀를 죽이지 말 것이라 오직 각 사람은 자기의 죄로 말미암아 죽을 것이니라 하셨더라","저희 자녀는 죽이지 아니하였으니 이는 모세 율법 책에 기록한대로 함이라 곧 여호와께서 명하여 이르시기를 자녀로 인하여 아비를 죽이지 말 것이요 아비로 인하여 자녀를 죽이지 말 것이라 오직 각 사람은 자기의 죄로 인하여 죽을 것이니라 하셨더라","그러나 그들의 아들들까지 죽이지는 않아 다음과 같이 모세의 율법책에 기록된 여호와의 율법을 지켰다. \"자식들의 죄때문에 부모를 죽이지 말 것이요, 부모의 죄때문에 자식들도 죽이지 말 일이다. 누구나 자기 자신의 죄 때문에만 벌을 받을 것이다\"","But their children he did not put to death, for he acted according to what is written in the law, in the Book of Moses, which the LORD commanded: “Parents shall not be put to death for their children, nor shall children be put to death for their parents; they shall each die for their own sin.”","But he slew not their children, but did as it is written in the law in the book of Moses, where the LORD commanded, saying, The fathers shall not die for the children, neither shall the children die for the fathers, but every man shall die for his own sin.","Yet he did not put their sons to death, but acted in accordance with what is written in the Law, in the Book of Moses, where the LORD commanded: \"Fathers shall not be put to death for their children, nor children put to death for their fathers; each is to die for his own sins.\"","sed filios eorum non interfecit, sicut scriptum est in libro legis Moysi, ubi praecepit Dominus dicens:  “Non occidentur patres pro filiis, neque filii pro patribus suis, sed unusquisque in suo peccato morietur “.","ואת בניהם לא המית כי ככתוב בתורה בספר משה אשר צוה יהוה לאמר לא ימותו אבות על בנים ובנים לא ימותו על אבות כי איש בחטאו ימותו׃"],["14","25","5","아마츠야는 유다 사람들을 불러 모았다. 그런 다음에 온 유다와 벤야민 사람들을 집안별로 세워, 천인대장들과 백인대장들의 지휘 아래 두었다. 그가 스무 살 이상 된 사람들을 사열하여 보니, 삼십만 명이었다. 이들은 창과 큰 방패로 무장하여 군대에 나갈 수 있는 정병이었다.","아마지야가 유다에 소집령을 내려 온 유다 장정과 베냐민 장정을 천인대장 백인대장 아래 가문별로 세우고 점검하니, 이십 세 이상 되는 사람으로서 창과 방패를 쓸 수 있는 장정이 삼십만 명이나 되었다.","아마샤가 유다 사람들을 모으고 그 여러 족속을 따라 천부장들과 백부장들을 세우되 유다와 베냐민을 함께 그리하고 이십 세 이상으로 계수하여 창과 방패를 잡고 능히 전장에 나갈 만한 자 삼십만 명을 얻고","아마샤가 유다 사람을 모으고 그 여러 족속을 따라 천부장과 백부장을 세우되 유다와 베냐민을 함께 그리하고 이십세 이상으로 계수하여 창과 방패를 잡고 능히 전장에 나갈만한 자 삼십만을 얻고","아마샤는 유다 지파와 베냐민 지파의 남자들을 전국에서 징집하였다. 왕은 이들을 가문별로 부대를 편성하여 중대장과 대대장의 휘하에 두었다. 그리고 20세 이상된 남자들을 세어 보니 모두 30만 명이었다. 이들은 모두 창과 방패로 무장하고 싸울 수 있는 용감한 군인들이었다.","Amaziah gathered Judah and placed them, out of all Judah and Benjamin according to their ancestral houses, under leaders of thousands and of hundreds. When he made a count of those twenty years old and over, he found that there were three hundred thousand picked men fit for war, capable of handling lance and shield.","Moreover Amaziah gathered Judah together, and made them captains over thousands, and captains over hundreds, according to the houses of their fathers, throughout all Judah and Benjamin: and he numbered them from twenty years old and above, and found them three hundred thousand choice men, able to go forth to war, that could handle spear and shield.","Amaziah called the people of Judah together and assigned them according to their families to commanders of thousands and commanders of hundreds for all Judah and Benjamin. He then mustered those twenty years old or more and found that there were three hundred thousand men ready for military service, able to handle the spear and shield.","Congregavit igitur Amasias Iudam et constituit eos per familias tribunosque et centuriones in universo Iuda et Beniamin. Et recensuit a viginti annis sursum invenitque trecenta milia iuvenum, qui egrederentur ad pugnam et tenerent hastam et clipeum.","ויקבץ אמציהו את יהודה ויעמידם לבית אבות לשרי האלפים ולשרי המאות לכל יהודה ובנימן ויפקדם למבן עשרים שנה ומעלה וימצאם שלש מאות אלף בחור יוצא צבא אחז רמח וצנה׃"],["14","25","6","그는 또 은 백 탈렌트를 주고 이스라엘에서 용사 십만 명을 고용하였다.","그는 또 은 백 달란트를 주고 이스라엘에서 날랜 군인 십만 명을 사 왔다.","또 은 백 달란트로 이스라엘 나라에서 큰 용사 십만 명을 고용하였더니","또 은 일백 달란트로 이스라엘 나라에서 큰 용사 십만을 삯내었더니","왕은 은 100달란트를 주고 다시 북왕국 이스라엘에서 용병 10만 명을 사왔다.","He also hired a hundred thousand valiant warriors from Israel for a hundred talents of silver.","He hired also an hundred thousand mighty men of valour out of Israel for an hundred talents of silver.","He also hired a hundred thousand fighting men from Israel for a hundred talents of silver.","Mercede quoque conduxit de Israel centum milia robustorum centum talentis argenti.","וישכר מישראל מאה אלף גבור חיל במאה ככר כסף׃"],["14","25","7","그러나 하느님의 사람 하나가 그에게 와서 말하였다. “임금님, 이스라엘 군대를 데리고 나가지 마십시오. 주님께서 이스라엘, 곧 에프라임의 모든 자손과는 함께 계시지 않기 때문입니다.","그러자 한 하느님의 사람이 와서 이렇게 말하였다. \"임금님, 이스라엘 군을 거느리고 출동하지 마십시오. 야훼께서는 이스라엘 사람들, 이 모든 에브라임 족속들과는 함께 가지 않으십니다.","어떤 하나님의 사람이 아마샤에게 나아와서 이르되 왕이여 이스라엘 군대를 왕과 함께 가게 하지 마옵소서 여호와께서는 이스라엘 곧 온 에브라임 자손과 함께 하지 아니하시나니","어떤 하나님의 사람이 아마샤에게 나아와서 이르되 왕이여 이스라엘 군대로 왕과 함께 가게 마옵소서 여호와께서는 이스라엘 곧 온 에브라임 자손과 함께하지 아니하시나니","이때 한 예언자가 왕에게 와서 이렇게 말하였다. \"왕이여, 이스라엘 군인들을 집으로 돌려보내십시오! 여호와께서는 북왕국의 저 에브라임 족속들 편에 서 계시지 않습니다!","But a man of God came to him and said: “O king, let not the army of Israel go with you, for the LORD is not with Israel—with any Ephraimite.","But there came a man of God to him, saying, O king, let not the army of Israel go with thee; for the LORD is not with Israel, to wit, with all the children of Ephraim.","But a man of God came to him and said, \"O king, these troops from Israel must not march with you, for the LORD is not with Israel--not with any of the people of Ephraim.","Venit autem homo Dei ad illum et ait:  “O rex, ne egrediatur tecum exercitus Israel; non est enim Dominus cum Israel, cunctis filiis Ephraim.","ואיש האלהים בא אליו לאמר המלך אל יבא עמך צבא ישראל כי אין יהוה עם ישראל כל בני אפרים׃"],["14","25","8","차라리 유다군만 데리고 가셔서, 용감하게 싸우십시오. 그렇지 않으면 하느님께서 임금님을 원수 앞에서 넘어뜨리실 것입니다. 하느님께서는 도와주실 수도 있고 넘어뜨리실 수도 있는 능력을 지니고 계십니다.”","이 사람들이 나간다면 임금님께서 아무리 용감하게 싸우셔도 하느님께서는 임금님을 원수 앞에서 패하게 하실 것입니다. 하느님께서는 도와주실 수도 있으시고 넘어뜨리실 수도 있으십니다.\"","왕이 만일 가시거든 힘써 싸우소서 하나님이 왕을 적군 앞에 엎드러지게 하시리이다 하나님은 능히 돕기도 하시고 능히 패하게도 하시나이다 하니","왕이 만일 가시거든 힘써 싸우소서 하나님이 왕을 대적 앞에 엎드러지게 하시리이다 하나님은 능히 돕기도 하시고 능히 패하게도 하시나이다","만일 왕께서 그들을 데려가야만 전쟁에 이긴다 고집하시면, 하나님께서는 이 전쟁을 적군이 승리하도록 뒤집어 놓으실 것입니다. 하나님은 왕을 도울 수도 있고 방해할 수도 있으시기 때문입니다!\"","Instead, go on your own, strongly prepared for the battle; why should the LORD hinder you in the face of the enemy: for with God is power to help or to hinder.”","But if thou wilt go, do it; be strong for the battle: God shall make thee fall before the enemy: for God hath power to help, and to cast down.","Even if you go and fight courageously in battle, God will overthrow you before the enemy, for God has the power to help or to overthrow.\"","Quod si putas in robore exercitus bella consistere, superari te faciet Deus ab hostibus: Dei quippe est et adiuvare et in fugam vertere “.","כי אם בא אתה עשה חזק למלחמה יכשילך האלהים לפני אויב כי יש כח באלהים לעזור ולהכשיל׃"],["14","25","9","그러자 아마츠야가 하느님의 사람에게 물었다. “그러면 이스라엘 군대를 고용하느라고 지불한 백 탈렌트는 어떻게 하면 좋겠소?” 하느님의 사람이 대답하였다. “주님께서는 그보다 더 많은 것을 임금님께 주실 수 있습니다.”","아마지야가 그 하느님의 사람에게 물었다. \"그러면 이스라엘 부대에게 준 백 달란트는 어떻게 하면 좋겠소?\" 하느님의 사람이 대답하였다. \"하느님께서는 그보다 더 큰 것을 주실 수 있으십니다.\"","아마샤가 하나님의 사람에게 이르되 내가 백 달란트를 이스라엘 군대에게 주었으니 어찌할까 하나님의 사람이 말하되 여호와께서 능히 이보다 많은 것을 왕에게 주실 수 있나이다 하니라","아마샤가 하나님의 사람에게 이르되 내가 일백 달란트를 이스라엘 군대에게 주었으니 어찌할꼬 하나님의 사람이 대답하되 여호와께서 능히 이보다 많은 것으로 왕에게 주실수 있나이다","아마샤가 예언자에게 말하였다. \"나는 벌써 이스라엘의 용병들에게 100달란트나 되는 은을 주었는데, 지금 어떻게 손해만 보겠소?\" 하나님의 사람이 대답하였다. \"주께서는 그보다 더 많은 것을 왕에게 되돌려주실 것입니다.\"","Amaziah answered the man of God, “But what is to be done about the hundred talents that I paid for the troops of Israel?” The man of God replied, “The LORD can give you much more than that.”","And Amaziah said to the man of God, But what shall we do for the hundred talents which I have given to the army of Israel? And the man of God answered, The LORD is able to give thee much more than this.","Amaziah asked the man of God, \"But what about the hundred talents I paid for these Israelite troops?\" The man of God replied, \"The LORD can give you much more than that.\"","Dixitque Amasias ad hominem Dei:  “Quid ergo fiet de centum talentis, quae dedi militibus Israel? “. Et respondit ei homo Dei:  “Habet Dominus, unde tibi dare possit multo his plura “.","ויאמר אמציהו לאיש האלהים ומה לעשות למאת הככר אשר נתתי לגדוד ישראל ויאמר איש האלהים יש ליהוה לתת לך הרבה מזה׃"],["14","25","10","그래서 아마츠야는 에프라임에서 데려온 군대를 갈라내어, 제 고향으로 가게 하였다. 그러자 그들은 유다 백성에게 몹시 화를 내었다. 그리고 크게 화가 나 고향으로 돌아갔다.","아마지야는 에브라임에서 데려온 부대를 갈라내어 제 고장으로 돌려보내었다. 그들은 화가 나서 유다 나라에 큰 앙심을 품고 제 고장으로 돌아갔다.","아마샤가 이에 에브라임에서 자기에게 온 군대를 나누어 그들의 고향으로 돌아가게 하였더니 그 무리가 유다 사람에게 심히 노하여 분연히 고향으로 돌아갔더라","아마샤가 이에 에브라임에서 자기에게 나아온 군대를 구별하여 본곳으로 돌아가게 하였더니 저희 무리가 유다 사람을 심히 노하여 분연히 본곳으로 돌아갔더라","아마샤는 하나님께 순종하여 북왕국의 용병들을 고향으로 돌려보냈다. 그러자 이들은 출전하여 전리품을 나누어 갖지 못하고 그냥 돌아가게 된 것에 몹시 화가 나서 유다의 군인들이 에돔으로 출전하면 그 기회를 틈타 유다를 약탈하리라 벼르면서 돌아갔다.","Amaziah then disbanded the troops that had come to him from Ephraim, and sent them home. But they became furiously angry with Judah, and returned home blazing with anger.","Then Amaziah separated them, to wit, the army that was come to him out of Ephraim, to go home again: wherefore their anger was greatly kindled against Judah, and they returned home in great anger.","So Amaziah dismissed the troops who had come to him from Ephraim and sent them home. They were furious with Judah and left for home in a great rage.","Separavit itaque Amasias exercitum, qui venerat ad eum ex Ephraim, ut reverteretur in locum suum; at illi contra Iudam vehementer irati reversi sunt in regionem suam.","ויבדילם אמציהו להגדוד אשר בא אליו מאפרים ללכת למקומם ויחר אפם מאד ביהודה וישובו למקומם בחרי אף׃"],["14","25","11","아마츠야는 용기를 내어 군대를 거느리고 ‘소금 골짜기’로 가서, 세이르의 자손 만 명을 쳐 죽였다.","아마지야는 용기를 내어 군대를 거느리고 소금골짜기로 가서 세일 사람 만 명을 쳐죽이고","아마샤가 담력을 내어 그의 백성을 거느리고 소금 골짜기에 이르러 세일 자손 만 명을 죽이고","아마샤가 담력을 내어 그 백성을 거느리고 염곡에 이르러 세일 자손 일만을 죽이고","아마샤는 용기를 내어 유다 군대만을 이끌고 출전하였다. 그들은 브엘세바 동쪽의 소금골짜기로 들어가서 에돔 족속을 단번에 격파하여 1만명을 죽이고,","Amaziah now assumed command of his army. They proceeded to the Valley of Salt, where they killed ten thousand men of Seir.","And Amaziah strengthened himself, and led forth his people, and went to the valley of salt, and smote of the children of Seir ten thousand.","Amaziah then marshaled his strength and led his army to the Valley of Salt, where he killed ten thousand men of Seir.","Porro Amasias confidenter eduxit populum suum et abiit in vallem Salinarum percussitque filios Seir decem milia.","ואמציהו התחזק וינהג את עמו וילך גיא המלח ויך את בני שעיר עשרת אלפים׃"],["14","25","12","유다의 자손들은 또 만 명을 산 채로 붙잡아 바위 꼭대기로 끌고 갔다. 그들을 바위 꼭대기에서 내던지니, 모두 몸이 으스러졌다.","만 명을 사로잡아 바위 꼭대기로 끌고 올라가 그 바위 꼭대기에서 내리쳐 모두 박살내 죽였다.","유다 자손이 또 만 명을 사로잡아 가지고 바위 꼭대기에 올라가서 거기서 밀쳐 내려뜨려서 그들의 온 몸이 부서지게 하였더라","유다 자손이 또 일만을 사로잡아 가지고 바위 꼭대기에 올라가서 거기서 밀쳐 내려뜨려서 그 몸이 부숴지게 하였더라","또 포로로 생포한 1만 명은 높은 바위 언덕으로 끌고 가서 밑으로 밀어뜨려서 모조리 죽였다.","The Judahites also brought back another ten thousand alive, led them to the summit of Sela, and then threw them down from that rock so that their bodies split open.","And other ten thousand left alive did the children of Judah carry away captive, and brought them unto the top of the rock, and cast them down from the top of the rock, that they all were broken in pieces.","The army of Judah also captured ten thousand men alive, took them to the top of a cliff and threw them down so that all were dashed to pieces.","Et alia decem milia virorum ceperunt filii Iudae et adduxerunt ad praeruptum cuiusdam petrae praecipitaveruntque eos de summo in praeceps, qui universi crepuerunt.","ועשרת אלפים חיים שבו בני יהודה ויביאום לראש הסלע וישליכום מראש הסלע וכלם נבקעו׃"],["14","25","13","그러는 사이에 아마츠야가 전투에 데려가지 않고 돌려보낸 부대의 병사들이, 사마리아에서 벳 호론에 이르기까지 유다의 성읍들을 공격하여, 주민들을 삼천 명이나 죽이고 물건을 많이 약탈하였다.","그러는 동안 아마지야가 전장으로 데리고 가지 않고 돌려보냈던 부대는 사마리아에서 벳호론에 이르기까지 온 유다 성읍들을 털었으며, 그 가운데서 삼천 명이나 쳐죽이고 물건을 많이 약탈해 갔다.","아마샤가 자기와 함께 전장에 나가지 못하게 하고 돌려보낸 군사들이 사마리아에서부터 벧호론까지 유다 성읍들을 약탈하고 사람 삼천 명을 죽이고 물건을 많이 노략하였더라","아마샤가 자기와 함께 전장에 나가지 못하게 하고 돌려 보낸 군사들이 사마리아에서부터 벧호론까지 유다 성읍을 엄습하고 사람 삼천을 죽이고 물건을 많이 노략하였더라","바로 이때에 북왕국으로 돌아갔던 용병들은 사마리아와 벧호론 사이의 유다 성읍들을 습격하여 유다인 3천 명을 죽이고 많은 물건을 약탈해 갔다. 그들은 에돔에 출전하지 못하여 입은 손실을 이렇게 보충하였다.","Meanwhile, the troops Amaziah had dismissed from going into battle with him raided the cities of Judah from Samaria to Beth-horon. They struck down three thousand of the inhabitants and carried off much plunder.","But the soldiers of the army which Amaziah sent back, that they should not go with him to battle, fell upon the cities of Judah, from Samaria even unto Bethhoron, and smote three thousand of them, and took much spoil.","Meanwhile the troops that Amaziah had sent back and had not allowed to take part in the war raided Judean towns from Samaria to Beth Horon. They killed three thousand people and carried off great quantities of plunder.","At ille exercitus, quem remiserat Amasias, ne secum iret ad proelium, diffusus est in civitatibus Iudae a Samaria usque Bethoron et, interfectis tribus milibus, diripuit praedam magnam.","ובני הגדוד אשר השיב אמציהו מלכת עמו למלחמה ויפשטו בערי יהודה משמרון ועד בית חורון ויכו מהם שלשת אלפים ויבזו בזה רבה׃"],["14","25","14","아마츠야는 에돔인들을 치고 돌아온 다음, 세이르 자손들의 신상들을 가져와서 자기 신으로 내세우고, 그 앞에서 예배하며 향을 피웠다.","아마지야는 에돔 사람들을 치고 돌아온 다음, 세일 사람들이 섬기는 우상들을 가져다가 신으로 모시고 그 앞에 분향하며 예배하였다.","아마샤가 에돔 사람들을 죽이고 돌아올 때에 세일 자손의 신들을 가져와서 자기의 신으로 세우고 그것들 앞에 경배하며 분향한지라","아마샤가 에돔 사람을 도륙하고 돌아올 때에 세일 자손의 우상들을 가져다가 자기의 신으로 세우고 그 앞에 경배하며 분향한지라","아마샤는 주님의 도우심을 체험하고서도 쉽게 그것을 잊고 근동의 세속 왕들처럼 패전국의 신상들을 모아 가지고 돌아왔다. 그는 그 에돔의 신상들을 모셔 놓고, 그 앞에 분향을 하면서 경배하였다.","When Amaziah returned from his conquest of the Edomites he brought back with him the gods of the people of Seir. He set these up as his own gods; he bowed down before them and offered sacrifice to them.","Now it came to pass, after that Amaziah was come from the slaughter of the Edomites, that he brought the gods of the children of Seir, and set them up to be his gods, and bowed down himself before them, and burned incense unto them.","When Amaziah returned from slaughtering the Edomites, he brought back the gods of the people of Seir. He set them up as his own gods, bowed down to them and burned sacrifices to them.","Amasias vero, post caedem Idumaeorum et allatos deos filiorum Seir, statuit illos in deos sibi et adorabat eos et illis adolebat.","ויהי אחרי בוא אמציהו מהכות את אדומים ויבא את אלהי בני שעיר ויעמידם לו לאלהים ולפניהם ישתחוה ולהם יקטר׃"],["14","25","15","그러자 주님께서 아마츠야에게 노하시어, 예언자를 한 사람 보내셨다. 예언자가 그에게 말하였다. “어찌하여 임금님께서는 자기 백성을 임금님의 손에서 구해 내지도 못한, 다른 백성의 신들을 찾으십니까?”","그 때문에 야훼께서는 아마지야에게 크게 노하시어 예언자를 보내시었다. \"이 우상들은 제 백성을 임금님의 손에서 건져내지도 못했는데 이 우상들에게 복을 빌다니 어찌 된 일입니까?\"","그러므로 여호와께서 아마샤에게 진노하사 한 선지자를 그에게 보내시니 그가 이르되 저 백성의 신들이 그들의 백성을 왕의 손에서 능히 구원하지 못하였거늘 왕은 어찌하여 그 신들에게 구하나이까 하며","그러므로 여호와께서 아마샤에게 진노하사 한 선지자를 보내시니 나아가 가로되 저 백성의 신들이 자기 백성을 왕의 손에서 능히 구원하지 못하였거늘 왕은 어찌하여 그 신들에게 구하나이까 하며","그러자 주께서 아마샤에게 진노하시어 한 예언자를 보내어 이렇게 책망하게 하셨다. \"에돔 족속들을 멸망시킬 때에 그 백성을 보호해 주지도 못하던 에돔의 신들을 왕께서 이제 섬기는 이유가 무엇입니까?\"","Then the anger of the LORD blazed out against Amaziah, and he sent a prophet to him who said: “Why have you sought this people’s gods that could not deliver their own people from your power?”","Wherefore the anger of the LORD was kindled against Amaziah, and he sent unto him a prophet, which said unto him, Why hast thou sought after the gods of the people, which could not deliver their own people out of thine hand?","The anger of the LORD burned against Amaziah, and he sent a prophet to him, who said, \"Why do you consult this people's gods, which could not save their own people from your hand?\"","Quam ob rem iratus Dominus contra Amasiam misit ad illum prophetam, qui diceret ei:  “Cur adorasti deos, qui non liberaverunt populum suum de manu tua? “.","ויחר אף יהוה באמציהו וישלח אליו נביא ויאמר לו למה דרשת את אלהי העם אשר לא הצילו את עמם מידך׃"],["14","25","16","예언자가 이렇게 이야기하고 있는데, 임금이 그에게 말하였다. “우리가 너를 임금의 고문관으로 임명하기라도 했단 말이냐? 닥쳐라. 네가 어쩌자고 맞아 죽으려 하느냐?” 그러자 예언자는 하던 말을 그치고, 대신 이렇게 말하였다. “임금님께서 이런 일을 하시고도 제 조언을 듣지 않으시는 것을 보니, 하느님께서 임금님을 멸망시키시려고 작정하셨다는 것을 이제 알겠습니다.”","예언자가 이렇게 말을 꺼내는데, 왕은 \"네가 언제 왕의 고문이 되었더냐?\" 하면서 호통을 쳤다. \"입을 닥쳐라. 맞아죽고 싶으냐?\" 예언자는 하려던 말을 중단하고 이렇게 말하였다. \"알겠습니다. 임금님께서 이런 일을 하시고도 소인의 충고를 듣지 않으시는 것을 보니, 하느님께서 임금님을 멸하시기로 결정하신 모양입니다.\"","선지자가 아직 그에게 말할 때에 왕이 그에게 이르되 우리가 너를 왕의 모사로 삼았느냐 그치라 어찌하여 맞으려 하느냐 하니 선지자가 그치며 이르되 왕이 이 일을 행하고 나의 경고를 듣지 아니하니 하나님이 왕을 멸하시기로 작정하신 줄 아노라 하였더라","선지자가 오히려 말할 때에 왕이 이르되 우리가 너로 왕의 모사를 삼았느냐 그치라 어찌하여 맞으려 하느냐 선지자가 그치며 가로되 왕이 이 일을 행하고 나의 경고를 듣지 아니하니 하나님이 왕을 멸하시기로 결정하신줄 아노라 하였더라","그러나 아마샤는 그 예언자의 말을 가로막으며 소리쳤다. \"내가 언제 당신을 나의 스승으로 세워 놓기라도 했다는 말이오? 맞아죽고 싶지 않거든 당장 입을 닥치시오!\" 그러자 그 예언자가 더 이상 주님의 말씀을 전하지 않고 이 한마디만을 넘겼다. \"왕께서 이렇게 다른 신들을 섬기고 내가 전하는 말씀을 듣지 않는 것을 보니 주께서 왕을 죽이기로 작정하신 게 틀림없습니다.\"","While he was still speaking, however, the king said to him: “Have you been appointed the king’s counselor? Stop! Why should you have to be killed?” Therefore the prophet stopped. But he said, “I know that God’s counsel is your destruction, for by doing this you have refused to listen to my counsel.”","And it came to pass, as he talked with him, that the king said unto him, Art thou made of the king's counsel? forbear; why shouldest thou be smitten? Then the prophet forbare, and said, I know that God hath determined to destroy thee, because thou hast done this, and hast not hearkened unto my counsel.","While he was still speaking, the king said to him, \"Have we appointed you an adviser to the king? Stop! Why be struck down?\" So the prophet stopped but said, \"I know that God has determined to destroy you, because you have done this and have not listened to my counsel.\"","Cumque haec ille loqueretur, respondit ei:  “Num consiliarium regis fecimus te? Quiesce! Cur interficiam te? “. Discedensque propheta:  “Sed scio, inquit, quod decrevit Deus occidere te, quia fecisti hoc et non acquievisti consilio meo “.","ויהי בדברו אליו ויאמר לו הליועץ למלך נתנוך חדל לך למה יכוך ויחדל הנביא ויאמר ידעתי כי יעץ אלהים להשחיתך כי עשית זאת ולא שמעת לעצתי׃"],["14","25","17","유다 임금 아마츠야는 사람들과 의논한 다음, 예후의 손자이며 여호아하즈의 아들인, 이스라엘 임금 여호아스에게 사람을 보내어 이렇게 말하였다. “자, 우리 한번 겨루어 보자!”","2)유다 왕 아마지야는 수하 사람들과 의논하고 이스라엘 왕 여호아스에게 사람을 보내어 싸움을 걸었다. 여호아스는 여호아하즈의 아들이요 예후의 손자였다.25:17-24에 대해서는 2열왕 14:8-14 참조.","유다 왕 아마샤가 상의하고 예후의 손자 여호아하스의 아들 이스라엘 왕 요아스에게 사신을 보내어 이르되 오라 서로 대면하자 한지라","유다 왕 아마샤가 상의하고 예후의 손자 여호아하스의 아들 이스라엘 왕 요아스에게 사자를 보내어 이르되 오라 서로 대면하자 한지라","유다 왕 아마샤가 의로운 예언자의 경고를 무시하고 아부만 일삼는 악한 신하들의 권면을 달게 받아 북왕국 이스라엘과 전쟁을 하기로 결심하였다. 그는 예후의 손자이며 여호아하스의 아들인 이스라엘의 요아스왕에게 사절단을 파견하여 이렇게 전하였다. \"우리 둘 중에서 누가 더 힘이 센지 서로 전쟁으로 결판을 내 알아봅시다!\" 에돔 전쟁에서 승리한 아마샤는 한껏 건방지고 대담해져 이렇게 큰소리를 친 것이다.","Having taken counsel, Amaziah, king of Judah, sent word to Joash, son of Jehoahaz, son of Jehu, the king of Israel, saying, “Come, let us meet face to face.”","Then Amaziah king of Judah took advice, and sent to Joash, the son of Jehoahaz, the son of Jehu, king of Israel, saying, Come, let us see one another in the face.","After Amaziah king of Judah consulted his advisers, he sent this challenge to Jehoash son of Jehoahaz, the son of Jehu, king of Israel: \"Come, meet me face to face.\"","Igitur Amasias rex Iudae, inito consilio, misit ad Ioas filium Ioachaz filii Iehu regem Israel dicens:  “Veni, videamus nos mutuo! “.","ויועץ אמציהו מלך יהודה וישלח אל יואש בן יהואחז בן יהוא מלך ישראל לאמר לך נתראה פנים׃"],["14","25","18","그러나 이스라엘 임금 여호아스는 유다 임금 아마츠야에게 사람을 보내어 이렇게 대답하였다. “레바논의 엉겅퀴가 레바논의 향백나무에게 ‘그대의 딸을 내 아들에게 아내로 주오.’ 하고 전갈을 보냈다. 그러자 레바논의 들짐승이 지나가다가 그 엉겅퀴를 밟아 버렸다.","이스라엘 왕 여호아스는 유다 왕 아마지야에게 다음과 같은 회신을 보냈다. \"레바논의 가시나무가 레바논의 송백에게 딸을 며느리로 달라고 청혼하였다가 지나가던 레바논의 들짐승에게 짓밟히는 신세가 되었다.","이스라엘 왕 요아스가 유다 왕 아마샤에게 사람을 보내어 이르되 레바논 가시나무가 레바논 백향목에게 전갈을 보내어 이르기를 네 딸을 내 아들에게 주어 아내로 삼게 하라 하였더니 레바논 들짐승이 지나가다가 그 가시나무를 짓밟았느니라","이스라엘 왕 요아스가 유다 왕 아마샤에게 보내어 이르되 레바논 가시나무가 레바논 백향목에게 보내어 이르기를 네 딸을 내 아들에게 주어 아내를 삼게 하라 하였더니 레바논 짐승이 지나가다가 그 가시나무를 짓밟았느니라","그러나 요아스왕은 단호하면서도 점잖은 답서를 보냈다. \"레바논산의 가시덤불이 레바논산에 있는 송백에게 \"네 딸을 내 아들의 아내로 달라!\"고 하였더니 레바논의 들짐승들이 가시덤불을 밟고 뛰어다녀 짓이겨 버렸소.","Joash, king of Israel, sent this reply to Amaziah, king of Judah: “A thistle of Lebanon sent word to a cedar of Lebanon, ‘Give your daughter to my son in marriage,’ but an animal of Lebanon passed by and trampled the thistle underfoot.","And Joash king of Israel sent to Amaziah king of Judah, saying, The thistle that was in Lebanon sent to the cedar that was in Lebanon, saying, Give thy daughter to my son to wife: and there passed by a wild beast that was in Lebanon, and trode down the thistle.","But Jehoash king of Israel replied to Amaziah king of Judah: \"A thistle in Lebanon sent a message to a cedar in Lebanon, 'Give your daughter to my son in marriage.' Then a wild beast in Lebanon came along and trampled the thistle underfoot.","At ille remisit nuntium dicens:  “Carduus, qui est in Libano, misit ad cedrum Libani dicens: “Da filiam tuam filio meo uxorem”. Et ecce bestiae agri, quae erant in Libano, transierunt et conculcaverunt carduum.","וישלח יואש מלך ישראל אל אמציהו מלך יהודה לאמר החוח אשר בלבנון שלח אל הארז אשר בלבנון לאמר תנה את בתך לבני לאשה ותעבר חית השדה אשר בלבנון ותרמס את החוח׃"],["14","25","19","그대는 에돔을 쳐부수었다고 말하며 마음이 우쭐해져 오만하게 구는데, 그냥 집에나 머물러 있어라. 어찌하여 재앙을 일으켜 그대 자신과 유다를 함께 쓰러뜨리려 하는가?”","그대는 에돔을 쳐 이겼다고 하여 목에 힘을 주고 우쭐거리는데 혼자 집 안에 머물러 있어라. 어찌하여 그대의 신세와 유다의 운명을 망치려고 스스로 설치는가?\"","네가 에돔 사람들을 쳤다고 네 마음이 교만하여 자긍하는도다 네 궁에나 있으라 어찌하여 화를 자초하여 너와 유다가 함께 망하고자 하느냐 하나","네가 에돔 사람을 쳤다 하고 네 마음이 교만하여 자긍하는도다 네 궁에나 편히 거하라 어찌하여 화를 자취하여 너와 유다가 함께 망하고자 하느냐 하나","그대가 에돔 족속을 쳐서 이기더니 무서운 사람이 없어진 모양이오. 차라리 에돔의 승리로 만족하고 조용히 지내시오. 무엇 때문에 그대도 비운에 죽고, 온 유다도 재앙에 빠뜨리려 하시오.?\"","You are thinking, ‘See, I have struck down Edom!’ Your heart is lifted up, And glories in it. Stay home! Why bring misfortune and failure on yourself and on Judah with you?”","Thou sayest, Lo, thou hast smitten the Edomites; and thine heart lifteth thee up to boast: abide now at home; why shouldest thou meddle to thine hurt, that thou shouldest fall, even thou, and Judah with thee?","You say to yourself that you have defeated Edom, and now you are arrogant and proud. But stay at home! Why ask for trouble and cause your own downfall and that of Judah also?\"","Dixisti: “Percussi Edom!”. Et idcirco erigitur cor tuum in superbiam. Sede in domo tua! Cur malum adversum te provocas, ut cadas et tu et Iuda tecum? “.","אמרת הנה הכית את אדום ונשאך לבך להכביד עתה שבה בביתך למה תתגרה ברעה ונפלת אתה ויהודה עמך׃"],["14","25","20","그러나 아마츠야는 그 말을 들으려 하지 않았다. 이는 하느님의 뜻이었다. 유다 사람들이 에돔의 신들을 찾았기 때문에, 하느님께서 그들을 적의 손에 넘기시려는 것이었다.","그러나 아마지야는 그 말을 들으려 하지 않았다. 에돔의 우상들에게 복을 비는 것을 보시고 하느님께서는 그들을 적군의 손에 부치시기로 결정하셨던 것이다.","아마샤가 듣지 아니하였으니 이는 하나님께로 말미암은 것이라 그들이 에돔 신들에게 구하였으므로 그 대적의 손에 넘기려 하심이더라","아마샤가 듣지 아니하였으니 이는 하나님께로 말미암은 것이라 저희가 에돔 신들에게 구하였으므로 그 대적의 손에 붙이려 하심이더라","그러나 아마샤는 결심을 꺾지 않았다. 이것은 하나님께서 그를 죽이려고 계획하신 일이기 때문이었다. 유다 백성들이 에돔 족속의 신들을 섬겼기 때문에 하나님께서는 유다 백성을 이스라엘 왕의 손에 넘겨 주기로 작정하셨던 것이다. 이것은 이미 예언자가 예고한 일의 성취였다.","But Amaziah did not listen; for it was God’s doing that they be handed over because they sought the gods of Edom.","But Amaziah would not hear; for it came of God, that he might deliver them into the hand of their enemies, because they sought after the gods of Edom.","Amaziah, however, would not listen, for God so worked that he might hand them over to Jehoash, because they sought the gods of Edom.","Noluit audire Amasias, eo quod Domini esset voluntas, ut traderetur in manibus hostium propter cultum deorum Edom.","ולא שמע אמציהו כי מהאלהים היא למען תתם ביד כי דרשו את אלהי אדום׃"],["14","25","21","그리하여 이스라엘 임금 여호아스가 올라와, 유다에 속한 벳 세메스에서 유다 임금 아마츠야와 겨루었다.","그리하여 이스라엘 왕 여호아스는 유다 영토인 벳세메스로 진군하여 거기에서 유다 왕 아마지야와 맞붙었다.","이스라엘 왕 요아스가 올라와서 유다 왕 아마샤와 더불어 유다의 벧세메스에서 대면하였더니","이스라엘 왕 요아스가 올라와서 유다 왕 아마샤로 더불어 유다의 벧세메스에서 대면하였더니","북왕국의 요아스왕이 대군을 거느리고 밀어닥쳐 예루살렘 서쪽 24킬로미터 지점의 벧세메스에서 두나라의 군대가 격돌하였다.","So Joash, king of Israel, advanced, and he and Amaziah, king of Judah, met face to face at Beth-shemesh of Judah,","So Joash the king of Israel went up; and they saw one another in the face, both he and Amaziah king of Judah, at Bethshemesh, which belongeth to Judah.","So Jehoash king of Israel attacked. He and Amaziah king of Judah faced each other at Beth Shemesh in Judah.","Ascendit igitur Ioas rex Israel, et mutuos sibi praebuere conspectus: ipse et Amasias rex Iudae in Bethsames Iudae.","ויעל יואש מלך ישראל ויתראו פנים הוא ואמציהו מלך יהודה בבית שמש אשר ליהודה׃"],["14","25","22","유다군은 이스라엘군에게 패배하여 저마다 자기 천막으로 도망쳤다.","유다 군은 이스라엘 군에게 패하여 제각기 자기 집으로 도망쳤다.","유다가 이스라엘 앞에서 패하여 각기 장막으로 도망한지라","유다가 이스라엘 앞에서 패하여 각기 장막으로 도망한지라","결과는 뻔하여 유다군은 격파되어 모조리 집으로 도망갔다.","and Judah was defeated by Israel, and all fled to their tents.","And Judah was put to the worse before Israel, and they fled every man to his tent.","Judah was routed by Israel, and every man fled to his home.","Corruitque Iuda coram Israel et fugit in tabernacula sua.","וינגף יהודה לפני ישראל וינסו איש לאהליו׃"],["14","25","23","이스라엘 임금 여호아스는 아하즈야의 손자이며 요아스의 아들인, 유다 임금 아마츠야를 벳 세메스에서 사로잡아 예루살렘으로 데리고 왔다. 그리고 ‘에프라임 성문’에서 ‘모퉁이 성문’까지, 예루살렘 성벽 사백 암마를 무너뜨렸다.","이스라엘 왕 여호아스는 벳세메스에서 아하지야의 손자이며 요아스의 아들인 유다 왕 아마지야를 사로잡아 예루살렘에 돌아왔다. 그는 에브라임 성문과 모퉁이 성문 사이 성벽을 사백 척이나 헐고는","이스라엘 왕 요아스가 벧세메스에서 여호아하스의 손자 요아스의 아들 유다 왕 아마샤를 사로잡고 예루살렘에 이르러 예루살렘 성벽을 에브라임 문에서부터 성 모퉁이 문까지 사백 규빗을 헐고","이스라엘 왕 요아스가 벧세메스에서 여호아하스의 손자 요아스의 아들 유다 왕 아마샤를 사로잡고 예루살렘에 이르러 예루살렘 성벽을 에브라임 문에서부터 성 모퉁이 문까지 사백 규빗을 헐고","아마샤도 벧세메스에서 요아스에게 붙잡혀 예루살렘으로 끌려가면서 자기 백성들이 보는 앞에서 수모를 당하였다. 요아스는 북왕국으로 향하는 예루살렘 성벽을 완전히 허물어 버렸는데, 그 길이가 에브라임문에서 모퉁이문에 이르기까지 200미터나 되었다.","But Amaziah, king of Judah, son of Joash, son of Jehoahaz, was captured by Joash, king of Israel, at Beth-shemesh. Joash brought him to Jerusalem and tore down the wall of Jerusalem from the Gate of Ephraim to the Corner Gate, four hundred cubits.","And Joash the king of Israel took Amaziah king of Judah, the son of Joash, the son of Jehoahaz, at Bethshemesh, and brought him to Jerusalem, and brake down the wall of Jerusalem from the gate of Ephraim to the corner gate, four hundred cubits.","Jehoash king of Israel captured Amaziah king of Judah, the son of Joash, the son of Ahaziah, at Beth Shemesh. Then Jehoash brought him to Jerusalem and broke down the wall of Jerusalem from the Ephraim Gate to the Corner Gate--a section about six hundred feet long.","Porro Amasiam regem Iudae filium Ioas filii Ioachaz cepit Ioas rex Israel in Bethsames et adduxit in Ierusalem destruxitque murum eius a porta Ephraim usque ad portam Anguli quadringentis cubitis.","ואת אמציהו מלך יהודה בן יואש בן יהואחז תפש יואש מלך ישראל בבית שמש ויביאהו ירושלם ויפרץ בחומת ירושלם משער אפרים עד שער הפונה ארבע מאות אמה׃"],["14","25","24","그는 하느님의 집 안에서 오벳 에돔이 맡고 있던 모든 금과 은과 기물, 그리고 왕궁의 보물들을 빼앗고, 인질까지 잡아 사마리아로 돌아갔다.","하느님의 전에서 오베데돔이 맡고 있는 금은과 세간을 모두 털고, 왕실 창고도 털고 사람들을 볼모로 잡아 사마리아로 돌아갔다.","또 하나님의 전 안에서 오벧에돔이 지키는 모든 금은과 그릇과 왕궁의 재물을 빼앗고 또 사람들을 볼모로 잡아 가지고 사마리아로 돌아갔더라","또 하나님의 전 안에 오벧에돔의 지키는 모든 금은과 기명과 왕궁의 재물을 취하고 또 사람을 볼모로 잡아가지고 사마리아로 돌아갔더라","그는 오벧에돔이 지키던 성전의 모든 금은 보화와 귀중품들을 약탈하고, 왕궁의 보물들도 모조리 빼앗아 수많은 인질들과 함께 사마리아로 실어 갔다.","He took all the gold and silver and all the vessels found in the house of God with Obed-edom, and in the treasuries of the king’s house, and hostages as well. Then he returned to Samaria.","And he took all the gold and the silver, and all the vessels that were found in the house of God with Obededom, and the treasures of the king's house, the hostages also, and returned to Samaria.","He took all the gold and silver and all the articles found in the temple of God that had been in the care of Obed-Edom, together with the palace treasures and the hostages, and returned to Samaria.","Omne quoque aurum et argentum et universa vasa, quae repererat in domo Dei et apud Obededom in thesauris etiam domus regiae, necnon et obsides reduxit Samariam.","וכל הזהב והכסף ואת כל הכלים הנמצאים בבית האלהים עם עבד אדום ואת אצרות בית המלך ואת בני התערבות וישב שמרון׃"],["14","25","25","유다 임금 요아스의 아들 아마츠야는 이스라엘 임금 여호아하즈의 아들 여호아스가 죽은 뒤에도 열다섯 해를 더 살았다.","유다 왕 요아스의 아들 아마지야는 이스라엘 왕 여호아하즈의 아들 여호아스보다 십오 년을 더 살았다.","이스라엘 왕 요아하스의 아들 요아스가 죽은 후에도 유다 왕 요아스의 아들 아마샤가 십오 년 간 생존하였더라","이스라엘 왕 요아하스의 아들 요아스가 죽은 후에도 유다 왕 요아스의 아들 아마샤가 십 오년을 생존하였더라","나라에 전쟁을 불러들이고, 패전한 뒤에는 인질의 신세가 되어 목숨만을 부지하던 유다 왕 아마샤는 더 이상 왕의 위엄을 떨치지 못하였다. 그런데도 그는 이스라엘 왕 요아스보다 15년이나 더 살았다.","Amaziah, son of Joash, king of Judah, survived Joash, son of Jehoahaz, king of Israel, by fifteen years.","And Amaziah the son of Joash king of Judah lived after the death of Joash son of Jehoahaz king of Israel fifteen years.","Amaziah son of Joash king of Judah lived for fifteen years after the death of Jehoash son of Jehoahaz king of Israel.","Vixit autem Amasias filius Ioas rex Iudae, postquam mortuus est Ioas filius Ioachaz rex Israel, quindecim annis.","ויחי אמציהו בן יואש מלך יהודה אחרי מות יואש בן יהואחז מלך ישראל חמש עשרה שנה׃"],["14","25","26","아마츠야의 나머지 행적은 처음부터 끝까지 유다와 이스라엘 임금들의 실록에 쓰여 있지 않은가?","아마지야의 나머지 역사는 처음부터 끝까지 유다 왕조실록과 이스라엘 왕조실록에 기록되어 있다.","아마샤의 이 외의 처음부터 끝까지의 행적은 유다와 이스라엘 열왕기에 기록되지 아니하였느냐","아마샤의 이 외의 시종 행적은 유다와 이스라엘 열왕기에 기록되지 아니하였느냐","아마샤에 대하여 더 이야기할 수 있는 것은 처음부터 끝까지 유다와 이스라엘 역대 왕들의 책 열왕기에서 읽을 수 있다.","The rest of the acts of Amaziah, first and last, are recorded in the book of the kings of Judah and Israel.","Now the rest of the acts of Amaziah, first and last, behold, are they not written in the book of the kings of Judah and Israel?","As for the other events of Amaziah's reign, from beginning to end, are they not written in the book of the kings of Judah and Israel?","Reliqua vero gestorum Amasiae priorum et novissimorum scripta sunt in libro regum Iudae et Israel.","ויתר דברי אמציהו הראשנים והאחרונים הלא הנם כתובים על ספר מלכי יהודה וישראל׃"],["14","25","27","아마츠야가 주님을 따르지 않고 돌아선 그때부터 예루살렘에서 그를 거슬러 모반이 일어났다. 그래서 아마츠야가 라키스로 도망쳤지만, 모반자들은 그의 뒤를 쫓아 라키스까지 사람을 보내어 거기에서 그를 죽였다.","아마지야가 야훼를 배반한 후에 예루살렘에서 반란이 일어났다. 아마지야는 라기스로 도망하였으나, 반란군은 라기스에 사람을 보내어 거기에서 그를 죽였다.","아마샤가 돌아서서 여호와를 버린 후로부터 예루살렘에서 무리가 그를 반역하였으므로 그가 라기스로 도망하였더니 반역한 무리가 사람을 라기스로 따라 보내어 그를 거기서 죽이게 하고","아마샤가 돌이켜 여호와를 버린 후로부터 예루살렘에서 무리가 저를 모반한고로 저가 라기스로 도망하였더니 모반한 무리가 사람을 라기스로 따라 보내어 저를 거기서 죽이게 하고","아마샤가 여호와를 버리고 떠나서 예언자를 탄압하기 시작하자 예루살렘 왕궁의 신하들은 그를 죽이기로 모의하였다. 아마샤는 이를 알고 예루살렘 남서쪽 약 45킬로미터 지점에 있는 라기스로 피하였으나, 신하들이 그곳으로 사람을 보내어 왕을 죽였다.","Now from the time that Amaziah turned away from the LORD, a conspiracy was formed against him in Jerusalem, and he fled to Lachish. But he was pursued to Lachish and killed there.","Now after the time that Amaziah did turn away from following the LORD they made a conspiracy against him in Jerusalem; and he fled to Lachish: but they sent to Lachish after him, and slew him there.","From the time that Amaziah turned away from following the LORD, they conspired against him in Jerusalem and he fled to Lachish, but they sent men after him to Lachish and killed him there.","Qui postquam recessit a Domino, tetenderunt ei insidias in Ierusalem; cumque fugisset Lachis, miserunt post eum in Lachis et interfecerunt eum ibi.","ומעת אשר סר אמציהו מאחרי יהוה ויקשרו עליו קשר בירושלם וינס לכישה וישלחו אחריו לכישה וימיתהו שם׃"],["14","25","28","그리고 아마츠야를 말에 싣고 와서, 다윗 성에 그의 조상들과 함께 묻었다.","그러나 그의 시체는 말에 실어 예루살렘으로 모셔다가 다윗 성에 있는 왕실 묘지에 안장하였다.","그의 시체를 말에 실어다가 그의 조상들과 함께 유다 성읍에 장사하였더라","그 시체를 말에 실어다가 그 열조와 함께 유다 성읍에 장사하였더라","사람들은 그의 시체를 마차로 실어다가 예루살렘의 다윗성에 있는 선왕들의 무덤에 안장하였다.","He was brought back on horses and was buried with his ancestors in the City of Judah.","And they brought him upon horses, and buried him with his fathers in the city of Judah.","He was brought back by horse and was buried with his fathers in the City of Judah.","Reportantesque super equos sepelierunt eum cum patribus suis in civitate David.","וישאהו על הסוסים ויקברו אתו עם אבתיו בעיר יהודה׃"],["14","26","1","유다의 모든 백성이 나이 열여섯 살인 우찌야를 데려다가, 그의 아버지 아마츠야의 뒤를 이어 임금으로 세웠다.","온 유다 백성이 십육 세밖에 되지 않은 우찌야를 택하여 왕으로 세워 아버지 아마지야의 뒤를 잇게 하였다.","유다 온 백성이 나이가 십육 세 된 웃시야를 세워 그의 아버지 아마샤를 대신하여 왕으로 삼으니","유다 온 백성이 웃시야로 그 부친 아마샤를 대신하여 왕을 삼으니 때에 나이 십륙세라","유다 온 백성들이 아사랴를 데려다가 그의 아버지 아마샤를 대신하여 왕을 삼고 웃시야왕이라고 불렀다. 그는 16세에 왕이 되어","All the people of Judah took Uzziah, who was only sixteen years old, and made him king to succeed Amaziah his father.","Then all the people of Judah took Uzziah, who was sixteen years old, and made him king in the room of his father Amaziah.","Then all the people of Judah took Uzziah, who was sixteen years old, and made him king in place of his father Amaziah.","Omnis autem populus Iudae Oziam annorum sedecim constituit regem pro patre suo Amasia.","ויקחו כל עם יהודה את עזיהו והוא בן שש עשרה שנה וימליכו אתו תחת אביו אמציהו׃"],["14","26","2","아마츠야가 자기 조상들과 함께 잠든 뒤에, 우찌야는 엘랏을 재건하여 유다에 복귀시켰다.","그는 부왕이 세상을 떠난 다음 엘롯을 되찾아 유다의 성으로 다시 세웠다.","아마샤 왕이 그의 열조들의 묘실에 누운 후에 웃시야가 엘롯을 건축하여 유다에 돌렸더라","왕이 그 열조와 함께 잔 후에 웃시야가 엘롯을 건축하여 유다에 돌렸더라","여호람 시대에 빼앗겼던 아카바만 북단의 항구 도시 엘롯을 에돔 족속에게서 다시 빼앗아 요새화하였다.","It was he who rebuilt Elath and restored it to Judah, after the king rested with his ancestors.","He built Eloth, and restored it to Judah, after that the king slept with his fathers.","He was the one who rebuilt Elath and restored it to Judah after Amaziah rested with his fathers.","Ipse reaedificavit Ailath et restituit eam dicioni Iudae, postquam dormivit rex cum patribus suis.","הוא בנה את אילות וישיבה ליהודה אחרי שכב המלך עם אבתיו׃"],["14","26","3","우찌야는 열여섯 살에 임금이 되어, 예루살렘에서 쉰두 해 동안 다스렸다. 그의 어머니 이름은 여콜야인데 예루살렘 출신이었다.","1)우찌야는 십육 세에 왕위에 올라 예루살렘에서 오십이 년간 다스렸다. 그의 어머니는 예루살렘 출신으로서 이름을 여골리야라고 하였다.3-4절에 대해서는 2열왕 15:2-3 참조.","웃시야가 왕위에 오를 때에 나이가 십육 세라 예루살렘에서 오십이 년 간 다스리니라 그의 어머니의 이름은 여골리아요 예루살렘 사람이더라","웃시야가 위에 나아갈 때에 나이 십륙세라 예루살렘에서 오십 이년을 치리하니라 그 모친의 이름은 여골리아라 예루살렘 사람이더라","웃시야는 16세에 왕위에 올라 52년 동안 예루살렘에서 다스렸다. 그의 어머니는 예루살렘 사람 여골리아였다.","Uzziah was sixteen years old when he became king, and he reigned fifty-two years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Jecoliah, from Jerusalem.","Sixteen years old was Uzziah when he began to reign, and he reigned fifty and two years in Jerusalem. His mother's name also was Jecoliah of Jerusalem.","Uzziah was sixteen years old when he became king, and he reigned in Jerusalem fifty-two years. His mother's name was Jecoliah; she was from Jerusalem.","Sedecim annorum erat Ozias, cum regnare coepisset, et quinquaginta duobus annis regnavit in Ierusalem. Nomen matris eius Iechelia de Ierusalem.","בן שש עשרה שנה עזיהו במלכו וחמשים ושתים שנה מלך בירושלם ושם אמו יכיליה מן ירושלם׃"],["14","26","4","그는 자기 아버지 아마츠야가 하던 그대로, 주님의 눈에 드는 옳은 일을 하였다.","그는 부왕 아마지야 못지않게 야훼 보시기에 옳은 일을 하였다.","웃시야가 그의 아버지 아마샤의 모든 행위대로 여호와 보시기에 정직하게 행하며","웃시야가 그 부친 아마샤의 모든 행위대로 여호와 보시기에 정직히 행하며","그는 아버지 아마샤의 초기 행적을 본받아 주님의 마음에 맞는 행동을 하였다.","He did what was right in the LORD’s sight, just as his father Amaziah had done.","And he did that which was right in the sight of the LORD, according to all that his father Amaziah did.","He did what was right in the eyes of the LORD, just as his father Amaziah had done.","Fecitque, quod erat rectum in oculis Domini iuxta omnia, quae fecerat Amasias pater eius.","ויעש הישר בעיני יהוה ככל אשר עשה אמציהו אביו׃"],["14","26","5","우찌야는, 하느님을 경외하도록 가르쳐 준 즈카르야가 살아 있는 동안에는 하느님을 찾았다. 그리고 그가 주님을 찾는 동안, 하느님께서는 그가 성공하도록 해 주셨다.","그의 곁에는 하느님을 공경하도록 깨우쳐주는 사람 즈가리야가 있었는데, 즈가리야 생전에 그는 하느님을 찾았고, 야훼를 찾았으며 그 동안 하느님께서는 그가 하는 일을 성취시켜 주셨다.","하나님의 묵시를 밝히 아는 스가랴가 사는 날에 하나님을 찾았고 그가 여호와를 찾을 동안에는 하나님이 형통하게 하셨더라","하나님의 묵시를 밝히 아는 스가랴의 사는 날에 하나님을 구하였고 저가 여호와를 구할 동안에는 하나님이 형통케 하셨더라","예언자 스가랴가 살아있는 동안에는 웃시야왕이 하나님을 두려워하고 옳은 일들만 하였다. 또 그가 스가랴의 교훈을 받아 하나님께 순종하며 사는 동안에는 하나님께서도 그에게 모든 일이 다 잘 이루어지게 해주셨다.","He was prepared to seek God as long as Zechariah lived, who taught him to fear God; and as long as he sought the LORD, God made him prosper.","And he sought God in the days of Zechariah, who had understanding in the visions of God: and as long as he sought the LORD, God made him to prosper.","He sought God during the days of Zechariah, who instructed him in the fear of God. As long as he sought the LORD, God gave him success.","Et exquisivit Deum in diebus Zachariae, qui erudivit eum in timore Dei; et quamdiu requirebat Dominum, eum prosperari fecit Deus.","ויהי לדרש אלהים בימי זכריהו המבין בראת האלהים ובימי דרשו את יהוה הצליחו האלהים׃"],["14","26","6","우찌야는 출동하여 필리스티아인들과 싸워서, 갓의 성벽과 야브네의 성벽과 아스돗의 성벽을 무너뜨렸다. 그러고 나서 아스돗을 비롯하여 필리스티아인들의 지역에 성읍들을 세웠다.","우찌야는 불레셋 사람들을 치려고 출동하여 갓 성과 야브네 성과 아스돗 성을 허물고는 아스돗을 비롯한 불레셋 지역에 성읍들을 세웠다.","웃시야가 나가서 블레셋 사람들과 싸우고 가드 성벽과 야브네 성벽과 아스돗 성벽을 헐고 아스돗 땅과 블레셋 사람들 가운데에 성읍들을 건축하매","웃시야가 나가서 블레셋 사람과 싸우고 가드성과 야브네성과 아스돗성을 헐고 아스돗 땅과 블레셋 사람 가운데 성읍들을 건축하매","그 당시 북쪽으로는 정벌이 불가능하였기 때문에, 웃시야왕이 동쪽과 서쪽으로 진출하였다. 그는 우선 블레셋을 치러 출전하였다. 이때에 그는 다음 세 성읍의 성벽을 모조리 허물어뜨렸다. 예루살렘에서 남서쪽으로 40킬로미터 지점에 있는 가드성, 예루살렘에서 서쪽으로 약 50킬로미터 지점에 있는 유다 국경 성읍 야브네성, 가드에서 북쪽으로 약 20킬로미터 지점에 있는 해안 성읍 아스돗성. 웃시야는 이렇게 서쪽으로 국경을 넓힌 다음 아스돗을 비롯한 블레셋 족속의 여러 지역에 요새 성읍들을 건축하여 국경선을 튼튼히 하였다.","He went out and fought the Philistines and razed the walls of Gath, Jabneh, and Ashdod, and built cities in the district of Ashdod and in Philistia.","And he went forth and warred against the Philistines, and brake down the wall of Gath, and the wall of Jabneh, and the wall of Ashdod, and built cities about Ashdod, and among the Philistines.","He went to war against the Philistines and broke down the walls of Gath, Jabneh and Ashdod. He then rebuilt towns near Ashdod and elsewhere among the Philistines.","Denique egressus est et pugnavit contra Philisthim et destruxit murum Geth et murum Iabniae murumque Azoti. Aedificavit quoque oppida in regione Azoti et Philisthim.","ויצא וילחם בפלשתים ויפרץ את חומת גת ואת חומת יבנה ואת חומת אשדוד ויבנה ערים באשדוד ובפלשתים׃"],["14","26","7","하느님께서는 우찌야가 필리스티아인들과 구르 바알에 사는 아라비아인들과 므운인들을 칠 때에 도와주셨다.","그는 하느님의 도우심을 받아 불레셋인들과 구르바알에 사는 아랍인들과 므운인들을 쳤고","하나님이 그를 도우사 블레셋 사람들과 구르바알에 거주하는 아라비아 사람들과 마온 사람들을 치게 하신지라","하나님이 도우사 블레셋 사람과 구르바알에 거한 아라비아 사람과 마온 사람을 치게 하신지라","하나님께서는 블레셋 족속을 쳐서 이기도록 그를 도와주신 뒤에도 구르바알을 비롯하여 유다 남동쪽의 경계선 지역에 살던 아라비아 족속들과 마온 족속들을 쳐서 이기도록 계속 그를 도우셨다.","God helped him against the Philistines, against the Arabians who dwelt in Gurbaal, and against the Meunites.","And God helped him against the Philistines, and against the Arabians that dwelt in Gurbaal, and the Mehunims.","God helped him against the Philistines and against the Arabs who lived in Gur Baal and against the Meunites.","Et adiuvit eum Deus contra Philisthim et contra Arabas, qui habitabant in Gurbaal, et contra Meunitas.","ויעזרהו האלהים על פלשתים ועל הערביים הישבים בגור בעל והמעונים׃"],["14","26","8","그러자 암몬인들이 우찌야에게 조공을 바치고, 그의 명성이 이집트 국경까지 퍼져 나갔다. 그만큼 그의 세력이 커진 것이다.","암몬인들에게서 조공을 받게 되니, 그의 명성이 이집트 땅에까지 떨쳤다. 그는 매우 막강해졌다.","암몬 사람들이 웃시야에게 조공을 바치매 웃시야가 매우 강성하여 이름이 애굽 변방까지 퍼졌더라","암몬 사람이 웃시야에게 조공을 바치매 웃시야가 심히 강성하여 이름이 애굽 변방까지 퍼졌더라","암몬 족속들까지 웃시야에게 조공을 바치자, 그의 명성이 애굽에까지 퍼져 나갔다. 그토록 그의 세력이 강하게 되었다.","The Ammonites paid tribute to Uzziah and his fame spread as far as Egypt, for he grew stronger and stronger.","And the Ammonites gave gifts to Uzziah: and his name spread abroad even to the entering in of Egypt; for he strengthened himself exceedingly.","The Ammonites brought tribute to Uzziah, and his fame spread as far as the border of Egypt, because he had become very powerful.","Pendebantque Ammonitae munera Oziae; et divulgatum est nomen eius usque ad introitum Aegypti, quia confortatus est in excelsum.","ויתנו העמונים מנחה לעזיהו וילך שמו עד לבוא מצרים כי החזיק עד למעלה׃"],["14","26","9","우찌야는 예루살렘의 ‘모퉁이 문’과 ‘골짜기 문’과 ‘성 굽이’에 탑들을 세우고, 그것들을 튼튼하게 하였다.","또 우찌야는 예루살렘 모퉁이 성문과 골짜기 성문과 성 귀퉁이에 망대를 튼튼히 세웠다.","웃시야가 예루살렘에서 성 모퉁이 문과 골짜기 문과 성굽이에 망대를 세워 견고하게 하고","웃시야가 예루살렘에서 성 모퉁이 문과 골짜기 문과 성굽이에 망대를 세워 견고하게 하고","웃시야왕은 예루살렘에도 북서쪽의 모퉁이문과 남서쪽의 골짜기문과 북동쪽의 성벽 모퉁이 위에 망대를 세워 방비를 튼튼히 하였다.","Moreover, Uzziah built towers in Jerusalem at the Corner Gate, at the Valley Gate, and at the Angle, and he fortified them.","Moreover Uzziah built towers in Jerusalem at the corner gate, and at the valley gate, and at the turning of the wall, and fortified them.","Uzziah built towers in Jerusalem at the Corner Gate, at the Valley Gate and at the angle of the wall, and he fortified them.","Aedificavitque Ozias turres in Ierusalem super portam Anguli et super portam Vallis et super Angulum firmavitque eas. 10 Exstruxit etiam turres in solitudine et fodit cisternas plurimas, eo quod haberet multa pecora tam in Sephela quam in planitie; agricolas quoque habuit et vinitores in montibus et in campis fertilibus; erat quippe homo agriculturae deditus.","ויבן עזיהו מגדלים בירושלם על שער הפנה ועל שער הגיא ועל המקצוע ויחזקם׃"],["14","26","10","그는 평원 지대와 평야에 많은 가축을 가지고 있었으므로, 광야에 탑들을 세우고 저수 동굴을 많이 팠다. 산악 지방과 기름진 땅에는 농부들과 포도밭 일꾼들을 두었다. 그는 땅을 사랑하는 사람이었다.","그는 야산 지대나 평야에 많은 짐승을 놓아 먹였다. 그는 또 흙을 사랑하는 사람이었으므로 사람들을 시켜 산악 지대나 기름진 땅에 농사를 짓고 과수도 가꾸게 하였다. 그러느라고 광야에도 망대들을 세우고 저수지들도 많이 파게 하였다.","또 광야에 망대를 세우고 물 웅덩이를 많이 파고 고원과 평지에 가축을 많이 길렀으며 또 여러 산과 좋은 밭에 농부와 포도원을 다스리는 자들을 두었으니 농사를 좋아함이었더라","또 거친 땅에 망대를 세우고 물웅덩이를 많이 팠으니 평야와 평지에 육축을 많이 기름이며 또 여러 산과 좋은 밭에 농부와 포도원을 다스리는 자를 두었으니 농사를 좋아함이더라","그는 또 가축을 놓아 기르는 유다 서쪽의 야산지대와 고원 평야지대에도 많은 방어용 망대를 세우고 물웅덩이를 파놓았다. 그는 또 농사짓는 일을 좋아하였으므로 전국의 산지와 비옥한 저지대에 농부와 포도원지기들을 보내어 밭을 가꾸게 하였다.","He built towers in the wilderness and dug numerous cisterns, for he had many cattle. He had plowmen in the Shephelah and the plains, farmers and vinedressers in the highlands and the garden land. He was a lover of the soil.","Also he built towers in the desert, and digged many wells: for he had much cattle, both in the low country, and in the plains: husbandmen also, and vine dressers in the mountains, and in Carmel: for he loved husbandry.","He also built towers in the desert and dug many cisterns, because he had much livestock in the foothills and in the plain. He had people working his fields and vineyards in the hills and in the fertile lands, for he loved the soil.",null,"ויבן מגדלים במדבר ויחצב ברות רבים כי מקנה רב היה לו ובשפלה ובמישור אכרים וכרמים בהרים ובכרמל כי אהב אדמה היה׃"],["14","26","11","우찌야에게는 출전 준비가 된 전투 병력이 있었는데, 서기관 여이엘과 행정관 마아세야가 사열한 수에 따라 부대가 편성되었다. 그 전투 병력은 임금의 장수들 가운데 하나인 하난야의 지휘 아래에 있었다.","우찌야에게는 언제든지 싸우러 나갈 수 있는 상비군이 있었다. 그 상비군은 비서장 여이엘과 병적관 마아세야가 수를 세며 병적에 올려 부대를 편성하였고 왕의 직속 지휘관 중의 한 사람인 하나니야의 지휘를 받았다.","웃시야에게 또 싸우는 군사가 있으니 서기관 여이엘과 병영장 마아세야가 직접 조사한 수효대로 왕의 지휘관 하나냐의 휘하에 속하여 떼를 지어 나가서 싸우는 자라","웃시야에게 또 싸우는 군사가 있으니 서기관 여이엘과 영장 마아세야의 조사한 수효대로 왕의 장관 하나냐의 수하에 속하여 떼를 지어 나가서 싸우는 자라","웃시야는 전국의 장정들을 동원하여 막강한 군대를 양성하였다. 장병들의 명단을 작성하여 징집하는 일은 서기관 여이엘이 맡았고, 그의 부관 마아세야가 실무를 담당하였다. 그리고 왕의 직속 지휘관 하나냐가 그 일을 감독하였다. 이 군대는 여러 부대로 편성되었는데","Uzziah also had a standing army of fit soldiers divided into bands according to the number in which they were mustered by Jeiel the scribe and Maaseiah the recorder, under the command of Hananiah, one of the king’s officials.","Moreover Uzziah had an host of fighting men, that went out to war by bands, according to the number of their account by the hand of Jeiel the scribe and Maaseiah the ruler, under the hand of Hananiah, one of the king's captains.","Uzziah had a well-trained army, ready to go out by divisions according to their numbers as mustered by Jeiel the secretary and Maaseiah the officer under the direction of Hananiah, one of the royal officials.","Fuit autem exercitus bellatorum eius, qui procedebant ad proelia in turmis secundum numerum census per manum Iehiel scribae Maasiaeque praefecti sub manu Hananiae, qui erat de ducibus regis.","ויהי לעזיהו חיל עשה מלחמה יוצאי צבא לגדוד במספר פקדתם ביד יעואל הסופר ומעשיהו השוטר על יד חנניהו משרי המלך׃"],["14","26","12","용사 가문들의 우두머리 수는 모두 이천육백 명이었다.","그 군대를 거느릴 각 가문 수령들은 모두 이천육백 명이었고","족장의 총수가 이천육백 명이니 모두 큰 용사요","족장의 총수가 이천 육백명이니 모두 큰 용사요","그들을 지휘하는 2600명의 장교들은 모두 족장들이었다.","The entire number of family heads over these valiant warriors was two thousand six hundred,","The whole number of the chief of the fathers of the mighty men of valour were two thousand and six hundred.","The total number of family leaders over the fighting men was 2,600.","Omnisque numerus principum per familias virorum fortium duorum milium sescentorum.","כל מספר ראשי האבות לגבורי חיל אלפים ושש מאות׃"],["14","26","13","그들의 지휘 아래 놓인 군사들은 임금을 도와 적을 무찌를 막강한 전투 병력으로, 삼십만 칠천오백 명이었다.","그들의 지휘 아래 왕을 도와 적을 무찌를 이 강력한 군대의 수는 모두 삼십만 칠천오백 명이나 되었다.","그의 휘하의 군대가 삼십만 칠천오백 명이라 건장하고 싸움에 능하여 왕을 도와 적을 치는 자이며","그 수하의 군대가 삼십만 칠천 오백명이라 건장하고 싸움에 능하여 왕을 도와 대적을 치는 자며","전체 부대의 장병수는 30만 7500명으로서, 모두 용감하고 힘센 군인들이었다. 웃시야왕은 이 군대를 거느리고 모든 적을 물리칠 수 있었다.","and at their disposal was a mighty army of three hundred seven thousand five hundred fighting men of great valor to help the king against his enemies.","And under their hand was an army, three hundred thousand and seven thousand and five hundred, that made war with mighty power, to help the king against the enemy.","Under their command was an army of 307,500 men trained for war, a powerful force to support the king against his enemies.","Et sub eis universus exercitus trecentorum et septem milium quingentorum, qui erant apti ad bella, ut pro rege contra adversarios dimicarent.","ועל ידם חיל צבא שלש מאות אלף ושבעת אלפים וחמש מאות עושי מלחמה בכח חיל לעזר למלך על האויב׃"],["14","26","14","우찌야는 전군에 작은 방패와 창과 투구와 갑옷과 활과 팔맷돌들을 마련해 주었다.","우찌야는 그들 전군에 방패, 창, 투구, 갑옷, 활, 물매를 마련해 주었고,","웃시야가 그의 온 군대를 위하여 방패와 창과 투구와 갑옷과 활과 물매 돌을 준비하고","웃시야가 그 온 군대를 위하여 방패와 창과 투구와 갑옷과 활과 물매 돌을 예비하고","웃시야는 모든 부대에 방패와 창과 투구와 갑옷과 활과 무릿매를 주어 무장시켰다.","Uzziah provided for them—for the entire army—bucklers, lances, helmets, breastplates, bows, and slingstones.","And Uzziah prepared for them throughout all the host shields, and spears, and helmets, and habergeons, and bows, and slings to cast stones.","Uzziah provided shields, spears, helmets, coats of armor, bows and slingstones for the entire army.","Praeparavit quoque eis Ozias, id est cuncto exercitui, clipeos et hastas et galeas et loricas arcusque et fundas ad iaciendos lapides.","ויכן להם עזיהו לכל הצבא מגנים ורמחים וכובעים ושרינות וקשתות ולאבני קלעים׃"],["14","26","15","그는 또 솜씨 좋은 장인들이 고안해 낸 것으로 화살과 큰 돌을 쏘는 무기를 만들어 탑과 성 모퉁이마다 배치하였다. 그러자 그의 명성이 널리 퍼져 나갔다. 그가 이처럼 강하게 되기까지는 놀라운 도우심이 있었다.","활을 쏘고 큰 돌을 던지는 무기를 기술자에게 고안시켜서 예루살렘 성 망대들과 성 귀퉁이마다 설치해 놓게 하였다. 이렇게 하여 그의 명성은 널리 떨쳤다. 그는 기이한 도우심을 받아 매우 강하게 되었던 것이다.","또 예루살렘에서 재주 있는 사람들에게 무기를 고안하게 하여 망대와 성곽 위에 두어 화살과 큰 돌을 쏘고 던지게 하였으니 그의 이름이 멀리 퍼짐은 기이한 도우심을 얻어 강성하여짐이었더라","또 예루살렘에서 공교한 공장으로 기계를 창작하여 망대와 성곽 위에 두어 살과 큰 돌을 발하게 하였으니 그 이름이 원방에 퍼짐은 기이한 도우심을 얻어 강성하여짐이더라","그는 또 화살을 발사하고 큰 돌덩이들을 멀리 던질 수 있는 기계들을 정교하게 고안하여 예루살렘의 모든 망대와 성벽의 모퉁이마다 배치해 놓았다. 하나님께서 놀랍도록 그를 도와주셨으므로 그의 세력이 점점 더 커지고 명성이 점점 더 멀리 퍼져 나갔다.","He also built machines in Jerusalem, devices designed to stand on the towers and at the angles of the walls to shoot arrows and cast large stones. His name spread far and wide; the help he received was wondrous, so strong did he become.","And he made in Jerusalem engines, invented by cunning men, to be on the towers and upon the bulwarks, to shoot arrows and great stones withal. And his name spread far abroad; for he was marvellously helped, till he was strong.","In Jerusalem he made machines designed by skillful men for use on the towers and on the corner defenses to shoot arrows and hurl large stones. His fame spread far and wide, for he was greatly helped until he became powerful.","Et fecit in Ierusalem machinas excogitatas arte, quas in turribus collocavit et in angulis murorum, ut mitterent sagittas et saxa grandia; egressumque est nomen eius procul, eo quod mirabiliter auxiliaretur ei Dominus et corroborasset illum.","ויעש בירושלם חשבנות מחשבת חושב להיות על המגדלים ועל הפנות לירוא בחצים ובאבנים גדלות ויצא שמו עד למרחוק כי הפליא להעזר עד כי חזק׃"],["14","26","16","그러나 우찌야는 강해지면서 교만해지더니, 마침내 패악한 짓을 저지르게 되었다. 그는 주 자기 하느님을 배신하여, 분향 제단 위에서 향을 피우려고 주님의 성전에 들어간 것이다.","그러나 그는 제 힘만 믿고 교만해졌다가 자멸하고 말았다. 그는 야훼의 성전 본관에 들어가 분향단에다 분향하려고 하였다. 이것은 저를 보살펴 주시던 하느님 야훼를 거역하는 일이었다.","그가 강성하여지매 그의 마음이 교만하여 악을 행하여 그의 하나님 여호와께 범죄하되 곧 여호와의 성전에 들어가서 향단에 분향하려 한지라","저가 강성하여지매 그 마음이 교만하여 악을 행하여 그 하나님 여호와께 범죄하되 곧 여호와의 전에 들어가서 향단에 분향하려 한지라","그러나 웃시야는 날로 세력이 강해지고 하는 일마다 성공을 거두자 교만에 빠져 자기의 하나님 여호와께 죄를 저지르기에 이르렀다. 그는 제사장이나 들어갈 수 있는 여호와의 성전에 직접 들어가 분향하려고까지 함으로써 하나님 말씀의 권위를 왕권에 예속시키려는 교만의 죄를 저질렀다.","But after he had become strong, he became arrogant to his own destruction and acted treacherously with the LORD, his God. He entered the temple of the LORD to make an offering on the altar of incense.","But when he was strong, his heart was lifted up to his destruction: for he transgressed against the LORD his God, and went into the temple of the LORD to burn incense upon the altar of incense.","But after Uzziah became powerful, his pride led to his downfall. He was unfaithful to the LORD his God, and entered the temple of the LORD to burn incense on the altar of incense.","Sed, cum roboratus esset, elevatum est cor eius in interitum suum, et deliquit contra Dominum Deum suum; ingressusque templum Domini adolere voluit incensum super altare thymiamatis.","וכחזקתו גבה לבו עד להשחית וימעל ביהוה אלהיו ויבא אל היכל יהוה להקטיר על מזבח הקטרת׃"],["14","26","17","그때에 아자르야 사제가 주님의 용감한 사제 여든 명과 함께 뒤따라 들어가,","대사제 아자리야와 야훼의 용감한 사제 팔십 명이 뒤따라 들어가","제사장 아사랴가 여호와의 용맹한 제사장 팔십 명을 데리고 그의 뒤를 따라 들어가서","제사장 아사랴가 여호와의 제사장 용맹한 자 팔십인을 데리고 그 뒤를 따라 들어가서","그러자 대제사장 아사랴가 다른 제사장 80명을 거느리고 왕을 뒤쫓아갔다. 그들은 모두 용사들이었다.","But Azariah the priest, and with him eighty other priests of the LORD, courageous men, followed him.","And Azariah the priest went in after him, and with him fourscore priests of the LORD, that were valiant men:","Azariah the priest with eighty other courageous priests of the LORD followed him in.","Statimque ingressus post eum Azarias sacerdos et cum eo sacerdotes Domini octoginta viri fortissimi;","ויבא אחריו עזריהו הכהן ועמו כהנים ליהוה שמונים בני חיל׃"],["14","26","18","우찌야 임금을 가로막고 서서 그에게 말하였다. “우찌야 임금님, 주님께 향을 피우는 일은 임금님께서 하실 일이 아닙니다. 그 일은 향을 피우도록 성별된 아론의 자손 사제들에게 맡겨졌습니다. 그러니 성소에서 나가 주십시오. 임금님께서는 하느님을 배신하셨습니다. 그래서 주 하느님께 영광을 받지도 못하실 것입니다.”","우찌야 왕을 가로막고 말하였다. \"우찌야, 야훼께 분향하는 일은 왕이 할 일이 아니오. 분향하는 일은 성별된 아론의 후손 사제들이 할 일이오. 이 성소에서 나가시오. 이렇게 하느님을 거역하셨으므로 야훼 하느님의 영광이 왕을 떠나시었소.\"","웃시야 왕 곁에 서서 그에게 이르되 웃시야여 여호와께 분향하는 일은 왕이 할 바가 아니요 오직 분향하기 위하여 구별함을 받은 아론의 자손 제사장들이 할 바니 성소에서 나가소서 왕이 범죄하였으니 하나님 여호와에게서 영광을 얻지 못하리이다","웃시야왕을 막아 가로되 웃시야여 여호와께 분향하는 일이 왕의 할바가 아니요 오직 분향하기 위하여 구별함을 받은 아론의 자손 제사장의 할바니 성소에서 나가소서 왕이 범죄하였으니 하나님 여호와께 영광을 얻지 못하리이다","그들이 웃시야왕을 가로막으며 이렇게 항의하였다. \"임금님, 여호와께 분향하는 것은 왕이 할 일이 아닙니다! 그 일은 제단을 맡아 섬기도록 성별된 아론의 후손 제사장들만이 할 수 있습니다. 그러니 어서 성전에서 나가시오! 하나님을 거역하는 죄를 저지른 임금께서는 이제 하나님의 복을 받지 못할 것입니다.\"","They stood up to King Uzziah, saying to him: “It is not for you, Uzziah, to burn incense to the LORD, but for the priests, the sons of Aaron, who have been consecrated for this purpose. Leave the sanctuary, for you have acted treacherously and no longer have a part in the glory that comes from the LORD God.”","And they withstood Uzziah the king, and said unto him, It appertaineth not unto thee, Uzziah, to burn incense unto the LORD, but to the priests the sons of Aaron, that are consecrated to burn incense: go out of the sanctuary; for thou hast trespassed; neither shall it be for thine honour from the LORD God.","They confronted him and said, \"It is not right for you, Uzziah, to burn incense to the LORD. That is for the priests, the descendants of Aaron, who have been consecrated to burn incense. Leave the sanctuary, for you have been unfaithful; and you will not be honored by the LORD God.\"","restiterunt regi atque dixerunt:  “Non est tui officii, Ozia, ut adoleas incensum Domino, sed sacerdotum, hoc est filiorum Aaron, qui consecrati sunt ad huiuscemodi ministerium. Egredere de sanctuario, quia praevaricatus es; et non reputabitur tibi in gloriam hoc a Domino Deo “.","ויעמדו על עזיהו המלך ויאמרו לו לא לך עזיהו להקטיר ליהוה כי לכהנים בני אהרן המקדשים להקטיר צא מן המקדש כי מעלת ולא לך לכבוד מיהוה אלהים׃"],["14","26","19","그러자 손에 향로를 들고 향을 피우려던 우찌야가 화를 냈다. 그가 사제들에게 화를 내는 순간, 주님의 집 분향 제단 곁에 있는 사제들 앞에서 그의 이마에 나병이 생겼다.","우찌야는 그 때 손에 향로를 들고 있었다. 그가 사제들에게 화를 내려고 하자 나병이 그의 이마에 번졌다. 그 사제들 앞에서, 야훼의 성전 안에서 그것도 바로 분향단 앞에서였다.","웃시야가 손으로 향로를 잡고 분향하려 하다가 화를 내니 그가 제사장에게 화를 낼 때에 여호와의 전 안 향단 곁 제사장들 앞에서 그의 이마에 나병이 생긴지라","웃시야가 손으로 향로를 잡고 분향하려 하다가 노를 발하니 저가 제사장에게 노할 때에 여호와의 전 안 향단 곁 제사장 앞에서 그 이마에 문둥병이 발한지라","이미 향로를 손에 들고 있던 웃시야가 버럭 화를 내었다. 그러나 그가 제사장들에게 호통을 치려고 하는 바로 그 순간에 그의 이마에서 문둥병이 돋아퍼졌다. 이 일은 성전의 분향 제단 곁에서 모든 제사장들이 지켜 보는 가운데 일어났다.","Uzziah, who was holding a censer for burning the incense, became angry. But at the very moment he showed his anger to the priests, while they were looking at him in the house of the LORD beside the altar of incense, leprosy broke out on his forehead.","Then Uzziah was wroth, and had a censer in his hand to burn incense: and while he was wroth with the priests, the leprosy even rose up in his forehead before the priests in the house of the LORD, from beside the incense altar.","Uzziah, who had a censer in his hand ready to burn incense, became angry. While he was raging at the priests in their presence before the incense altar in the LORD'S temple, leprosy broke out on his forehead.","Iratusque est Ozias et tenens in manu turibulum, ut adoleret incensum, minabatur sacerdotibus. Statimque orta est lepra in fronte eius coram sacerdotibus in domo Domini super altare thymiamatis.","ויזעף עזיהו ובידו מקטרת להקטיר ובזעפו עם הכהנים והצרעת זרחה במצחו לפני הכהנים בבית יהוה מעל למזבח הקטרת׃"],["14","26","20","아자르야 수석 사제와 모든 사제가 그를 돌아보다가 이마에 나병이 생긴 것을 발견하고, 재빨리 그를 그곳에서 내몰았다. 우찌야 자신도 서둘러 밖으로 나갔다. 주님께서 그를 치신 것이다.","대사제 아자리야와 온 사제들은 그의 이마에 나병이 생긴 것을 보고 왕에게 당장 나가라고 하였다. 왕도 야훼께서 자기를 치신 줄 깨닫고 급히 물러나왔다.","대제사장 아사랴와 모든 제사장이 왕의 이마에 나병이 생겼음을 보고 성전에서 급히 쫓아내고 여호와께서 치시므로 왕도 속히 나가니라","대제사장 아사랴와 모든 제사장이 왕의 이마에 문둥병이 발하였음을 보고 전에서 급히 쫓아내고 여호와께서 치시므로 왕도 속히 나가니라","대제사장 아사랴와 모든 제사장들은 그의 이마에 돋아난 문둥병을 보자 곧 그를 성전에서 쫓아내었다. 웃시야왕도 여호와께서 자기에게 벌을 내리신 줄 깨닫고는 급히 성전 밖으로 달려 나왔다.","Azariah the chief priest and all the other priests examined him, and when they saw that his forehead was leprous, they rushed him out. He let himself be expelled, for the LORD had afflicted him.","And Azariah the chief priest, and all the priests, looked upon him, and, behold, he was leprous in his forehead, and they thrust him out from thence; yea, himself hasted also to go out, because the LORD had smitten him.","When Azariah the chief priest and all the other priests looked at him, they saw that he had leprosy on his forehead, so they hurried him out. Indeed, he himself was eager to leave, because the LORD had afflicted him.","Cumque respexisset eum Azarias pontifex et omnes reliqui sacerdotes, viderunt lepram in fronte eius et festinato expulerunt eum; sed et ipse acceleravit egredi, eo quod malo afflixisset eum Dominus.","ויפן אליו עזריהו כהן הראש וכל הכהנים והנה הוא מצרע במצחו ויבהלוהו משם וגם הוא נדחף לצאת כי נגעו יהוה׃"],["14","26","21","우찌야 임금은 죽는 날까지 나병을 앓았다. 그리고 주님의 집에서 내쫓긴 몸이었으므로, 별궁에서 살았다. 그래서 그의 아들 요탐이 왕궁을 관리하며 나라의 백성을 다스렸다.","2)우찌야 왕은 나병환자로 여생을 보내게 되었다. 야훼의 성전에 들어갈 수 없는 몸이 되었으므로 별궁에서 홀로 나병을 앓으며 지내야 했다. 그래서 그의 아들 요담이 왕궁의 어른이 되어 나라를 다스리게 되었다.21-23절에 대해서는 2열왕 15:5-7 참조.","웃시야 왕이 죽는 날까지 나병환자가 되었고 나병환자가 되매 여호와의 전에서 끊어져 별궁에 살았으므로 그의 아들 요담이 왕궁을 관리하며 백성을 다스렸더라","웃시야왕이 죽는 날까지 문둥이가 되었고 문둥이가 되매 여호와의 전에서 끊어졌고 별궁에 홀로 거하였으므로 그 아들 요담이 왕궁을 관리하며 국민을 치리하였더라","이리하여 웃시야왕은 죽는 날까지 문둥병자가 되었다. 그는 별궁에서 격리생활을 하며, 다시는 성전에 들어가지 못하였다. 왕이 이렇게 약 8년동안 격리생활을 하는 동안에 그의 아들 요담이 왕궁의 책임자가 되어 왕을 대신하여 정사를 돌보았다.","King Uzziah remained a leper till the day he died. As a leper he lived in a house apart, for he was excluded from the house of the LORD. Therefore his son Jotham was master of the palace and ruled the people of the land.","And Uzziah the king was a leper unto the day of his death, and dwelt in a several house, being a leper; for he was cut off from the house of the LORD: and Jotham his son was over the king's house, judging the people of the land.","King Uzziah had leprosy until the day he died. He lived in a separate house--leprous, and excluded from the temple of the LORD. Jotham his son had charge of the palace and governed the people of the land.","Fuit igitur Ozias rex leprosus usque ad diem mortis suae et habitavit in domo separata plenus lepra, eo quod abscissus fuerat de domo Domini. Porro Ioatham filius eius rexit domum regis et iudicabat populum terrae.","ויהי עזיהו המלך מצרע עד יום מותו וישב בית החפשות מצרע כי נגזר מבית יהוה ויותם בנו על בית המלך שופט את עם הארץ׃"],["14","26","22","우찌야의 나머지 행적은 처음부터 끝까지 아모츠의 아들 이사야 예언자가 써 두었다.","우찌야의 나머지 역사는 처음부터 끝까지 아모쓰의 아들 예언자 이사야가 기록해 두었다.","웃시야의 남은 시종 행적은 아모스의 아들 선지자 이사야가 기록하였더라","이 외에 웃시야의 시종 행적은 아모스의 아들 선지자 이사야가 기록하였더라","웃시야에 대하여 더 전할 수 있는 것은 처음부터 끝까지 아모스의 아들 이사야 예언자가 기록하였다. 이사야는 웃시야가 죽던 해에 소명을 받은 예언자이다.","The rest of the acts of Uzziah, first and last, were written by Isaiah the prophet, son of Amoz.","Now the rest of the acts of Uzziah, first and last, did Isaiah the prophet, the son of Amoz, write.","The other events of Uzziah's reign, from beginning to end, are recorded by the prophet Isaiah son of Amoz.","Reliqua autem gestorum Oziae priorum et novissimorum scripsit Isaias filius Amos propheta.","ויתר דברי עזיהו הראשנים והאחרנים כתב ישעיהו בן אמוץ הנביא׃"],["14","26","23","우찌야가 자기 조상들과 함께 잠들자, 사람들은 그가 나병 환자였다고 해서 그를 왕실 묘지에 딸린 터에 조상들과 함께 묻었다. 그의 아들 요탐이 그 뒤를 이어 임금이 되었다.","우찌야가 세상을 떠나자 나병환자라고 하여 그를 왕실 묘지에 딸린 뜰에 묻었다. 그의 아들 요담이 뒤를 이어 왕위에 올랐다.","웃시야가 그의 조상들과 함께 누우매 그는 나병환자라 하여 왕들의 묘실에 접한 땅 곧 그의 조상들의 곁에 장사하니라 그의 아들 요담이 대신하여 왕이 되니라","웃시야가 그 열조와 함께 자매 저는 문둥이라 하여 열왕의 묘실에 접한 땅 곧 그 열조의 곁에 장사하니라 그 아들 요담이 대신하여 왕이 되니라","웃시야가 죽자 문둥병 때문에 왕들의 묘실 곁에 있는 뜰에 매장되었다. 그의 아들 요담이 뒤를 이어 왕위에 올랐다.","Uzziah rested with his ancestors and was buried with them in the field adjoining the royal cemetery, for they said, “He was a leper.” His son Jotham succeeded him as king.","So Uzziah slept with his fathers, and they buried him with his fathers in the field of the burial which belonged to the kings; for they said, He is a leper: and Jotham his son reigned in his stead.","Uzziah rested with his fathers and was buried near them in a field for burial that belonged to the kings, for people said, \"He had leprosy.\" And Jotham his son succeeded him as king.","Dormivitque Ozias cum patribus suis, et sepelierunt eum in agro regalium sepulcrorum, eo quod dicebant:  “Erat leprosus “. Regnavitque Ioatham filius eius pro eo.","וישכב עזיהו עם אבתיו ויקברו אתו עם אבתיו בשדה הקבורה אשר למלכים כי אמרו מצורע הוא וימלך יותם בנו תחתיו׃"],["14","27","1","요탐은 스물다섯 살에 임금이 되어, 예루살렘에서 열여섯 해 동안 다스렸다. 그의 어머니 이름은 여루사인데 차독의 딸이었다.","1)요담은 이십오 세에 왕위에 올라 예루살렘에서 십육 년간 다스렸다. 그의 어머니는 사독의 딸로서 이름을 여루사라고 하였다.1-3절에 대해서는 2열왕 15:33-35 참조.","요담이 왕위에 오를 때에 나이가 이십오 세라 예루살렘에서 십육 년 동안 다스리니라 그의 어머니의 이름은 여루사요 사독의 딸이더라","요담이 위에 나아갈 때에 나이 이십 오세라 예루살렘에서 십 륙년을 치리하니라 그 모친의 이름은 여루사라 사독의 딸이더라","요담은 25세에 왕이 되어 16년 동안 예루살렘에서 다스렸다. 그의 어머니 여루사는 사독의 딸이었다.","Jotham was twenty-five years old when he became king, and he reigned sixteen years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Jerusha, daughter of Zadok.","Jotham was twenty and five years old when he began to reign, and he reigned sixteen years in Jerusalem. His mother's name also was Jerushah, the daughter of Zadok.","Jotham was twenty-five years old when he became king, and he reigned in Jerusalem sixteen years. His mother's name was Jerusha daughter of Zadok.","Viginti quinque annorum erat Ioatham, cum regnare coepisset, et sedecim annis regnavit in Ierusalem. Nomen matris eius Ierusa filia Sadoc.","בן עשרים וחמש שנה יותם במלכו ושש עשרה שנה מלך בירושלם ושם אמו ירושה בת צדוק׃"],["14","27","2","그는 자기 아버지 우찌야가 하던 그대로, 주님의 눈에 드는 옳은 일을 하였다. 다만 아버지와는 달리 주님의 성전에는 들어가지 않았다. 그러나 백성은 여전히 타락해 있었다.","그는 부왕 우찌야 못지않게 야훼 보시기에 옳은 일을 하였다. 다만 그는 야훼의 성전 본관에만은 들어가지 않았다. 백성들은 여전히 악한 짓을 하였다.","요담이 그의 아버지 웃시야의 모든 행위대로 여호와 보시기에 정직하게 행하였으나 여호와의 성전에는 들어가지 아니하였고 백성은 여전히 부패하였더라","요담이 그 부친 웃시야의 모든 행위대로 여호와 보시기에 정직히 행하였으나 여호와의 전에는 들어가지 아니하였고 백성은 오히려 사악을 행하였더라","요담은 여호와의 마음에 드는 일들을 하고, 모든 점에서 아버지 웃시야의 모범을 따랐다. 다만 그는 자기의 아버지처럼 함부로 여호와의 성전에 들어가지는 않았다. 그런데도 백성은 계속 살인과 폭행을 일삼았다.","He did what was right in the LORD’s sight, just as his father Uzziah had done, though he did not enter the temple of the LORD. The people, however, continued to act corruptly.","And he did that which was right in the sight of the LORD, according to all that his father Uzziah did: howbeit he entered not into the temple of the LORD. And the people did yet corruptly.","He did what was right in the eyes of the LORD, just as his father Uzziah had done, but unlike him he did not enter the temple of the LORD. The people, however, continued their corrupt practices.","Fecitque, quod rectum erat coram Domino iuxta omnia, quae fecerat Ozias pater suus, excepto quod non est ingressus templum Domini, et adhuc populus delinquebat.","ויעש הישר בעיני יהוה ככל אשר עשה עזיהו אביו רק לא בא אל היכל יהוה ועוד העם משחיתים׃"],["14","27","3","요탐은 주님의 집 ‘윗대문’을 세웠다. 그리고 오펠의 성벽 위에 많은 것을 지었으며,","그는 야훼의 성전 윗문을 세웠고 오벨 성곽을 더욱 많이 쌓아올렸다.","그가 여호와의 전 윗문을 건축하고 또 오벨 성벽을 많이 증축하고","저가 여호와의 전 윗문을 건축하고 또 오벨성을 많이 증축하고","요담은 성전의 북쪽에 있는 위성문을 새로 만들고, 예루살렘 남동쪽의 오벨 성벽도 여러 곳을 보수하였다.","It was he who built the Upper Gate of the LORD’s house and did much construction on the wall of Ophel.","He built the high gate of the house of the LORD, and on the wall of Ophel he built much.","Jotham rebuilt the Upper Gate of the temple of the LORD and did extensive work on the wall at the hill of Ophel.","Ipse aedificavit portam domus Domini Superiorem et in muro Ophel multa construxit.","הוא בנה את שער בית יהוה העליון ובחומת העפל בנה לרב׃"],["14","27","4","유다의 산악 지방에 성읍들을 세우고, 산림 지대에 성채들과 탑들을 세웠다.","또 유다 산악 지대에 성읍들을 세우고 산림 지대에 성채들과 망대들을 세웠다.","유다 산중에 성읍들을 건축하며 수풀 가운데에 견고한 진영들과 망대를 건축하고","유다 산중에 성읍을 건축하며 수풀 가운데 견고한 영채와 망대를 건축하고","그는 유다의 산지에 여러 채의 성읍들을 축성하여 국경을 강화하고, 삼림지대에도 망대와 요새 성읍들을 세웠다.","Moreover, he built cities in the hill country of Judah, and in the wooded areas he set up fortresses and towers.","Moreover he built cities in the mountains of Judah, and in the forests he built castles and towers.","He built towns in the Judean hills and forts and towers in the wooded areas.","Urbes quoque aedificavit in montibus Iudae et in saltibus castella et turres.","וערים בנה בהר יהודה ובחרשים בנה בירניות ומגדלים׃"],["14","27","5","그는 또 암몬 자손들의 임금과 싸워 이겼다. 그해에 암몬 자손들은 그에게 은 백 탈렌트와 밀 만 코르와 보리 만 코르를 바쳤다. 암몬 자손들은 두 번째 해에도, 세 번째 해에도 같은 양을 가져왔다.","그리고 암몬 왕과 싸워 이기고는 그 해에 암몬 왕에게서 금 백 달란트와 밀 만 석, 보리 만 석을 받았다. 암몬 사람들은 그에게 다음해에도 또 그 다음해에도 이렇게 바쳤다.","암몬 자손의 왕과 더불어 싸워 그들을 이겼더니 그 해에 암몬 자손이 은 백 달란트와 밀 만 고르와 보리 만 고르를 바쳤고 제이년과 제삼년에도 암몬 자손이 그와 같이 바쳤더라","암몬 자손의 왕으로 더불어 싸워 이기었더니 그 해에 암몬 자손이 은 일백 달란트와 밀 일만석과 보리 일만석을 드렸고 제 이년과 제 삼년에도 암몬 자손이 그와 같이 드렸더라","요담은 암몬 왕과 싸워 이겼다. 그래서 암몬 족속은 그해에 은 100달란트와 밀 약 980톤과 보리 약 980톤을 요담에게 바치고, 다음해와 그 다음해에도 똑같이 바쳤다.","He fought with the king of the Ammonites and conquered them. That year the Ammonites paid him one hundred talents of silver, together with ten thousand kors of wheat and ten thousand of barley. They brought the same to him also in the second and in the third year.","He fought also with the king of the Ammonites, and prevailed against them. And the children of Ammon gave him the same year an hundred talents of silver, and ten thousand measures of wheat, and ten thousand of barley. So much did the children of Ammon pay unto him, both the second year, and the third.","Jotham made war on the king of the Ammonites and conquered them. That year the Ammonites paid him a hundred talents of silver, ten thousand cors of wheat and ten thousand cors of barley. The Ammonites brought him the same amount also in the second and third years.","Ipse pugnavit contra regem filiorum Ammon et vicit eos, dederuntque ei filii Ammon in anno illo centum talenta argenti et decem milia choros tritici ac totidem choros hordei; haec ei praebuerunt filii Ammon etiam in anno secundo et tertio.","והוא נלחם עם מלך בני עמון ויחזק עליהם ויתנו לו בני עמון בשנה ההיא מאה ככר כסף ועשרת אלפים כרים חטים ושעורים עשרת אלפים זאת השיבו לו בני עמון ובשנה השנית והשלשית׃"],["14","27","6","요탐은 이렇게 강해졌는데, 주 자기 하느님 앞에서 제 길을 굳건하게 지켰기 때문이다.","요담은 자기 하느님 야훼의 뜻대로 자신 있게 처신했기 때문에 세력이 있었다.","요담이 그의 하나님 여호와 앞에서 바른 길을 걸었으므로 점점 강하여졌더라","요담이 그 하나님 여호와 앞에서 정도를 행하였으므로 점점 강하여졌더라","요담은 무슨 일을 하든지 자기의 하나님 여호와의 뜻에 따라 하였기 때문에 아주 세력이 강하게 되었다.","Thus Jotham continued to grow strong because he made sure to walk before the LORD, his God.","So Jotham became mighty, because he prepared his ways before the LORD his God.","Jotham grew powerful because he walked steadfastly before the LORD his God.","Corroboratusque est Ioatham, eo quod direxisset vias suas coram Domino Deo suo.","ויתחזק יותם כי הכין דרכיו לפני יהוה אלהיו׃"],["14","27","7","요탐의 나머지 행적과 그가 수행한 모든 전쟁과 그가 걸어간 길에 관해서는 이스라엘과 유다 임금들의 실록에 쓰여 있다.","요담이 벌인 모든 전쟁과 이룩한 행적 등 그의 나머지 역사는 이스라엘과 유다 왕조실록에 기록되어 있다.","요담의 남은 사적과 그의 모든 전쟁과 행위는 이스라엘과 유다 열왕기에 기록되니라","요담의 남은 사적과 그 모든 전쟁과 행위는 이스라엘과 유다 열왕기에 기록되니라","요담의 전쟁 이야기와 업적들에 대하여 더 전할 수 있는 것은 유다와 이스라엘 역대 왕들의 행적을 기록한 열왕기에서 읽을 수 있다.","The rest of the acts of Jotham, his wars and his activities, are recorded in the book of the kings of Israel and Judah.","Now the rest of the acts of Jotham, and all his wars, and his ways, lo, they are written in the book of the kings of Israel and Judah.","The other events in Jotham's reign, including all his wars and the other things he did, are written in the book of the kings of Israel and Judah.","Reliqua autem gestorum Ioatham et omnes pugnae eius et viae scriptae sunt in libro regum Israel et Iudae.","ויתר דברי יותם וכל מלחמתיו ודרכיו הנם כתובים על ספר מלכי ישראל ויהודה׃"],["14","27","8","그는 스물다섯 살에 임금이 되어, 예루살렘에서 열여섯 해 동안 다스렸다.","그는 이십오 세에 왕위에 올라 예루살렘에서 십육 년을 다스리다가","요담이 왕위에 오를 때에 나이가 이십오 세요 예루살렘에서 다스린 지 십육 년이라","요담이 위에 나아갈 때에 나이 이십 오세요 예루살렘에서 치리한지 십 륙년이라","그는 25세에 왕이 되어 16년 동안 예루살렘에서 다스렸다.","He was twenty-five years old when he became king, and he reigned sixteen years in Jerusalem.","He was five and twenty years old when he began to reign, and reigned sixteen years in Jerusalem.","He was twenty-five years old when he became king, and he reigned in Jerusalem sixteen years.","Viginti quinque annorum erat, cum regnare coepisset, et sedecim annis regnavit in Ierusalem.","בן עשרים וחמש שנה היה במלכו ושש עשרה שנה מלך בירושלם׃"],["14","27","9","요탐은 자기 조상들과 함께 잠들어 다윗 성에 묻히고, 그의 아들 아하즈가 그 뒤를 이어 임금이 되었다.","세상을 떠나 다윗 성에 안장되었다. 그의 아들 아하즈가 뒤를 이어 왕위에 올랐다.","그가 그의 조상들과 함께 누우매 다윗 성에 장사되고 그의 아들 아하스가 대신하여 왕이 되니라","저가 그 열조와 함께 자매 다윗성에 장사되고 그 아들 아하스가 대신하여 왕이 되니라","요담이 죽어 다윗성에 안장되자, 그의 아들 아하스가 뒤를 이어 왕위에 올랐다.","Jotham rested with his ancestors and was buried in the City of David, and his son Ahaz succeeded him as king.","And Jotham slept with his fathers, and they buried him in the city of David: and Ahaz his son reigned in his stead.","Jotham rested with his fathers and was buried in the City of David. And Ahaz his son succeeded him as king.","Dormivitque Ioatham cum patribus suis, et sepelierunt eum in civitate David; et regnavit Achaz filius eius pro eo.","וישכב יותם עם אבתיו ויקברו אתו בעיר דויד וימלך אחז בנו תחתיו׃"],["14","28","1","아하즈는 스무 살에 임금이 되어, 예루살렘에서 열여섯 해 동안 다스렸다. 그는 자기 조상 다윗과는 달리 주님의 눈에 드는 옳은 일을 하지 않고,","아하즈는 이십 세에 왕위에 올라 예루살렘에서 십육 년간 다스렸다. 그는 태조 다윗처럼 야훼의 눈에 드는 바른 정치를 펴지 못하고","아하스가 왕위에 오를 때에 나이가 이십 세라 예루살렘에서 십육 년 동안 다스렸으나 그의 조상 다윗과 같지 아니하여 여호와 보시기에 정직하게 행하지 아니하고","아하스가 위에 나아갈 때에 나이 이십세라 예루살렘에서 십 륙년을 치리하였으나 그 조상 다윗과 같지 아니하여 여호와 보시기에 정직히 행치 아니하고","아하스는 20세에 왕이 되어 16년 동안 예루살렘에서 다스렸다. 그는 여호와의 마음에 드는 일을 하여 좋은 모범을 보인 그의 조상 다윗을 본받지 않고","Ahaz was twenty years old when he became king, and he reigned sixteen years in Jerusalem. He did not do what was right in the sight of the LORD as David his father had done.","Ahaz was twenty years old when he began to reign, and he reigned sixteen years in Jerusalem: but he did not that which was right in the sight of the LORD, like David his father:","Ahaz was twenty years old when he became king, and he reigned in Jerusalem sixteen years. Unlike David his father, he did not do what was right in the eyes of the LORD.","Viginti annorum erat Achaz, cum regnare coepis set, et sedecim annis regnavit in Ierusalem. Non fecit rectum in conspectu Domini sicut David pater eius,","בן עשרים שנה אחז במלכו ושש עשרה שנה מלך בירושלם ולא עשה הישר בעיני יהוה כדויד אביו׃"],["14","28","2","이스라엘 임금들의 길을 따라 걸으며, 바알들을 위하여 신상을 부어 만들기까지 하였다.","이스라엘 왕들의 전철을 밟아 우상을 부어 만들어 바알들을 섬기기까지 하였다.","이스라엘 왕들의 길로 행하여 바알들의 우상을 부어 만들고","이스라엘 열왕의 길로 행하여 바알들의 우상을 부어만들고","오히려 이스라엘 왕들의 흉악한 행실만을 본받았다. 그는 바알의 신상들을 주조하여 전국에 세워 놓고","He walked in the ways of the kings of Israel and even made molten idols for the Baals.","For he walked in the ways of the kings of Israel, and made also molten images for Baalim.","He walked in the ways of the kings of Israel and also made cast idols for worshiping the Baals.","sed ambulavit in viis regum Israel. Insuper et simulacra fudit Baalim.","וילך בדרכי מלכי ישראל וגם מסכות עשה לבעלים׃"],["14","28","3","그는 ‘벤 힌놈 골짜기’에서 향을 피우고, 주님께서 이스라엘 자손들 앞에서 쫓아내신 민족들의 역겨운 짓을 따라, 자기 아들들을 불 속으로 지나가게 하였다.","그는 야훼께서 이스라엘 백성의 면전에서 쫓아낸 민족들의 역겨운 풍속을 본받아 벤힌놈 골짜기에서 친자식들을 불살라 제물로 바쳤으며","또 힌놈의 아들 골짜기에서 분향하고 여호와께서 이스라엘 자손 앞에서 쫓아내신 이방 사람들의 가증한 일을 본받아 그의 자녀들을 불사르고","또 힌놈의 아들 골짜기에서 분향하고 여호와께서 이스라엘 자손 앞에서 쫓아내신 이방 사람의 가증한 일을 본받아 그 자녀를 불사르고","힌놈 골짜기에서 이방신들에게 분향하는가 하면, 여호와께서 이스라엘 백성 앞에서 쫓아내신 이방 족속들의 더러운 풍속에 따라 자기 자식들까지 산 채로 불 속에 집어 넣어 우상에게 희생제물로 바쳤다.","Moreover, he offered sacrifice in the Valley of Ben-hinnom, and immolated his children by fire in accordance with the abominable practices of the nations whom the LORD had dispossessed before the Israelites.","Moreover he burnt incense in the valley of the son of Hinnom, and burnt his children in the fire, after the abominations of the heathen whom the LORD had cast out before the children of Israel.","He burned sacrifices in the Valley of Ben Hinnom and sacrificed his sons in the fire, following the detestable ways of the nations the LORD had driven out before the Israelites.","Ipse est, qui adolevit in valle filii Ennom et lustravit filios suos in igne iuxta abominationes gentium, quas expulit Dominus coram filiis Israel.","והוא הקטיר בגיא בן הנם ויבער את בניו באש כתעבות הגוים אשר הריש יהוה מפני בני ישראל׃"],["14","28","4","그는 산당과 언덕과 온갖 푸른 나무 아래에서 제물을 바치고 향을 피웠다.","산당과 산마루에서, 또 우거진 나무 아래에서 분향하고 제사를 지냈다.","또 산당과 작은 산 위와 모든 푸른 나무 아래에서 제사를 드리며 분향하니라","또 산당과 작은 산위와 모든 푸른 나무 아래에서 제사를 드리며 분향한지라","그는 언덕 위의 모든 푸른 나무 아래에서 이방신들에게 제물을 바치고 향을 피웠다.","He sacrificed and burned incense on the high places, on hills, and under every green tree.","He sacrificed also and burnt incense in the high places, and on the hills, and under every green tree.","He offered sacrifices and burned incense at the high places, on the hilltops and under every spreading tree.","Sacrificabat quoque et thymiama succendebat in excelsis et in collibus et sub omni ligno frondoso.","ויזבח ויקטר בבמות ועל הגבעות ותחת כל עץ רענן׃"],["14","28","5","그래서 주 그의 하느님께서는 아하즈를 아람 임금의 손에 넘기셨다. 아람인들은 그를 쳐서 많은 사람들을 포로로 사로잡아 다마스쿠스로 데려갔다. 또 이스라엘 임금의 손에도 그를 넘기시니, 이스라엘 임금이 그에게 큰 타격을 입혔다.","그래서 그를 보살피실 하느님 야훼께서 그를 시리아 왕의 손에 부치셨다. 시리아 군은 많은 사람을 사로잡아 가지고 다마스쿠스로 돌아갔다. 또 이스라엘 왕의 손에 부치시어 호되게 당하게 하셨다.","그러므로 그의 하나님 여호와께서 그를 아람 왕의 손에 넘기시매 그들이 쳐서 심히 많은 무리를 사로잡아 다메섹으로 갔으며 또 이스라엘 왕의 손에 넘기시매 그가 쳐서 크게 살륙하였으니","그러므로 그 하나님 여호와께서 아람 왕의 손에 붙이시매 저희가 쳐서 심히 많은 무리를 사로잡아 가지고 다메섹으로 갔으며 또 이스라엘 왕의 손에 붙이시매 저가 쳐서 크게 살륙하였으니","아하스의 죄악이 이렇게 쌓이고 쌓이자, 그의 하나님 여호와께서 그를 원수들의 손에 넘겨 주셨다. 그리하여 아람 왕이 침공하여 그를 치니 수많은 유다 백성이 사로잡혀 다메섹으로 끌려갔다. 또 이스라엘 왕 베가도 침공하여 수많은 유다 백성을 쳐죽였다.","Therefore the LORD, his God, delivered him into the power of the king of Aram. The Arameans defeated him and carried away captive a large number of his people, whom they brought to Damascus. He was also delivered into the power of the king of Israel, who defeated him with great slaughter.","Wherefore the LORD his God delivered him into the hand of the king of Syria; and they smote him, and carried away a great multitude of them captives, and brought them to Damascus. And he was also delivered into the hand of the king of Israel, who smote him with a great slaughter.","Therefore the LORD his God handed him over to the king of Aram. The Arameans defeated him and took many of his people as prisoners and brought them to Damascus. He was also given into the hands of the king of Israel, who inflicted heavy casualties on him.","Tradiditque eum Dominus Deus eius in manu regis Syriae, qui percussit eum multosque captivos de eo cepit et adduxit in Damascum. Manibus quoque regis Israel traditus est et percussus plaga grandi.","ויתנהו יהוה אלהיו ביד מלך ארם ויכו בו וישבו ממנו שביה גדולה ויביאו דרמשק וגם ביד מלך ישראל נתן ויך בו מכה גדולה׃"],["14","28","6","르말야의 아들 페카는 유다에서 단 하루에 십이만 명을 죽였는데, 그들은 모두 용감한 사람이었다. 그들이 주 저희 조상들의 하느님을 저버렸기 때문이다.","르말리야의 아들 베가는 유다에서 하루에 장정 십이만 명을 죽였다. 선조들의 하느님 야훼를 저버린 탓으로 그런 일을 당했던 것이다.","이는 그의 조상들의 하나님 여호와를 버렸음이라 르말랴의 아들 베가가 유다에서 하루 동안에 용사 십이만 명을 죽였으며","이는 그 열조의 하나님 여호와를 버렸음이라 르말랴의 아들 베가가 유다에서 하루 동안에 용사 십 이만명을 죽였으며","르말랴의 아들 베가가 하루 동안에 유다 사람을 12만 명이나 쳐죽였는데, 이는 다 순전히 용사들의 숫자였다. 유다 백성이 그들의 조상의 하나님 여호와를 버리고 떠났기 때문에 이러한 일이 모두 일어났다.","For Pekah, son of Remaliah, killed one hundred and twenty thousand of Judah in a single day, all of them valiant men, because they had abandoned the LORD, the God of their ancestors.","For Pekah the son of Remaliah slew in Judah an hundred and twenty thousand in one day, which were all valiant men; because they had forsaken the LORD God of their fathers.","In one day Pekah son of Remaliah killed a hundred and twenty thousand soldiers in Judah--because Judah had forsaken the LORD, the God of their fathers.","Occidit enim Phacee filius Romeliae de Iuda centum viginti milia in die uno, omnes viros bellatores, eo quod reliquissent Dominum, Deum patrum suorum.","ויהרג פקח בן רמליהו ביהודה מאה ועשרים אלף ביום אחד הכל בני חיל בעזבם את יהוה אלהי אבותם׃"],["14","28","7","그리고 에프라임의 용사 지크리는 마아세야 왕자와 아즈리캄 궁내 대신과 임금 다음 서열인 엘카나를 죽였다.","에브라임의 영웅 지그리는 왕자 마아세야와 궁내대신 아즈리캄과 왕의 다음 서열인 엘카나를 죽였다.","에브라임의 용사 시그리는 왕의 아들 마아세야와 궁내대신 아스리감과 총리대신 엘가나를 죽였더라","에브라임의 용사 시그리는 왕의 아들 마아세야와 궁내대신 아스리감과 총리대신 엘가나를 죽였더라","북왕국 에브라임 지파의 용사 시그리는 왕자 마아세야와 궁중대신 아스리감과 왕의 대리자인 엘가나를 혼자서 다 쳐죽였다.","Zichri, an Ephraimite warrior, killed Maaseiah, the king’s son, and Azrikam, the master of the palace, and also Elkanah, who was second to the king.","And Zichri, a mighty man of Ephraim, slew Maaseiah the king's son, and Azrikam the governor of the house, and Elkanah that was next to the king.","Zicri, an Ephraimite warrior, killed Maaseiah the king's son, Azrikam the officer in charge of the palace, and Elkanah, second to the king.","Eodem tempore occidit Zechri vir potens ex Ephraim Maasiam filium regis et Ezricam praefectum domus, Elcanam quoque secundum a rege.","ויהרג זכרי גבור אפרים את מעשיהו בן המלך ואת עזריקם נגיד הבית ואת אלקנה משנה המלך׃"],["14","28","8","이스라엘 자손들은 또 자기들의 형제 가운데에서 여자들과 그 아들딸들을 포함하여 이십만 명을 사로잡고, 전리품도 많이 거두어 사마리아로 가져갔다.","동족인 이스라엘 군은 부녀자와 아이들을 이십만 명이나 사로잡고 재물을 많이 노략질하여 사마리아로 돌아갔다.","이스라엘 자손이 그들의 형제 중에서 그들의 아내와 자녀를 합하여 이십만 명을 사로잡고 그들의 재물을 많이 노략하여 사마리아로 가져가니","이스라엘 자손이 그 형제 중에서 그 아내와 자녀 합하여 이십만명을 사로잡고 그 재물을 많이 노략하여 사마리아로 가져가니","이스라엘 군대는 그들의 동족인 유다 백성 가운데 20만 명의 여인과 어린아이들을 사로잡아 가고, 많은 전리품을 노획하여 사마리아로 실어 갔다.","The Israelites took away as captives two hundred thousand of their kinfolk’s wives, sons, and daughters; they also took from them much plunder, which they brought to Samaria.","And the children of Israel carried away captive of their brethren two hundred thousand, women, sons, and daughters, and took also away much spoil from them, and brought the spoil to Samaria.","The Israelites took captive from their kinsmen two hundred thousand wives, sons and daughters. They also took a great deal of plunder, which they carried back to Samaria.","Ceperuntque filii Israel de fratribus suis ducenta milia mulierum, puerorum et puellarum, et infinitam praedam pertuleruntque eam in Samariam.","וישבו בני ישראל מאחיהם מאתים אלף נשים בנים ובנות וגם שלל רב בזזו מהם ויביאו את השלל לשמרון׃"],["14","28","9","그때에 사마리아에는 오뎃이라고 하는 주님의 예언자가 있었다. 그가 사마리아로 들어오는 군대 앞에 나가 말하였다. “주 여러분의 조상들의 하느님께서 유다에게 진노하시어 그들을 여러분의 손에 넘겨주셨습니다. 그런데 여러분은 하늘까지 닿는 분노를 터뜨리며 그들을 학살하였습니다.","그런데 거기에는 오뎃이라는 야훼의 예언자가 있었다. 그는 사마리아로 개선하는 군대를 나가 맞으며 말하였다. \"너희 선조들의 하느님 야훼께서 유다 백성의 일을 노여워하시어 그들을 너희 손에 부치셨다. 그리하여 너희는 하늘에 닿도록 분노를 터뜨리어 그들을 죽였다.","그 곳에 여호와의 선지자가 있는데 이름은 오뎃이라 그가 사마리아로 돌아오는 군대를 영접하고 그들에게 이르되 너희 조상의 하나님 여호와께서 유다에게 진노하셨으므로 너희 손에 넘기셨거늘 너희의 노기가 충천하여 살륙하고","그 곳에 여호와의 선지자가 있는데 이름은 오뎃이라 저가 사마리아로 돌아오는 군대를 영접하고 저희에게 이르되 너희 열조의 하나님 여호와께서 유다를 진노하신고로 너희 손에 붙이셨거늘 너희 노기가 충천하여 살륙하고","사마리아에 오뎃이라는 예언자가 살고 있었다. 그는 이스라엘 군대가 사마리아로 돌아오자 나아가 이렇게 책망하였다. \"여러분의 조상의 하나님 여호와께서 유다 백성에게 진노하시어 그들을 아람과 이스라엘의 손에 넘겨 주셨습니다. 그런데 덩달아 여러분이 분노가 충천하여 그들을 무찔러 죽였으니, 그 원한이 하늘에까지 사무쳤습니다.","In Samaria there was a prophet of the LORD by the name of Oded. He went out to meet the army returning to Samaria and said to them: “It was because the LORD, the God of your ancestors, was angry with Judah that he delivered them into your power. You, however, have killed them with a fury that has reached up to heaven.","But a prophet of the LORD was there, whose name was Oded: and he went out before the host that came to Samaria, and said unto them, Behold, because the LORD God of your fathers was wroth with Judah, he hath delivered them into your hand, and ye have slain them in a rage that reacheth up unto heaven.","But a prophet of the LORD named Oded was there, and he went out to meet the army when it returned to Samaria. He said to them, \"Because the LORD, the God of your fathers, was angry with Judah, he gave them into your hand. But you have slaughtered them in a rage that reaches to heaven.","Erat autem ibi propheta Domini nomine Oded, qui egressus obviam exercitui venienti in Samariam dixit eis:  “Ecce, iratus Dominus, Deus patrum vestrorum, contra Iudam tradidit eos in manibus vestris, et occidistis eos atrociter, ita ut ad caelum pertingeret vestra crudelitas.","ושם היה נביא ליהוה עדד שמו ויצא לפני הצבא הבא לשמרון ויאמר להם הנה בחמת יהוה אלהי אבותיכם על יהודה נתנם בידכם ותהרגו בם בזעף עד לשמים הגיע׃"],["14","28","10","더구나 이제 유다 자손들과 예루살렘 주민들을 남종과 여종으로 삼으려 하고 있습니다. 그러니 여러분 자신이 주 여러분의 하느님께 죄를 지은 것이 아닙니까?","그리고 이제 너희는 유다인들과 예루살렘 시민들을 남자 여자 할 것 없이 종으로 부려먹을 생각을 하는구나! 너희는 너희 하느님 야훼께 범죄하지 않은 줄 아느냐?","이제 너희가 또 유다와 예루살렘 백성들을 압제하여 노예로 삼고자 생각하는도다 그러나 너희는 너희의 하나님 여호와께 범죄함이 없느냐","이제 너희가 또 유다와 예루살렘 백성들을 압제하여 노예를 삼고자 생각하는도다 너희는 너희 하나님 여호와께 범죄함이 없느냐","게다가 여러분은 이제 유다와 예루살렘에서 잡아온 이 여인네와 어린아이들까지도 압제하여 노예로 만들 작정을 하고 있으니 여러분은 얼마나 더 많은 죄를 지어 여호와의 벌을 받으려는 것입니까?","And now you are planning to subjugate the people of Judah and Jerusalem as your slaves and bondwomen. Are not you yourselves, therefore, guilty of a crime against the LORD, your God?","And now ye purpose to keep under the children of Judah and Jerusalem for bondmen and bondwomen unto you: but are there not with you, even with you, sins against the LORD your God?","And now you intend to make the men and women of Judah and Jerusalem your slaves. But aren't you also guilty of sins against the LORD your God?","Insuper filios Iudae et Ierusalem vultis vobis subicere in servos et ancillas. Attamen nonne vos ipsi estis in culpa coram Domino Deo vestro?","ועתה בני יהודה וירושלם אתם אמרים לכבש לעבדים ולשפחות לכם הלא רק אתם עמכם אשמות ליהוה אלהיכם׃"],["14","28","11","이제 내 말을 들으십시오. 여러분이 형제들 가운데에서 사로잡아 온 포로들을 돌려보내십시오. 주님의 타오르는 분노가 이미 여러분에게 내렸습니다.”","이제 내 말을 들어라. 너희가 사로잡아 온 너희 동족을 돌려보내라. 야훼께서 너희가 한 일을 크게 노여워하시리라.\"","그런즉 너희는 내 말을 듣고 너희의 형제들 중에서 사로잡아 온 포로를 놓아 돌아가게 하라 여호와의 진노가 너희에게 임박하였느니라 한지라","그런즉 너희는 내 말을 듣고 너희가 형제 중에서 사로잡아 온 포로를 놓아 돌아가게 하라 여호와의 진노가 너희에게 임박하였느니라 한지라","이제 내 말을 똑똑히 들으시오! 이 포로들은 여러분의 힘없는 자매와 아우들입니다. 그들을 다시 집으로 돌려보내시오. 그렇지 않으면 여호와의 진노가 여러분에게로 되돌아올 것입니다!\"","Now listen to me: send back the captives you have carried off from among your kin, for the burning anger of the LORD is upon you.”","Now hear me therefore, and deliver the captives again, which ye have taken captive of your brethren: for the fierce wrath of the LORD is upon you.","Now listen to me! Send back your fellow countrymen you have taken as prisoners, for the LORD'S fierce anger rests on you.\"","Audite ergo consilium meum et reducite captivos, quos adduxistis de fratribus vestris, quia magnus furor Domini imminet vobis “.","ועתה שמעוני והשיבו השביה אשר שביתם מאחיכם כי חרון אף יהוה עליכם׃"],["14","28","12","에프라임 자손들의 우두머리들 가운데에서도 여호하난의 아들 아자르야, 므실레못의 아들 베레크야, 살룸의 아들 여히즈키야, 하들라이의 아들 아마사가 전쟁에서 돌아오는 자들을 가로막으며,","에브라임 백성의 어른들 가운데서 여호하난의 아들 아자리야, 므실레못의 아들 베레기야, 살룸의 아들 여히즈키야, 하들라이의 아들 아마사가 개선하는 군인들을 가로막으며","에브라임 자손의 우두머리 몇 사람 곧 요하난의 아들 아사랴와 무실레못의 아들 베레갸와 살룸의 아들 여히스기야와 하들래의 아들 아마사가 일어나서 전장에서 돌아오는 자들을 막으며","에브라임 자손의 두목 몇사람 요하난의 아들 아사랴와 무실레못의 아들 베레갸와 살룸의 아들 여히스기야와 하들래의 아들 아마사가 일어나서 전장에서 돌아오는 자를 막으며","그러자 에브라임의 지도자들이 예언자의 말에 감동하여 싸움터에서 사마리아로 돌아오는 군대 지휘관들에게 나아가 간곡히 말하였다. \"이 포로들을 도성 안으로 데려올 수는 없소! 우리가 여호와께 지은 죄와 허물이 이미 너무 커서 여호와의 진노를 샀는데 장군들은 더 큰 죄를 보탤 작정이오?\" 이렇게 예언의 말씀을 실천한 이들은 요하난의 아들 아사랴와 무실레못의 아들 베레갸와 살룸의 아들 여히스기야와 하들래의 아들 아마사였다.","At this, some of the Ephraimite leaders, Azariah, son of Johanan, Berechiah, son of Meshillemoth, Jehizkiah, son of Shallum, and Amasa, son of Hadlai, themselves stood up in opposition to those who had returned from the war.","Then certain of the heads of the children of Ephraim, Azariah the son of Johanan, Berechiah the son of Meshillemoth, and Jehizkiah the son of Shallum, and Amasa the son of Hadlai, stood up against them that came from the war,","Then some of the leaders in Ephraim--Azariah son of Jehohanan, Berekiah son of Meshillemoth, Jehizkiah son of Shallum, and Amasa son of Hadlai--confronted those who were arriving from the war.","Steterunt itaque viri de principibus filiorum Ephraim, Azarias filius Iohanan, Barachias filius Mosollamoth, Ezechias filius Sellum et Amasa filius Adali, contra eos, qui veniebant de proelio,","ויקמו אנשים מראשי בני אפרים עזריהו בן יהוחנן ברכיהו בן משלמות ויחזקיהו בן שלם ועמשא בן חדלי על הבאים מן הצבא׃"],["14","28","13","그들에게 말하였다. “여러분은 포로들을 이곳에 끌고 들어올 수 없습니다. 여러분은 주님께 죄가 되는 일을 우리에게 끌어들이려고 하는데, 그런 행위는 우리 죄악과 허물에 또 다른 죄를 보태는 것입니다. 그렇지 않아도 우리의 허물이 이미 많고 이스라엘에 대한 주님의 진노가 큽니다.”","말하였다. \"이 포로들을 데리고 들어올 수 없다. 이것은 야훼께 죄가 되는 일이다. 그렇지 않아도 죄가 많아 그의 진노가 이스라엘에 떨어질 판인데, 못할 일을 한 우리의 죄가 아직 부족하다고 생각하느냐?\"","그들에게 이르되 너희는 이 포로를 이리로 끌어들이지 못하리라 너희가 행하는 일이 우리를 여호와께 허물이 있게 함이니 우리의 죄와 허물을 더하게 함이로다 우리의 허물이 이미 커서 진노하심이 이스라엘에게 임박하였느니라 하매","저희에게 이르되 너희는 이 포로를 이리로 끌어 들이지 못하리라 너희의 경영하는 일이 우리로 여호와께 허물이 있게 함이니 우리의 죄와 허물을 더하게 함이로다 우리의 허물이 이미 커서 진노하심이 이스라엘에게 임박하였느니라 하매","(12절에 포함되어 있음)","They said to them: “Do not bring the captives here, for what you are planning will make us guilty before the LORD and increase our sins and our guilt. Great is our guilt, and there is burning anger upon Israel.”","And said unto them, Ye shall not bring in the captives hither: for whereas we have offended against the LORD already, ye intend to add more to our sins and to our trespass: for our trespass is great, and there is fierce wrath against Israel.","\"You must not bring those prisoners here,\" they said, \"or we will be guilty before the LORD. Do you intend to add to our sin and guilt? For our guilt is already great, and his fierce anger rests on Israel.\"","et dixerunt eis:  “Non introducetis huc captivos, quia ad culpam coram Domino, quae iam est super nos, vultis adicere super peccata nostra et culpam nostram. Grandis quippe culpa est nobis, et ira furoris Domini super Israel “.","ויאמרו להם לא תביאו את השביה הנה כי לאשמת יהוה עלינו אתם אמרים להסיף על חטאתינו ועל אשמתינו כי רבה אשמה לנו וחרון אף על ישראל׃"],["14","28","14","그러자 군사들이 포로들과 노획품을 대신들과 지도자들과 온 회중에게 넘기고,","군인들은 포로들과 전리품을 장교들과 온 회중 앞에 내놓았다.","이에 무기를 가진 사람들이 포로와 노략한 물건을 방백들과 온 회중 앞에 둔지라","이에 병기를 가진 사람이 포로와 노략한 물건을 방백들과 온 회중 앞에 둔지라","이에 군인들이 모든 포로들을 백성의 지도자들과 온 무리 앞에서 풀어 주고, 전리품까지도 내놓았다.","Therefore the soldiers left their captives and the plunder before the princes and the whole assembly.","So the armed men left the captives and the spoil before the princes and all the congregation.","So the soldiers gave up the prisoners and plunder in the presence of the officials and all the assembly.","Dimiseruntque viri bellatores captivos et universa, quae ceperant, coram principibus et omni multitudine.","ויעזב החלוץ את השביה ואת הבזה לפני השרים וכל הקהל׃"],["14","28","15","지명을 받은 사람들이 나서서 포로들을 돌보는 일을 맡았다. 그들은 전리품에서 옷을 가져다가 벌거벗은 이들에게 모두 입혀 주었다. 이렇게 그들은 포로들에게 옷을 입혀 주고 신을 신겨 주었으며, 먹을 것과 마실 것을 주고 기름을 발라 주었다. 그리고 걷지 못하는 이들은 모두 나귀에 태워 ‘야자나무 성읍’ 예리코에 있는 그들의 형제들에게 데려다 준 다음, 사마리아로 돌아갔다.","사람들은 포로들을 돌봐 줄 사람을 지명해서 전리품 가운데서 옷을 찾아내어 벌거벗은 사람들에게 입혀주고 신을 찾아 신겨줄 뿐 아니라 먹을 것과 마실 것을 주고 약을 발라주었다. 걸을 수 없는 사람들은 나귀에 태워 종려나무 성읍 예리고로 데려다가 친척들에게 돌려주고 사마리아로 돌아갔다.","이 위에 이름이 기록된 자들이 일어나서 포로를 맞고 노략하여 온 것 중에서 옷을 가져다가 벗은 자들에게 입히며 신을 신기며 먹이고 마시게 하며 기름을 바르고 그 약한 자들은 모두 나귀에 태워 데리고 종려나무 성 여리고에 이르러 그의 형제에게 돌려준 후에 사마리아로 돌아갔더라","이 위에 이름이 기록된 자들이 일어나서 포로를 맞고 노략하여 온 중에서 옷을 취하여 벗은 자에게 입히며 신을 신기며 먹이고 마시우며 기름을 바르고 그 약한 자는 나귀에 태워 데리고 종려나무 성 여리고에 이르러 그 형제에게 돌린 후에 사마리아로 돌아갔더라","백성의 지도자들은 몇 사람을 임명하여 포로 송환의 임무를 맡겼다. 그들은 모두 심판 속에서도 주님의 자비를 체험하게 하는 관대한 이들이었다. 그들은 전리품 속에서 옷과 신을 꺼내어 알몸인 포로들에게 나누어 주었다. 또 먹을 것과 마실 것을 주고, 병들고 부상당한 이들을 고쳐주었다. 그리고 걸어갈 수 없을 정도로 허약한 이들은 나귀에 태운 뒤 모든 포로들을 이끌고 종려나무의 성인 여리고에까지 데리고 가서 유다 백성들에게 넘겨 주고 그들은 다시 사마리아로 돌아왔다.","Then the men just named proceeded to help the captives. All of them who were naked they clothed from the spoils; they clothed them, put sandals on their feet, gave them food and drink, anointed them, and all who were weak they set on donkeys. They brought them to Jericho, the City of Palms, to their kinfolk. Then they returned to Samaria.","And the men which were expressed by name rose up, and took the captives, and with the spoil clothed all that were naked among them, and arrayed them, and shod them, and gave them to eat and to drink, and anointed them, and carried all the feeble of them upon asses, and brought them to Jericho, the city of palm trees, to their brethren: then they returned to Samaria.","The men designated by name took the prisoners, and from the plunder they clothed all who were naked. They provided them with clothes and sandals, food and drink, and healing balm. All those who were weak they put on donkeys. So they took them back to their fellow countrymen at Jericho, the City of Palms, and returned to Samaria.","Et surrexerunt viri nominatim designati et confortaverunt captivos omnesque, qui nudi erant, vestierunt de spoliis. Cumque vestissent eos et calceassent et refecissent cibo ac potu unxissentque, deduxerunt eos sollicite, et quidem omnes vacillantes in iumentis, et adduxerunt Iericho civitatem Palmarum ad fratres eorum. Ipsique reversi sunt Samariam.","ויקמו האנשים אשר נקבו בשמות ויחזיקו בשביה וכל מערמיהם הלבישו מן השלל וילבשום וינעלום ויאכלום וישקום ויסכום וינהלום בחמרים לכל כושל ויביאום ירחו עיר התמרים אצל אחיהם וישובו שמרון׃"],["14","28","16","그때에 아하즈 임금이 사신을 보내어 아시리아 임금들에게 도움을 청하였다.","아하즈 왕이 아시리아 왕들에게 도움을 청한 것도 그 때였다.","그 때에 아하스 왕이 앗수르 왕에게 사람을 보내어 도와 주기를 구하였으니","그 때에 아하스왕이 앗수르 왕에게 보내어 도와주기를 구하였으니","아람과 이스라엘의 침공으로 해서 나라가 환난을 당할 때에 아하스는 회개하여 하나님을 의지하지 않고 앗수르 왕에게 특사를 파견하여 군사 지원을 요청하였다.","At that time King Ahaz sent an appeal for help to the kings of Assyria.","At that time did king Ahaz send unto the kings of Assyria to help him.","At that time King Ahaz sent to the king of Assyria for help.","Tempore illo misit rex Achaz ad regem Assyriorum auxilium postulans.","בעת ההיא שלח המלך אחז על מלכי אשור לעזר לו׃"],["14","28","17","에돔인들이 다시 와서 유다를 치고, 포로들을 끌고 갔기 때문이다.","에돔 군이 다시 유다에 쳐들어와 사람들을 사로잡아 갔고","이는 에돔 사람들이 다시 와서 유다를 치고 그의 백성을 사로잡았음이며","이는 에돔 사람이 다시 와서 유다를 치고 그 백성을 사로잡았음이며","다시 에돔 족속들까지 침공하여 유다 백성들을 포로로 잡아갔기 때문이었다.","The Edomites had returned, attacked Judah, and carried off captives.","For again the Edomites had come and smitten Judah, and carried away captives.","The Edomites had again come and attacked Judah and carried away prisoners,","Venerunt enim et Idumaei et percusserunt Iudam et ceperunt captivos.","ועוד אדומים באו ויכו ביהודה וישבו שבי׃"],["14","28","18","필리스티아인들도 평원 지대와 유다 남부의 성읍들을 공격하여 벳 세메스, 아얄론, 그데롯, 소코와 거기에 딸린 마을들, 팀나와 거기에 딸린 마을들, 김조와 거기에 딸린 마을들을 점령하고 그곳에 자리 잡았다.","불레셋 군은 야산 지대와 유다 남부에 있는 성읍들을 털어갔으며 벳세메스, 아얄론, 그데롯, 소코와 거기에 딸린 촌락들과 딤나와 거기에 딸린 촌락들과 김조와 거기에 딸린 촌락들을 점령하고 살았다.","블레셋 사람들도 유다의 평지와 남방 성읍들을 침노하여 벧세메스와 아얄론과 그데롯과 소고 및 그 주변 마을들과 딤나 및 그 주변 마을들과 김소 및 그 주변 마을들을 점령하고 거기에 살았으니","블레셋 사람도 유다의 평지와 남방 성읍들을 침노하여 벧세메스와 아얄론과 그데롯과 소고와 그 동네와 딤나와 그 동네와 김소와 그 동네를 취하고 거기 거하였으니","블레셋 족속들도 유다 서쪽 야산지대의 성읍들과 남쪽의 농경지대로 침입하여 벧세메스와 아얄론과 그데롯과 소고와 딤나와 김소와 또 이 성읍들에 딸린 마을들을 차지하여 그곳에 정착해 살았다.","The Philistines too had raided the cities of the Shephelah and the Negeb of Judah; they captured Beth-shemesh, Aijalon, Gederoth, Soco and its dependencies, Timnah and its dependencies, and Gimzo and its dependencies, and settled there.","The Philistines also had invaded the cities of the low country, and of the south of Judah, and had taken Bethshemesh, and Ajalon, and Gederoth, and Shocho with the villages thereof, and Timnah with the villages thereof, Gimzo also and the villages thereof: and they dwelt there.","while the Philistines had raided towns in the foothills and in the Negev of Judah. They captured and occupied Beth Shemesh, Aijalon and Gederoth, as well as Soco, Timnah and Gimzo, with their surrounding villages.","Philisthim quoque diffusi sunt per urbes Sephelae et Nageb Iudae ceperuntque Bethsames et Aialon et Gederoth, Socho quoque cum viculis eius et Thamnan et Gamzo cum viculis earum et habitaverunt in eis.","ופלשתים פשטו בערי השפלה והנגב ליהודה וילכדו את בית שמש ואת אילון ואת הגדרות ואת שוכו ובנותיה ואת תמנה ובנותיה ואת גמזו ואת בנתיה וישבו שם׃"],["14","28","19","이스라엘 임금 아하즈가 유다에서 멋대로 행동하면서 주님을 배신하였으므로, 주님께서 유다를 낮추셨던 것이다.","야훼께 반역하는 일만 하여 온 나라 일을 그르친 아하즈 왕 때문에 야훼께서는 유다를 꺾으셨던 것이다.","이는 이스라엘 왕 아하스가 유다에서 망령되이 행하여 여호와께 크게 범죄하였으므로 여호와께서 유다를 낮추심이라","이는 이스라엘 왕 아하스가 유다에서 망령되이 행하여 여호와께 크게 범죄하였으므로 여호와께서 유다를 낮추심이라","아하스왕이 여호와를 버리고 떠나서 유다 백성에게 우상숭배의 길을 열어 놓았기 때문에 주께서 이렇게 유다 백성을 징벌하신 것이다.","For the LORD had brought Judah low because of Ahaz, king of Israel, who let Judah go its own way and committed treachery against the LORD.","For the LORD brought Judah low because of Ahaz king of Israel; for he made Judah naked, and transgressed sore against the LORD.","The LORD had humbled Judah because of Ahaz king of Israel, for he had promoted wickedness in Judah and had been most unfaithful to the LORD.","Humiliaverat enim Dominus Iudam propter Achaz regem Israel, eo quod relaxasset ei frenum et contemptui habuisset Dominum.","כי הכניע יהוה את יהודה בעבור אחז מלך ישראל כי הפריע ביהודה ומעול מעל ביהוה׃"],["14","28","20","그리하여 아시리아 임금 티글랏 필에세르가 아하즈에게 왔지만, 힘을 보태 주기는커녕 오히려 아하즈를 포위해 버렸다.","아시리아 왕 디글랏빌레셀도 왔지만 힘이 되어주기는커녕 도리어 포위 공격하였다.","앗수르 왕 디글랏빌레셀이 그에게 이르렀으나 돕지 아니하고 도리어 그를 공격하였더라","앗수르 왕 디글랏 빌레셀이 이르렀으나 돕지 아니하고 도리어 군박하였더라","앗수르 왕 디글랏빌레셀이 대군을 거느리고 내려왔다. 그러나 그는 아하스를 돕기는 커녕 오히려 위협하였다.","Tiglath-pileser, king of Assyria, did indeed come to him, but to oppress him rather than to lend strength.","And Tilgathpilneser king of Assyria came unto him, and distressed him, but strengthened him not.","Tiglath-Pileser king of Assyria came to him, but he gave him trouble instead of help.","Venitque contra eum Theglathphalasar rex Assyriorum, qui afflixit eum, non autem confortavit.","ויבא עליו תלגת פלנאסר מלך אשור ויצר לו ולא חזקו׃"],["14","28","21","그래서 아하즈가 주님의 집과 왕궁과 대신들의 집에서 재물을 빼앗아 아시리아 임금에게 주었으나, 그는 아하즈를 도와주지 않았다.","그래서 아하즈는 야훼의 성전과 왕궁과 대신들의 집들을 털어 아시리아 왕에게 바쳤으나 헛된 일이었다.","아하스가 여호와의 전과 왕궁과 방백들의 집에서 재물을 가져다가 앗수르 왕에게 주었으나 그에게 유익이 없었더라","아하스가 여호와의 전과 왕궁과 방백들의 집에서 재물을 취하여 앗수르 왕에게 주었으나 유익이 없었더라","아하스가 성전과 왕궁과 지도층에 있는 사람들의 집에서 보물을 모아다가 앗수르 왕에게 뇌물로 바쳤으나 아무 도움도 받지 못하였다.","Though Ahaz plundered the LORD’s house and the houses of the king and the princes to pay off the king of Assyria, it was no help to him.","For Ahaz took away a portion out of the house of the LORD, and out of the house of the king, and of the princes, and gave it unto the king of Assyria: but he helped him not.","Ahaz took some of the things from the temple of the LORD and from the royal palace and from the princes and presented them to the king of Assyria, but that did not help him.","Achaz enim, spoliata domo Domini et domo regis et principum, dedit regi Assyriorum munera, et tamen nihil ei profuit.","כי חלק אחז את בית יהוה ואת בית המלך והשרים ויתן למלך אשור ולא לעזרה לו׃"],["14","28","22","아하즈 임금은 이렇게 곤경에 빠졌을 때에도 줄곧 주님을 배신하였다.","이 아하즈 왕은 포위 공격을 당하게 되자 더욱더 야훼께 반역하였다.","이 아하스 왕이 곤고할 때에 더욱 여호와께 범죄하여","이 아하스왕이 곤고할 때에 더욱 여호와께 범죄하여","아하스왕은 나라가 사방에서 침략을 받아 더없이 짓눌리는 때에도 여전히 여호와께 거역하고 더욱 흉악한 짓을 저질렀다.","While he was already in distress, the same King Ahaz increased his treachery to the LORD.","And in the time of his distress did he trespass yet more against the LORD: this is that king Ahaz.","In his time of trouble King Ahaz became even more unfaithful to the LORD.","Insuper et in tempore angustiae suae auxit contemptum in Dominum. Ipse rex Achaz","ובעת הצר לו ויוסף למעול ביהוה הוא המלך אחז׃"],["14","28","23","그는 자기를 친 다마스쿠스의 신들에게 제물을 바치며, “아람 임금들의 신들이 그들을 도와주었으니, 나도 이 신들에게 제물을 바치면 이 신들이 나를 도와주겠지.” 하고 말하였다. 그러나 그 신들이 오히려 아하즈와 온 이스라엘을 망하게 만들었다.","그는 자기를 쳐부순 다마스쿠스의 신들에게 고사를 지냈다. \"시리아 왕실의 신들은 제 백성을 도와줄 수 있었지. 그러니 나도 그 신들에게 고사를 지내야지. 그러면 도와주겠지.\" 이런 생각이었다. 그러나 그 때문에 아하즈와 온 이스라엘은 자멸하고 말았다.","자기를 친 다메섹 신들에게 제사하여 이르되 아람 왕들의 신들이 그들을 도왔으니 나도 그 신에게 제사하여 나를 돕게 하리라 하였으나 그 신이 아하스와 온 이스라엘을 망하게 하였더라","자기를 친 다메섹 신들에게 제사하여 가로되 아람 열왕의 신들이 저희를 도왔으니 나도 그 신에게 제사하여 나를 돕게 하리라 하였으나 그 신이 아하스와 온 이스라엘을 망케 하였더라","그는 아람 족속에게 패배를 겪고서도 그 나라의 신들에게 제물을 바쳤다. 아람의 신들이 이스라엘의 하나님보다 더 높기 때문에 아람 군대가 승리할 것으로 생각한 것이다. 그가 말하였다. \"아람의 수도 다메섹의 신들이 그 나라의 왕들을 도와주어서 내가 싸움에 졌다. 그러니 이제 다메섹의 신들을 모셔놓고 제물을 바치면, 그 신들이 나를 도울 것이다.\" 그러나 그 신들이 아하스와 온 이스라엘 백성에게 가져다 준 것은 패망뿐이었다.","He sacrificed to the gods of Damascus who had defeated him, saying, “Since it was the gods of the kings of Aram who helped them, I will sacrifice to them that they may help me also.” However, they only furthered his downfall and that of all Israel.","For he sacrificed unto the gods of Damascus, which smote him: and he said, Because the gods of the kings of Syria help them, therefore will I sacrifice to them, that they may help me. But they were the ruin of him, and of all Israel.","He offered sacrifices to the gods of Damascus, who had defeated him; for he thought, \"Since the gods of the kings of Aram have helped them, I will sacrifice to them so they will help me.\" But they were his downfall and the downfall of all Israel.","immolavit diis Damasci victimas percussoribus suis et dixit:  “Dii regum Syriae auxiliantur eis; quos ego placabo hostiis, et aderunt mihi “, cum e contrario ipsi fuerint ruina ei et universo Israel.","ויזבח לאלהי דרמשק המכים בו ויאמר כי אלהי מלכי ארם הם מעזרים אותם להם אזבח ויעזרוני והם היו לו להכשילו ולכל ישראל׃"],["14","28","24","아하즈는 또 하느님의 집 기물들을 모았다. 그는 하느님의 집 기물들을 떼어 내고 이 주님의 집 문들을 잠가 버렸다. 그러고 나서 멋대로 예루살렘 모퉁이마다 제단을 만들었다.","아하즈는 하느님의 성전에서 기구들을 거두어 부수고 야훼의 성전 문들을 봉해 버렸다. 그리고 예루살렘 모퉁이마다에 제단을 만들어 세웠다.","아하스가 하나님의 전의 기구들을 모아 하나님의 전의 기구들을 부수고 또 여호와의 전 문들을 닫고 예루살렘 구석마다 제단을 쌓고","아하스가 하나님의 전의 기구들을 모아 훼파하고 또 여호와의 전문들을 닫고 예루살렘 구석마다 단을 쌓고","아하스는 또 앗수르 왕의 비위를 맞추려고 예루살렘 성전의 그릇과 기구들을 모조리 거두어다가 깨뜨려 없애 버리고, 성전의 모든 문을 폐쇄시켰다. 아하스는 앗수르의 강력한 정치 세력 밑에서 스스로 예루살렘의 모든 거리에 제단을 세우고 앗수르의 신들을 섬겼다.","Ahaz gathered up the utensils of God’s house and broke them in pieces. He closed the doors of the LORD’s house and made altars for himself in every corner of Jerusalem.","And Ahaz gathered together the vessels of the house of God, and cut in pieces the vessels of the house of God, and shut up the doors of the house of the LORD, and he made him altars in every corner of Jerusalem.","Ahaz gathered together the furnishings from the temple of God and took them away. He shut the doors of the LORD'S temple and set up altars at every street corner in Jerusalem.","Direptis itaque Achaz omnibus vasis domus Dei atque confractis, clausit ianuas templi Dei et fecit sibi altaria in universis angulis Ierusalem.","ויאסף אחז את כלי בית האלהים ויקצץ את כלי בית האלהים ויסגר את דלתות בית יהוה ויעש לו מזבחות בכל פנה בירושלם׃"],["14","28","25","또 유다의 성읍마다 산당을 세우고 다른 신들에게 향을 피워, 자기 조상들의 하느님이신 주님의 화를 돋우었다.","또 유다의 성읍마다 산당을 세우고 남의 나라 신들에게 분향하게 하여 선조의 하느님 야훼를 진노케 하였다.","유다 각 성읍에 산당을 세워 다른 신에게 분향하여 그의 조상들의 하나님 여호와를 진노하게 하였더라","유다 각 성읍에 산당을 세워 다른 신에게 분향하여 그 열조의 하나님 여호와의 노를 격발케 하였더라","그는 또 유다의 모든 지방 성읍에도 제사처들을 만들어 놓고 이방신들에게 제물을 바치게 하였다. 그는 이렇게 온갖 죄를 저질러 자기 조상들의 하나님 여호와를 진노하게 하였다.","In every city throughout Judah he set up high places to offer sacrifice to other gods. Thus he provoked the LORD, the God of his ancestors, to anger.","And in every several city of Judah he made high places to burn incense unto other gods, and provoked to anger the LORD God of his fathers.","In every town in Judah he built high places to burn sacrifices to other gods and provoked the LORD, the God of his fathers, to anger.","In singulis quoque urbibus Iudae exstruxit excelsa ad adolendum diis alienis atque ad iracundiam provocavit Dominum, Deum patrum suorum.","ובכל עיר ועיר ליהודה עשה במות לקטר לאלהים אחרים ויכעס את יהוה אלהי אבתיו׃"],["14","28","26","아하즈의 나머지 행적과 그가 걸어간 모든 길에 관해서는 처음부터 끝까지 유다와 이스라엘 임금들의 실록에 쓰여 있다.","그의 나머지 역사와 모든 행적은 처음부터 끝까지 유다와 이스라엘의 왕조실록에 기록되어 있다.","아하스의 남은 시종 사적과 모든 행위는 유다와 이스라엘 열왕기에 기록되니라","아하스의 이 외의 시종 사적과 모든 행위는 유다와 이스라엘 열왕기에 기록되니라","아하스의 모든 행실에 대하여 더 전할 수 있는 것은 처음부터 끝까지 유다와 이스라엘 역대 왕들의 행적을 기록한 열왕기에서 읽을 수 있다.","The rest of his words and his deeds, first and last, are recorded in the book of the kings of Judah and Israel.","Now the rest of his acts and of all his ways, first and last, behold, they are written in the book of the kings of Judah and Israel.","The other events of his reign and all his ways, from beginning to end, are written in the book of the kings of Judah and Israel.","Reliqua autem gestorum eius et omnium operum suorum priorum et novissimorum scripta sunt in libro regum Iudae et Israel.","ויתר דבריו וכל דרכיו הראשנים והאחרונים הנם כתובים על ספר מלכי יהודה וישראל׃"],["14","28","27","아하즈가 자기 조상들과 함께 잠들자, 사람들은 그를 이스라엘 임금들의 무덤에 매장하지 않고 예루살렘 성안에 묻었다. 그의 아들 히즈키야가 그 뒤를 이어 임금이 되었다.","아하즈가 세상을 떠나자 유다 왕실 묘지에 모시지 않고 예루살렘 성 안에 모셨다. 그의 아들 히즈키야가 뒤를 이어 왕위에 올랐다.","아하스가 그의 조상들과 함께 누우매 이스라엘 왕들의 묘실에 들이지 아니하고 예루살렘 성에 장사하였더라 그의 아들 히스기야가 대신하여 왕이 되니라","아하스가 그 열조와 함께 자매 이스라엘 열왕의 묘실에 들이지 아니하고 예루살렘성에 장사하였더라 그 아들 히스기야가 대신하여 왕이 되니라","아하스가 죽어 예루살렘의 다윗성에 안장되었으나, 이스라엘 왕들의 무덤에는 들어가지 못하였다. 그의 아들 히스기야가 뒤를 이어 왕위에 올랐다.","Ahaz rested with his ancestors and was buried in Jerusalem—in the city, for they did not bring him to the tombs of the kings of Israel. His son Hezekiah succeeded him as king.","And Ahaz slept with his fathers, and they buried him in the city, even in Jerusalem: but they brought him not into the sepulchres of the kings of Israel: and Hezekiah his son reigned in his stead.","Ahaz rested with his fathers and was buried in the city of Jerusalem, but he was not placed in the tombs of the kings of Israel. And Hezekiah his son succeeded him as king.","Dormivitque Achaz cum patribus suis, et sepelierunt eum in civitate Ierusalem; non autem posuerunt eum in sepulcra regum Israel. Regnavitque Ezechias filius eius pro eo.","וישכב אחז עם אבתיו ויקברהו בעיר בירושלם כי לא הביאהו לקברי מלכי ישראל וימלך יחזקיהו בנו תחתיו׃"],["14","29","1","히즈키야는 스물다섯 살에 임금이 되어, 예루살렘에서 스물아홉 해 동안 다스렸다. 그의 어머니 이름은 아비야인데 즈카르야의 딸이었다.","히즈키야는 이십오 세에 왕위에 올라 예루살렘에서 이십구 년간 다스렸다. 그의 어머니는 즈가리야의 딸로서 이름을 아비야라고 하였다.","히스기야가 왕위에 오를 때에 나이가 이십오 세라 예루살렘에서 이십구 년 동안 다스리니라 그의 어머니의 이름은 아비야요 스가랴의 딸이더라","히스기야가 위에 나아갈 때에 나이 이십 오세라 예루살렘에서 이십 구년을 치리하니라 그 모친의 이름은 아비야라 스가랴의 딸이더라","히스기야는 25세에 왕이 되어 29년 동안 예루살렘에서 다스렸다. 그의 어머니는 스가랴의 딸 아비야였다.","Hezekiah was twenty-five years old when he became king, and he reigned twenty-nine years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Abijah, daughter of Zechariah.","Hezekiah began to reign when he was five and twenty years old, and he reigned nine and twenty years in Jerusalem. And his mother's name was Abijah, the daughter of Zechariah.","Hezekiah was twenty-five years old when he became king, and he reigned in Jerusalem twenty-nine years. His mother's name was Abijah daughter of Zechariah.","Igitur Ezechias regnare coepit, cum viginti quinque esset annorum, et viginti novem annis regnavit in Ierusalem. Nomen matris eius Abi filia Zachariae.","יחזקיהו מלך בן עשרים וחמש שנה ועשרים ותשע שנה מלך בירושלם ושם אמו אביה בת זכריהו׃"],["14","29","2","그는 자기 조상 다윗이 하던 그대로, 주님의 눈에 드는 옳은 일을 하였다.","그는 태조 다윗 못지않게 야훼 보시기에 옳은 일을 하였다.","히스기야가 그의 조상 다윗의 모든 행실과 같이 여호와 보시기에 정직하게 행하여","히스기야가 그 조상 다윗의 모든 행위와 같이 여호와 보시기에 정직히 행하여","히스기야는 그의 조상 다윗을 본받아 여호와의 마음에 드는 일들을 하였다.","He did what was right in the LORD’s sight, just as David his father had done.","And he did that which was right in the sight of the LORD, according to all that David his father had done.","He did what was right in the eyes of the LORD, just as his father David had done.","Fecitque, quod erat placitum in conspectu Domini, iuxta omnia, quae fecerat David pater eius.","ויעש הישר בעיני יהוה ככל אשר עשה דויד אביו׃"],["14","29","3","히즈키야는 임금이 되던 첫해 첫째 달에, 주님의 집 문들을 열고 보수하였다.","그는 왕이 되면서 첫 해 첫 달에 야훼의 성전 문들을 열어 수리하고","첫째 해 첫째 달에 여호와의 전 문들을 열고 수리하고","원년 정월에 여호와의 전 문들을 열고 수리하고","히스기야는 왕이 된 첫해 첫달에 여호와의 성전문들을 모두 열고 수리하였다.","In the first month of the first year of his reign, he opened the doors of the LORD’s house and repaired them.","He in the first year of his reign, in the first month, opened the doors of the house of the LORD, and repaired them.","In the first month of the first year of his reign, he opened the doors of the temple of the LORD and repaired them.","Ipse anno et mense primo regni sui aperuit valvas domus Domini et instauravit eas.","הוא בשנה הראשונה למלכו בחדש הראשון פתח את דלתות בית יהוה ויחזקם׃"],["14","29","4","그는 사제들과 레위인들을 오라고 하여 동쪽 광장에 모은 다음,","사제들과 레위인들을 동쪽 광장에 불러모은 다음","제사장들과 레위 사람들을 동쪽 광장에 모으고","제사장들과 레위 사람들을 동편 광장에 모으고","그는 제사장들과 레위 사람들을 성전 동쪽의 광장에 불러모으고","He summoned the priests and Levites, gathering them in the open space to the east,","And he brought in the priests and the Levites, and gathered them together into the east street,","He brought in the priests and the Levites, assembled them in the square on the east side","Adduxitque sacerdotes atque Levitas et congregavit eos in plateam orientalem","ויבא את הכהנים ואת הלוים ויאספם לרחוב המזרח׃"],["14","29","5","그들에게 말하였다. “레위인들은 내 말을 들으시오. 그대들은 이제 자신들을 먼저 거룩하게 하고, 그대들 조상들의 하느님이신 주님의 집을 거룩하게 하시오. 그리고 성소에서 부정한 것을 끌어내시오.","이렇게 말하였다. \"레위인들은 내 말을 들어라. 너희는 이제 목욕재계하고 너희 선조들의 하느님 야훼의 전을 깨끗이 하여라. 성소에서 부정한 것을 쓸어내어라.","그들에게 이르되 레위 사람들아 내 말을 들으라 이제 너희는 성결하게 하고 또 너희 조상들의 하나님 여호와의 전을 성결하게 하여 그 더러운 것을 성소에서 없애라","저희에게 이르되 레위 사람들아 내 말을 들으라 이제 너희는 성결케 하고 또 너희 열조의 하나님 여호와의 전을 성결케 하여 그 더러운 것을 성소에서 없이하라","이렇게 말하였다. \"레위 지파 여러분, 내 말을 잘 들으시오! 이제 여러분은 자신을 성결하게 하여 각자 맡은 직무를 수행할 준비를 하시오! 여러분의 조상의 하나님 여호와의 성전도 다시 청소하여 성결하게 하시오. 성전을 더럽힌 부정한 것들을 모조리 성전에서 치워 없애시오!","and said to them: “Listen to me, you Levites! Sanctify yourselves now and sanctify the house of the LORD, the God of your ancestors, and clean out the filth from the sanctuary.","And said unto them, Hear me, ye Levites, sanctify now yourselves, and sanctify the house of the LORD God of your fathers, and carry forth the filthiness out of the holy place.","and said: \"Listen to me, Levites! Consecrate yourselves now and consecrate the temple of the LORD, the God of your fathers. Remove all defilement from the sanctuary.","dixitque ad eos:  “Audite me, Levitae! Nunc sanctificamini; mundate domum Domini, Dei patrum vestrorum, et auferte omnem immunditiam de sanctuario.","ויאמר להם שמעוני הלוים עתה התקדשו וקדשו את בית יהוה אלהי אבתיכם והוציאו את הנדה מן הקדש׃"],["14","29","6","우리 선조들은 배신하여, 주 우리 하느님의 눈에 거슬리는 악한 짓을 저지르고 그분을 저버렸으며, 주님의 거처에서 자기들의 얼굴을 돌리고 등을 돌렸소.","우리 선조들은 우리 하느님 야훼께 반역하여 그의 눈에 거슬리는 일을 하였다. 야훼를 저버리고 그가 계시는 곳을 바라보기도 싫어하여 등을 돌리고 말았다.","우리 조상들이 범죄하여 우리 하나님 여호와 보시기에 악을 행하여 하나님을 버리고 얼굴을 돌려 여호와의 성소를 등지고","우리 열조가 범죄하여 우리 하나님 여호와 보시기에 악을 행하여 하나님을 버리고 얼굴을 돌이켜 여호와의 성소를 등지고","우리 조상들은 주님을 배반하고, 주께서 악하게 보시는 일들만 저질렀습니다. 그들은 주님의 성전에서 고개를 돌리고 주님에게서 멀리 떠나갔습니다. 주님에게 등을 돌렸습니다.","Our ancestors acted treacherously and did what was evil in the eyes of the LORD, our God. They abandoned him, turned away their faces from the LORD’s dwelling, and turned their backs on him.","For our fathers have trespassed, and done that which was evil in the eyes of the LORD our God, and have forsaken him, and have turned away their faces from the habitation of the LORD, and turned their backs.","Our fathers were unfaithful; they did evil in the eyes of the LORD our God and forsook him. They turned their faces away from the LORD'S dwelling place and turned their backs on him.","Peccaverunt patres nostri et fecerunt malum in conspectu Domini Dei nostri derelinquentes eum; averterunt facies suas a tabernaculo Domini et praebuerunt dorsum.","כי מעלו אבתינו ועשו הרע בעיני יהוה אלהינו ויעזבהו ויסבו פניהם ממשכן יהוה ויתנו ערף׃"],["14","29","7","그들은 또 주님의 집 현관문들을 잠가 버리고 등불을 꺼 버렸으며, 성소에서 이스라엘의 하느님께 향도 피우지 않고 번제물도 바치지 않았소.","현관 앞 문들을 봉하고 등을 끄고 성소에서 이스라엘의 하느님께 분향하지도 않았으며 번제도 드리지 않았다.","또 낭실 문을 닫으며 등불을 끄고 성소에서 분향하지 아니하며 이스라엘의 하나님께 번제를 드리지 아니하므로","또 낭실 문을 닫으며 등불을 끄고 성소에서 분향하지 아니하며 이스라엘 하나님께 번제를 드리지 아니한고로","심지어 그들은 성전 낭실의 문들까지 폐쇄해 버렸습니다. 성전의 등불을 모두 끄고 성전에서 이스라엘의 하나님께 분향의 제물도, 번제의 제물도 바치지 않았습니다.","They also closed the doors of the vestibule, extinguished the lamps, and failed to burn incense and sacrifice burnt offerings in the sanctuary to the God of Israel.","Also they have shut up the doors of the porch, and put out the lamps, and have not burned incense nor offered burnt offerings in the holy place unto the God of Israel.","They also shut the doors of the portico and put out the lamps. They did not burn incense or present any burnt offerings at the sanctuary to the God of Israel.","Insuper clauserunt ostia, quae erant in porticu, et exstinxerunt lucernas incensumque non adoleverunt et holocausta non obtulerunt in sanctuario Deo Israel.","גם סגרו דלתות האולם ויכבו את הנרות וקטרת לא הקטירו ועלה לא העלו בקדש לאלהי ישראל׃"],["14","29","8","그래서 주님의 진노가 유다와 예루살렘에 내린 것이오. 그대들이 눈으로 보았듯이 그분께서는 유다와 예루살렘 주민들을 두려움과 놀람과 비웃음 거리가 되게 하셨소.","야훼께서 유다와 예루살렘에 진노를 터뜨리신 것은 그 때문이었다. 그래서 너희가 보는 대로 모두 다 놀랄 만큼 끔찍스러운 일을 당한 것이다.","여호와께서 유다와 예루살렘에 진노하시고 내버리사 두려움과 놀람과 비웃음거리가 되게 하신 것을 너희가 똑똑히 보는 바라","여호와께서 유다와 예루살렘을 진노하시고 내어버리사 두려움과 놀람과 비웃음거리가 되게 하신 것을 너희가 목도하는바라","그래서 여호와께서는 유다와 예루살렘 백성에게 크게 진노하셨습니다. 주께서는 그들을 내어 버리시고 공포와 떨림과 조롱을 당하게 하셨습니다. 이러한 사실은 여러분이 오늘날 직접 보고 있는 일입니다.","Therefore the anger of the LORD has come upon Judah and Jerusalem; he has made them an object of terror, horror, and hissing, as you see with your own eyes.","Wherefore the wrath of the LORD was upon Judah and Jerusalem, and he hath delivered them to trouble, to astonishment, and to hissing, as ye see with your eyes.","Therefore, the anger of the LORD has fallen on Judah and Jerusalem; he has made them an object of dread and horror and scorn, as you can see with your own eyes.","Concitatus est itaque furor Domini super Iudam et Ierusalem; tradiditque eos in commotionem et in stuporem et in sibilum, sicut ipsi cernitis oculis vestris.","ויהי קצף יהוה על יהודה וירושלם ויתנם לזועה לשמה ולשרקה כאשר אתם ראים בעיניכם׃"],["14","29","9","우리 조상들이 칼에 맞아 쓰러지고, 우리 아들딸들과 아내들이 잡혀간 것은 바로 그 때문이오.","알겠느냐? 우리 선조들이 칼에 맞아 죽고 아들딸과 아내들이 사로잡혀 가게 된 것은 바로 그 때문이었다.","이로 말미암아 우리의 조상들이 칼에 엎드러지며 우리의 자녀와 아내들이 사로잡혔느니라","이로 인하여 우리의 열조가 칼에 엎드러지며 우리의 자녀와 아내가 사로잡혔느니라","우리의 조상들이 전쟁에서 죽고 부녀자와 어린아이들이 포로로 잡혀간 것도 그 때문입니다.","For our ancestors fell by the sword, and our sons, our daughters, and our wives have been taken captive because of this.","For, lo, our fathers have fallen by the sword, and our sons and our daughters and our wives are in captivity for this.","This is why our fathers have fallen by the sword and why our sons and daughters and our wives are in captivity.","En, corruerunt patres nostri gladiis, filii nostri et filiae nostrae et coniuges captivae ductae sunt propter hoc scelus.","והנה נפלו אבותינו בחרב ובנינו ובנותינו ונשינו בשבי על זאת׃"],["14","29","10","이제 나는 주 이스라엘의 하느님께서 당신의 타오르는 분노를 우리에게서 거두시기를 바라며 그분과 계약을 맺기로 결심하였소.","이제 나는 이스라엘의 하느님 야훼께서 진노를 거두어주시기를 바라며 그와 계약을 맺기로 결심하였다.","이제 이스라엘의 하나님 여호와와 더불어 언약을 세워 그 맹렬한 노를 우리에게서 떠나게 할 마음이 내게 있노니","이제 이스라엘 하나님 여호와로 더불어 언약을 세워 그 맹렬한 노로 우리에게서 떠나게 할 마음이 내게 있노니","그러므로 이제 나는 이스라엘의 하나님 여호와와 새로운 계약을 맺어 그 분의 분노를 우리에게서 거두시게 하도록 노력할 작정입니다.","Now, I intend to make a covenant with the LORD, the God of Israel, that his burning anger may turn away from us.","Now it is in mine heart to make a covenant with the LORD God of Israel, that his fierce wrath may turn away from us.","Now I intend to make a covenant with the LORD, the God of Israel, so that his fierce anger will turn away from us.","Nunc igitur placet mihi, ut ineam foedus cum Domino, Deo Israel, et avertat a nobis furorem irae suae.","עתה עם לבבי לכרות ברית ליהוה אלהי ישראל וישב ממנו חרון אפו׃"],["14","29","11","이제 내 아들들이여, 게으름을 피우지 마시오. 그대들이 당신 앞에 서서 시중들도록, 이렇게 당신의 시종이 되어 당신께 향을 피우도록 주님께서 그대들을 선택하셨기 때문이오.”","아들들아, 이제는 머뭇거리지 마라. 야훼께서는 당신 앞에서 섬길 사람으로 너희를 뽑으시어 당신을 섬기며 분향할 사람으로 삼으셨다.\"","내 아들들아 이제는 게으르지 말라 여호와께서 이미 너희를 택하사 그 앞에 서서 수종들어 그를 섬기며 분향하게 하셨느니라","내 아들들아 이제는 게으르지 말라 여호와께서 이미 너희를 택하사 그 앞에 서서 수종들어 섬기며 분향하게 하셨느니라","여러분은 이제 더 이상 지체하지 말고 본연의 임무로 돌아가시오! 주께서는 일찍이 여러분을 선택하여, 주님 앞에 제물을 바치고 섬기도록 임무를 주셨습니다.\"","My sons, do not be negligent any longer, for it is you whom the LORD has chosen to stand before him, to minister to him, to be his ministers and to offer incense.”","My sons, be not now negligent: for the LORD hath chosen you to stand before him, to serve him, and that ye should minister unto him, and burn incense.","My sons, do not be negligent now, for the LORD has chosen you to stand before him and serve him, to minister before him and to burn incense.\"","Filii mei, nolite neglegere; vos enim elegit Dominus, ut stetis coram eo et ministretis illi colatisque eum et adoleatis “.","בני עתה אל תשלו כי בכם בחר יהוה לעמד לפניו לשרתו ולהיות לו משרתים ומקטרים׃"]]