[["47","18","10","“너희는 이 작은 이들 가운데 하나라도 업신여기지 않도록 주의하여라. 내가 너희에게 말한다. 하늘에서 그들의 천사들이 하늘에 계신 내 아버지의 얼굴을 늘 보고 있다.”","\"너희는 이 보잘것없는 사람들 가운데 누구 하나라도 업신여기는 일이 없도록 조심하여라. 하늘에 있는 그들의 천사들이 하늘에 계신 내 아버지를 항상 모시고 있다는 것을 알아두어라.\"1)어떤 사본에는 11절에 다음과 같은 말이 있다. \"사람의 아들은 잃어버린 사람을 찾아 구원하러 왔기 때문이다.\"","삼가 이 작은 자 중의 하나도 업신여기지 말라 너희에게 말하노니 그들의 천사들이 하늘에서 하늘에 계신 내 아버지의 얼굴을 항상 뵈옵느니라","삼가 이 소자 중에 하나도 업신여기지 말라 너희에게 말하노니 저희 천사들이 하늘에서 하늘에 계신 내 아버지의 얼굴을 항상 뵈옵느니라","너희는 작은 어린아이 하나라도 업신여기지 않도록 조심하여라. 그들의 천사들이 하늘에 계신 내 아버지를 항상 모시고 있다는 것을 알아 두어라.","“See that you do not despise one of these little ones, for I say to you that their angels in heaven always look upon the face of my heavenly Father.","Take heed that ye despise not one of these little ones; for I say unto you, That in heaven their angels do always behold the face of my Father which is in heaven.","\"See that you do not look down on one of these little ones. For I tell you that their angels in heaven always see the face of my Father in heaven.","Videte, ne contemnatis unum ex his pusillis; dico enim vobis quia angeli eorum in caelis semper vident faciem Patris mei, qui in caelis est.","ראו פן תבזו אחד wקטנים האלה כי אמר אני לכם כי מלאכיהם ראים תמיד את פני אבי שבשמים׃"],["47","18","11","사람의 아들은 잃어버린 것들을 구하러 왔기 때문이다.",null,"(없음)","3)(없음) 어떤 사본에, 11절「인자가 온 것은 잃은 자를 구원하려 함이니라」가 있음","인자는 잃어버린 사람을 구원하러 온 것이다.","()","For the Son of man is come to save that which was lost.","[\"For the Son of Man has come to save that which was lost.]",null,"כי בא בן האדם להושיע את האבד׃"],["47","18","12","“너희는 어떻게 생각하느냐? 어떤 사람에게 양 백 마리가 있는데 그 가운데 한 마리가 길을 잃으면, 아흔아홉 마리를 산에 남겨 둔 채 길 잃은 양을 찾아 나서지 않느냐?","\"너희의 생각은 어떠하냐? 어떤 사람에게 양 백 마리가 있었는데 그 중의 한 마리가 길을 잃었다고 하자. 그 사람은 아흔아홉 마리를 산에 그대로 둔 채 그 길 잃은 양을 찾아 나서지 않겠느냐?","너희 생각에는 어떠하냐 만일 어떤 사람이 양 백 마리가 있는데 그 중의 하나가 길을 잃었으면 그 아흔아홉 마리를 산에 두고 가서 길 잃은 양을 찾지 않겠느냐","너희 생각에는 어떻겠느뇨 만일 어떤 사람이 양 일백 마리가 있는데 그 중에 하나가 길을 잃었으면 그 아흔 아홉 마리를 산에 두고 가서 길 잃은 양을 찾지 않겠느냐","만일 어떤 사람이 양 백 마리를 가지고 있는데 그 중 한 마리가 길을 잃고 헤맨다면 어떻게 하겠느냐? 아흔아홉 마리를 그대로 두고 잃은 양을 찾아 온 들판을 돌아다니지 않겠느냐?","What is your opinion? If a man has a hundred sheep and one of them goes astray, will he not leave the ninety-nine in the hills and go in search of the stray?","How think ye? if a man have an hundred sheep, and one of them be gone astray, doth he not leave the ninety and nine, and goeth into the mountains, and seeketh that which is gone astray?","\"What do you think? If a man owns a hundred sheep, and one of them wanders away, will he not leave the ninety-nine on the hills and go to look for the one that wandered off?","Quid vobis videtur? Si fuerint alicui centum oves, et erraverit una ex eis, nonne relinquet nonaginta novem in montibus et vadit quaerere eam, quae erravit?","מה דעתכם כי יהיו לאיש מאה כבשים ותעה אחד מהם הלא יעזב את התשעים ותשעה על ההרים והלך לבקש את התעה׃"],["47","18","13","그가 양을 찾게 되면, 내가 진실로 너희에게 말하는데, 길을 잃지 않은 아흔아홉 마리보다 그 한 마리를 두고 더 기뻐한다.","나는 분명히 말한다. 그 양을 찾게 되면 그는 길을 잃지 않은 아흔아홉 마리 양보다 오히려 그 한 마리 양 때문에 더 기뻐할 것이다.","진실로 너희에게 이르노니 만일 찾으면 길을 잃지 아니한 아흔아홉 마리보다 이것을 더 기뻐하리라","진실로 너희에게 이르노니 만일 찾으면 길을 잃지 아니한 아흔 아홉 마리보다 이것을 더 기뻐하리라","내가 진정으로 말한다. 만일 그 양을 찾게 되면 그는 안전하게 있는 아흔아홉 마리 양보다 오히려 그 한 마리 양 때문에 더 기뻐할 것이다.","And if he finds it, amen, I say to you, he rejoices more over it than over the ninety-nine that did not stray.","And if so be that he find it, verily I say unto you, he rejoiceth more of that sheep, than of the ninety and nine which went not astray.","And if he finds it, I tell you the truth, he is happier about that one sheep than about the ninety-nine that did not wander off.","Et si contigerit ut inveniat eam, amen dico vobis quia gaudebit super eam magis quam super nonaginta novem, quae non erraverunt.","והיה כאשר ימצאהו אמן אמר אני לכם כי ישמח עליו יותר מעל התשעים ותשעה אשר לא תעו׃"],["47","18","14","이와 같이 이 작은 이들 가운데 하나라도 잃어버리는 것은 하늘에 계신 너희 아버지의 뜻이 아니다.”","이와 같이 하늘에 계신 너희의 아버지께서는 이 보잘것없는 사람들 가운데 하나라도 망하는 것을 원하시지 않는다.\"","이와 같이 이 작은 자 중의 하나라도 잃는 것은 하늘에 계신 너희 아버지의 뜻이 아니니라","이와 같이 이 소자 중에 하나라도 잃어지는 것은 하늘에 계신 너희 아버지의 뜻이 아니니라","이와 갈이 하늘에 계신 너희의 아버지께서는 이 작은 사람들 가운데 하나라도 멸망하는 것을 원하시지 않는다.","In just the same way, it is not the will of your heavenly Father that one of these little ones be lost.","Even so it is not the will of your Father which is in heaven, that one of these little ones should perish.","In the same way your Father in heaven is not willing that any of these little ones should be lost.","Sic non est voluntas ante Patrem vestrum, qui in caelis est, ut pereat unus de pusillis istis.","כן איננו רצון מלפני אביכם שבשמים כי יאבד אחד מן הקטנים האלה׃"],["47","18","15","네 형제가 너에게 죄를 짓거든, 가서 단둘이 만나 그를 타일러라. 그가 네 말을 들으면 네가 그 형제를 얻은 것이다.","\"어떤 형제가 너에게 잘못한 일이 있거든 단 둘이 만나서 그의 잘못을 타일러주어라. 그가 말을 들으면 너는 형제 하나를 얻는 셈이다.","네 형제가 죄를 범하거든 가서 너와 그 사람과만 상대하여 권고하라 만일 들으면 네가 네 형제를 얻은 것이요","네 형제가 4)죄를 범하거든 가서 너와 그 사람과만 상대하여 권고하라 만일 들으면 네가 네 형제를 얻은 것이요 어떤 사본에, 네게 죄를","만일 어떤 형제가 네게 잘못한 일이 있거든 단둘이 만나서 그의 잘못을 타일러 주어라. 만일 그가 말을 듣고 잘못을 고백하면 너는 형제 하나를 얻은 것이다.","“If your brother sins [against you], go and tell him his fault between you and him alone. If he listens to you, you have won over your brother.","Moreover if thy brother shall trespass against thee, go and tell him his fault between thee and him alone: if he shall hear thee, thou hast gained thy brother.","\"If your brother sins against you, go and show him his fault, just between the two of you. If he listens to you, you have won your brother over.","Si autem peccaverit in te frater tuus, vade, corripe eum inter te et ipsum solum. Si te audierit, lucratus es fratrem tuum;","וכי יחטא לך אחיך לך והוכחת אותו בינך ובינו לבדו ואם ישמע אליך קנית לך אחיך׃"],["47","18","16","그러나 그가 네 말을 듣지 않거든 한 사람이나 두 사람을 더 데리고 가거라. '모든 일을 둘이나 세 증인의 말로 확정 지어야 하기' 때문이다.","그러나 듣지 않거든 한 사람이나 두 사람을 더 데리고 가라. 그리하여 '두 사람이나 세 사람의 증언을 들어 확정하여라.' 한 말씀대로 모든 사실을 밝혀라.","만일 듣지 않거든 한두 사람을 데리고 가서 두세 증인의 입으로 말마다 확증하게 하라","만일 듣지 않거든 한 두 사람을 데리고 가서 두 세 증인의 입으로 말마다 증참케 하라","그러나 만일 듣지 않거든 ㄹ) 한두 사람을 더 데리고 가서 두세 사람의 증언을 들어 모든 사실이 확증되도록 하라. (ㄹ. 70인역 신19:15)","If he does not listen, take one or two others along with you, so that ‘every fact may be established on the testimony of two or three witnesses.’","But if he will not hear thee, then take with thee one or two more, that in the mouth of two or three witnesses every word may be established.","But if he will not listen, take one or two others along, so that 'every matter may be established by the testimony of two or three witnesses.'","si autem non audierit, adhibe tecum adhuc unum vel duos, ut in ore duorum testium vel trium stet omne verbum;","ואם לא ישמע קח עמך עוד אחד או שנים למען על פי שנים או שלשה עדים יקום כל דבר׃"],["47","18","17","그가 그들의 말을 들으려고 하지 않거든 교회에 알려라. 교회의 말도 들으려고 하지 않거든 그를 다른 민족 사람이나 세리처럼 여겨라.","그래도 그들의 말을 듣지 않거든 교회에 알리고 교회의 말조차 듣지 않거든 그를 이방인이나 세리처럼 여겨라.\"","만일 그들의 말도 듣지 않거든 교회에 말하고 교회의 말도 듣지 않거든 이방인과 세리와 같이 여기라","만일 그들의 말도 듣지 않거든 교회에 말하고 교회의 말도 듣지 않거든 이방인과 세리와 같이 여기라","만일 그들의 말도 듣지 않거든 교회에 알리고 교회의 말조차 듣지 않거든 그를 이방인이나 세리처럼 여겨 상대조차 하지 말라.","If he refuses to listen to them, tell the church. If he refuses to listen even to the church, then treat him as you would a Gentile or a tax collector.","And if he shall neglect to hear them, tell it unto the church: but if he neglect to hear the church, let him be unto thee as an heathen man and a publican.","If he refuses to listen to them, tell it to the church; and if he refuses to listen even to the church, treat him as you would a pagan or a tax collector.","quod si noluerit audire eos, dic ecclesiae; si autem et ecclesiam noluerit audire, sit tibi sicut ethnicus et publicanus.","ואם לא ישמע אליהם הגד אל הקהל ואם לא ישמע גם אל הקהל והיה לך כגוי וכמוכס׃"],["47","18","18","내가 진실로 너희에게 말한다. 너희가 무엇이든지 땅에서 매면 하늘에서도 매일 것이고, 너희가 무엇이든지 땅에서 풀면 하늘에서도 풀릴 것이다.”","\"나는 분명히 말한다. 너희가 무엇이든지 땅에서 매면 하늘에도 매여 있을 것이며 땅에서 풀면 하늘에도 풀려 있을 것이다.\"","진실로 너희에게 이르노니 무엇이든지 너희가 땅에서 매면 하늘에서도 매일 것이요 무엇이든지 땅에서 풀면 하늘에서도 풀리리라","진실로 너희에게 이르노니 무엇이든지 너희가 땅에서 매면 하늘에서도 매일 것이요 무엇이든지 땅에서 풀면 하늘에서도 풀리리라","내가 진정으로 말한다. 너희가 땅에서 매어 놓은 것은 무엇이나 하늘에서도 매일 것이고 땅에서 풀어 놓은 것은 무엇이나 하늘에서도 풀릴 것이다.","Amen, I say to you, whatever you bind on earth shall be bound in heaven, and whatever you loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven.","Verily I say unto you, Whatsoever ye shall bind on earth shall be bound in heaven: and whatsoever ye shall loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven.","\"I tell you the truth, whatever you bind on earth will be bound in heaven, and whatever you loose on earth will be loosed in heaven.","Amen dico vobis: Quaecumque alligaveritis super terram, erunt ligata in caelo; et, quaecumque solveritis super terram, erunt soluta in caelo.","אמן אמר אני לכם כל אשר תאסרו על הארץ אסור יהיה בשמים וכל אשר תתירו על הארץ מתר יהיה בשמים׃"],["47","18","19","“내가 또 진실로 너희에게 말한다. 너희 가운데 두 사람이 이 땅에서 마음을 모아 무엇이든 청하면, 하늘에 계신 내 아버지께서 이루어 주실 것이다.","\"내가 다시 말한다. 너희 중의 두 사람이 이 세상에서 마음을 모아 구하면 하늘에 계신 내 아버지께서는 무슨 일이든 다 들어주실 것이다.","진실로 다시 너희에게 이르노니 너희 중의 두 사람이 땅에서 합심하여 무엇이든지 구하면 하늘에 계신 내 아버지께서 그들을 위하여 이루게 하시리라","진실로 다시 너희에게 이르노니 너희 중에 두 사람이 땅에서 합심하여 무엇이든지 구하면 하늘에 계신 내 아버지께서 저희를 위하여 이루게 하시리라","내가 또 진정으로 말한다. 만일 너희 중에 두 사람이 땅 위에서 마음을 합하여 무엇이든지 구하면 하늘에 계신 내 아버지께서 이루어 주실 것이다.","Again, [amen,] I say to you, if two of you agree on earth about anything for which they are to pray, it shall be granted to them by my heavenly Father.","Again I say unto you, That if two of you shall agree on earth as touching any thing that they shall ask, it shall be done for them of my Father which is in heaven.","\"Again, I tell you that if two of you on earth agree about anything you ask for, it will be done for you by my Father in heaven.","Iterum dico vobis: Si duo ex vobis consenserint super terram de omni re, quamcumque petierint, fiet illis a Patre meo, qui in caelis est.","ועוד אמר אני לכם שנים מכם כי יועצו יחדו בארץ על כל דבר אשר ישאלו היה יהיה להם מאת אבי שבשמים׃"],["47","18","20","두 사람이나 세 사람이라도 내 이름으로 모인 곳에는 나도 함께 있기 때문이다.”","단 두세 사람이라도 내 이름으로 모인 곳에는 나도 함께 있기 때문이다.\"","두세 사람이 내 이름으로 모인 곳에는 나도 그들 중에 있느니라","두 세 사람이 내 이름으로 모인 곳에는 나도 그들 중에 있느니라","두세 사람이 내 이름으로 모인 곳에는 나도 그들과 함께 있기 때문이다.\"","For where two or three are gathered together in my name, there am I in the midst of them.”","For where two or three are gathered together in my name, there am I in the midst of them.","For where two or three come together in my name, there am I with them.\"","Ubi enim sunt duo vel tres congregati in nomine meo, ibi sum in medio eorum “.","כי בכל מקום אשר שנים או שלשה נאספו בשמי שם אני בתוכם׃"],["47","18","21","그때에 베드로가 예수님께 다가와, “주님, 제 형제가 저에게 죄를 지으면 몇 번이나 용서해 주어야 합니까? 일곱 번까지 해야 합니까?” 하고 물었다.","그 때에 베드로가 예수께 와서 \"주님, 제 형제가 저에게 잘못을 저지르면 몇 번이나 용서해 주어야 합니까? 일곱 번이면 되겠습니까?\" 하고 묻자","그 때에 베드로가 나아와 이르되 주여 형제가 내게 죄를 범하면 몇 번이나 용서하여 주리이까 일곱 번까지 하오리이까","그 때에 베드로가 나아와 가로되 주여 형제가 내게 죄를 범하면 몇번이나 용서하여 주리이까 일곱번까지 하오리이까","그때 베드로가 예수께 와서 물었다. \"주님, 형제가 제게 죄를 지었을 경우에 몇 번이나 용서해 주어야 합니까? 일곱번까지 용서하면 되겠습니까?\"","Then Peter approaching asked him, “Lord, if my brother sins against me, how often must I forgive him? As many as seven times?”","Then came Peter to him, and said, Lord, how oft shall my brother sin against me, and I forgive him? till seven times?","Then Peter came to Jesus and asked, \"Lord, how many times shall I forgive my brother when he sins against me? Up to seven times?\"","Tunc accedens Petrus dixit ei:  “Domine, quotiens peccabit in me frater meus, et dimittam ei? Usque septies? “.","ויגש אליו פטרוס ויאמר לו אדני כמה פעמים יחטא לי אחי וסלחתי לו העד שבע פעמים׃"],["47","18","22","예수님께서 그에게 대답하셨다. “내가 너에게 말한다. 일곱 번이 아니라 일흔일곱 번까지라도 용서해야 한다.”","예수께서는 이렇게 대답하셨다. \"일곱 번뿐 아니라 일곱 번씩 일흔 번이라도 용서하여라.\"","예수께서 이르시되 네게 이르노니 일곱 번뿐 아니라 일곱 번을 일흔 번까지라도 할지니라","예수께서 가라사대 네게 이르노니 일곱번 뿐 아니라 일흔번씩 일곱번이라도 할찌니라","예수께서 대답하셨다. \"아니다. 일곱 번뿐 아니라 일곱 번씩 일흔 번까지라도 용서해 주어라.\"","Jesus answered, “I say to you, not seven times but seventy-seven times.","Jesus saith unto him, I say not unto thee, Until seven times: but, Until seventy times seven.","Jesus answered, \"I tell you, not seven times, but seventy-seven times.","Dicit illi Iesus:  “Non dico tibi usque septies sed usque septuagies septies.","ויאמר אליו ישוע לא אמר לך עד שבע פעמים כי אם עד שבעים ושבע׃"],["47","18","23","“그러므로 하늘 나라는 자기 종들과 셈을 하려는 어떤 임금에게 비길 수 있다.","\"하늘 나라는 이렇게 비유할 수 있다. 어떤 왕이 자기 종들과 셈을 밝히려 하였다.","그러므로 천국은 그 종들과 결산하려 하던 어떤 임금과 같으니","이러므로 천국은 그 종들과 회계하려 하던 어떤 임금과 같으니","하늘나라는 어떤 왕이 자기 종들과 정해진 날에 셈을 맞춰 보는 것에 비할 수 있다.","That is why the kingdom of heaven may be likened to a king who decided to settle accounts with his servants.","Therefore is the kingdom of heaven likened unto a certain king, which would take account of his servants.","\"Therefore, the kingdom of heaven is like a king who wanted to settle accounts with his servants.","Ideo assimilatum est regnum caelorum homini regi, qui voluit rationem ponere cum servis suis.","על כן דומה מלכות השמים למלך בשר ודם אשר חפץ לעשות חשבון עם עבדיו׃"],["47","18","24","임금이 셈을 하기 시작하자 만 탈렌트를 빚진 사람 하나가 끌려왔다.","셈을 시작하자 일만 2)달란트나 되는 돈을 빚진 사람이 왕 앞에 끌려왔다. 로마 금돈의 명칭이다, 한 달란트는 육천 데나리온, 이백 세겔이다.","결산할 때에 만 달란트 빚진 자 하나를 데려오매","회계할 때에 일만 5)달란트 빚진 자 하나를 데려오매 금은의 수량","셈을 하는 중에 일만 달란트나 되는 돈을 빚진 사람이 왕 앞에 끌려 나왔다.","When he began the accounting, a debtor was brought before him who owed him a huge amount.","And when he had begun to reckon, one was brought unto him, which owed him ten thousand talents.","As he began the settlement, a man who owed him ten thousand talents was brought to him.","Et cum coepisset rationem ponere, oblatus est ei unus, qui debebat decem milia talenta.","וכאשר החל לחשב הובא לפניו איש אשר חיב לו עשרת אלפים ככרי כסף׃"],["47","18","25","그런데 그가 빚을 갚을 길이 없으므로, 주인은 그 종에게 자신과 아내와 자식과 그 밖에 가진 것을 다 팔아서 갚으라고 명령하였다.","그에게 빚을 갚을 길이 없었으므로 왕은 '네 몸과 네 처자와 너에게 있는 것을 다 팔아서 빚을 갚아라.'  하였다.","갚을 것이 없는지라 주인이 명하여 그 몸과 아내와 자식들과 모든 소유를 다 팔아 갚게 하라 하니","갚을 것이 없는지라 주인이 명하여 그 몸과 처와 자식들과 모든 소유를 다 팔아 갚게 하라 한대","그가 빚을 갚을 돈이 없음을 알자 왕은 그의 아내와 자녀들과 그가 가진 것을 다 팔아서 갚으라고 명령하였다.","Since he had no way of paying it back, his master ordered him to be sold, along with his wife, his children, and all his property, in payment of the debt.","But forasmuch as he had not to pay, his lord commanded him to be sold, and his wife, and children, and all that he had, and payment to be made.","Since he was not able to pay, the master ordered that he and his wife and his children and all that he had be sold to repay the debt.","Cum autem non haberet, unde redderet, iussit eum dominus venumdari et uxorem et filios et omnia, quae habebat, et reddi.","ולא היה לו לשלם ויצו אדניו למכר אותו ואת אשתו ואת בניו ואת כל אשר לו וכן ישלם׃"],["47","18","26","그러자 그 종이 엎드려 절하며, ‘제발 참아 주십시오. 제가 다 갚겠습니다.’ 하고 말하였다.","이 말을 듣고 종이 엎드려 왕에게 절하며 '조금만 참아주십시오. 곧 다 갚아드리겠습니다.' 하고 애걸하였다.","그 종이 엎드려 절하며 이르되 내게 참으소서 다 갚으리이다 하거늘","그 종이 엎드리어 절하며 가로되 내게 참으소서 다 갚으리이다 하거늘","그는 왕 앞에 엎드려 얼굴을 땅에 대고 \"제발 조금만 참아주십시오. 곧 다 갚아 드리겠습니다\" 하고 빌었다.","At that, the servant fell down, did him homage, and said, ‘Be patient with me, and I will pay you back in full.’","The servant therefore fell down, and worshipped him, saying, Lord, have patience with me, and I will pay thee all.","\"The servant fell on his knees before him. 'Be patient with me,' he begged, 'and I will pay back everything.'","Procidens igitur servus ille adorabat eum dicens:  “Patientiam habe in me, et omnia reddam tibi “.","ויפל העבד וישתחו לו לאמר אדני הארך לי אפך ואת כל אשלמה לך׃"],["47","18","27","그 종의 주인은 가엾은 마음이 들어, 그를 놓아주고 부채도 탕감해 주었다.","왕은 그를 가엾게 여겨 빚을 탕감해 주고 놓아 보냈다.","그 종의 주인이 불쌍히 여겨 놓아 보내며 그 빚을 탕감하여 주었더니","그 종의 주인이 불쌍히 여겨 놓아 보내며 그 빚을 탕감하여 주었더니","왕은 그를 가엾게 여겨 놓아 보내며 빚도 탕감해 주었다.","Moved with compassion the master of that servant let him go and forgave him the loan.","Then the lord of that servant was moved with compassion, and loosed him, and forgave him the debt.","The servant's master took pity on him, canceled the debt and let him go.","Misertus autem dominus servi illius dimisit eum et debitum dimisit ei.","ויהמו רחמי אדוני העבד ההוא ויפטרהו וישמט לו את החוב׃"],["47","18","28","그런데 그 종이 나가서 자기에게 백 데나리온을 빚진 동료 하나를 만났다. 그러자 그를 붙들어 멱살을 잡고 ‘빚진 것을 갚아라.’ 하고 말하였다.","그런데 그 종은 나가서 자기에게 백 데나리온밖에 안 되는 빚을 진 동료를 만나자 달려들어 멱살을 잡으며 '내 빚을 갚아라.' 하고 호통을 쳤다.","그 종이 나가서 자기에게 백 데나리온 빚진 동료 한 사람을 만나 붙들어 목을 잡고 이르되 빚을 갚으라 하매","그 종이 나가서 제게 백 6)데나리온 빚진 동관 하나를 만나 붙들어 목을 잡고 가로되 빚을 갚으라 하매 은전의 명칭","그런데 그 종이 나가서 자기에게 백 데나리온밖에 안 되는 빚을 진 사람을 만나자 멱살을 잡고 당장에 내놓으라고 다그쳤다.","When that servant had left, he found one of his fellow servants who owed him a much smaller amount. He seized him and started to choke him, demanding, ‘Pay back what you owe.’","But the same servant went out, and found one of his fellowservants, which owed him an hundred pence: and he laid hands on him, and took him by the throat, saying, Pay me that thou owest.","\"But when that servant went out, he found one of his fellow servants who owed him a hundred denarii. He grabbed him and began to choke him. 'Pay back what you owe me!' he demanded.","Egressus autem servus ille invenit unum de conservis suis, qui debebat ei centum denarios, et tenens suffocabat eum dicens:  “Redde, quod debes! “.","ויצא העבד ההוא מלפניו וימצא אחד מחבריו העבדים והוא חיב לו מאה דינרים ויחזק בו ויחנקהו לאמר שלם את אשר אתה חיב לי׃"],["47","18","29","그의 동료는 엎드려서, ‘제발 참아 주게. 내가 갚겠네.’ 하고 청하였다.","그 동료는 엎드려 '꼭 갚을 터이니 조금만 참아주게.' 하고 애원하였다.","그 동료가 엎드려 간구하여 이르되 나에게 참아 주소서 갚으리이다 하되","그 동관이 엎드리어 간구하여 가로되 나를 참아 주소서 갚으리이다 하되","그 사람이 엎드려 조금만 시간 여유를 달라고 빌었으나","Falling to his knees, his fellow servant begged him, ‘Be patient with me, and I will pay you back.’","And his fellowservant fell down at his feet, and besought him, saying, Have patience with me, and I will pay thee all.","\"His fellow servant fell to his knees and begged him, 'Be patient with me, and I will pay you back.'","Procidens igitur conservus eius rogabat eum dicens:  “Patientiam habe in me, et reddam tibi “.","ויפל חברו לפני רגליו ויבקש ממנו לאמר הארך לי אפך ואשלמה לך הכל׃"],["47","18","30","그러나 그는 들어주려고 하지 않았다. 그리고 가서 그 동료가 빚진 것을 다 갚을 때까지 감옥에 가두었다.","그러나 그는 들어주기는커녕 오히려 그 동료를 끌고 가서 빚진 돈을 다 갚을 때까지 감옥에 가두어두었다.","허락하지 아니하고 이에 가서 그가 빚을 갚도록 옥에 가두거늘","허락하지 아니하고 이에 가서 저가 빚을 갚도록 옥에 가두거늘","그는 들은 체도 하지 않고 그를 끌고 가서 빚진 돈을 다 갚을 때까지 감옥에 가두었다.","But he refused. Instead, he had him put in prison until he paid back the debt.","And he would not: but went and cast him into prison, till he should pay the debt.","\"But he refused. Instead, he went off and had the man thrown into prison until he could pay the debt.","Ille autem noluit, sed abiit et misit eum in carcerem, donec redderet debitum.","והוא מאן וילך וישליכהו במשמר עד כי ישלם לו את חובו׃"],["47","18","31","동료들이 그렇게 벌어진 일을 보고 너무 안타까운 나머지, 주인에게 가서 그 일을 죄다 일렀다.","다른 종들이 이 광경을 보고 매우 분개하여 왕에게 가서 이 일을 낱낱이 일러바쳤다.","그 동료들이 그것을 보고 몹시 딱하게 여겨 주인에게 가서 그 일을 다 알리니","그 동관들이 그것을 보고 심히 민망하여 주인에게 가서 그 일을 다 고하니","다른 종들이 왕에게 가서 이 일을 낱낱이 고해 바쳤다.","Now when his fellow servants saw what had happened, they were deeply disturbed, and went to their master and reported the whole affair.","So when his fellowservants saw what was done, they were very sorry, and came and told unto their lord all that was done.","When the other servants saw what had happened, they were greatly distressed and went and told their master everything that had happened.","Videntes autem conservi eius, quae fiebant, contristati sunt valde et venerunt et narraverunt domino suo omnia, quae facta erant.","וחבריו העבדים ראו את הנעשה ויעצבו מאד ויבאו ויגידו לאדניהם את כל אשר נעשה׃"],["47","18","32","그러자 주인이 그 종을 불러들여 말하였다. ‘이 악한 종아, 네가 청하기에 나는 너에게 빚을 다 탕감해 주었다.","그러자 왕은 그 종을 불러들여 '이 몹쓸 종아, 네가 애걸하기에 나는 그 많은 빚을 탕감해 주지 않았느냐?","이에 주인이 그를 불러다가 말하되 악한 종아 네가 빌기에 내가 네 빚을 전부 탕감하여 주었거늘","이에 주인이 저를 불러다가 말하되 악한 종아 네가 빌기에 내가 네 빚을 전부 탕감하여 주었거늘","그러자 왕은 용서해 주었던 그를 불러서 말하였다. \"이 악독하고 뻔뻔한 놈아! 네가 애걸하기에 불쌍히 여겨 내가 그 엄청난 빚을 탕감해 주지 않았느냐?","His master summoned him and said to him, ‘You wicked servant! I forgave you your entire debt because you begged me to.","Then his lord, after that he had called him, said unto him, O thou wicked servant, I forgave thee all that debt, because thou desiredst me:","\"Then the master called the servant in. 'You wicked servant,' he said, 'I canceled all that debt of yours because you begged me to.","Tunc vocavit illum dominus suus et ait illi:  “Serve nequam, omne debitum illud dimisi tibi, quoniam rogasti me;","ויקרא אליו אדניו ויאמר לו אתה העבד הרע את כל החוב ההוא השמטתי לך יען אשר בקשת ממני׃"],["47","18","33","내가 너에게 자비를 베푼 것처럼 너도 네 동료에게 자비를 베풀었어야 하지 않느냐?’","그렇다면 내가 너에게 자비를 베푼 것처럼 너도 네 동료에게 자비를 베풀었어야 할 것이 아니냐?' 하며","내가 너를 불쌍히 여김과 같이 너도 네 동료를 불쌍히 여김이 마땅하지 아니하냐 하고","내가 너를 불쌍히 여김과 같이 너도 네 동관을 불쌍히 여김이 마땅치 아니하냐 하고","그러니 내가 자비를 베푼 것처럼 너도 남에게 자비를 베풀었어야 할 것이 아니냐?\"","Should you not have had pity on your fellow servant, as I had pity on you?’","Shouldest not thou also have had compassion on thy fellowservant, even as I had pity on thee?","Shouldn't you have had mercy on your fellow servant just as I had on you?'","non oportuit et te misereri conservi tui, sicut et ego tui misertus sum? “.","הלא היה לך גם אתה לרחם על העבד חברך כאשר רחמתי אני עליך׃"],["47","18","34","그러고 나서 화가 난 주인은 그를 고문 형리에게 넘겨 빚진 것을 다 갚게 하였다.","몹시 노하여 그 빚을 다 갚을 때까지 그를 형리에게 넘겼다.","주인이 노하여 그 빚을 다 갚도록 그를 옥졸들에게 넘기니라","주인이 노하여 그 빚을 다 갚도록 저를 옥졸들에게 붙이니라","왕은 몹시 노하여 그를 형리에게 보내고 마지막 한푼까지 다 갚게 하였다.","Then in anger his master handed him over to the torturers until he should pay back the whole debt.","And his lord was wroth, and delivered him to the tormentors, till he should pay all that was due unto him.","In anger his master turned him over to the jailers to be tortured, until he should pay back all he owed.","Et iratus dominus eius tradidit eum tortoribus, quoadusque redderet universum debitum.","ויקצף אדניו ויסגר אותו למיסרים עד כי ישלם את כל חובו׃"],["47","18","35","너희가 저마다 자기 형제를 마음으로부터 용서하지 않으면, 하늘의 내 아버지께서도 너희에게 그와 같이 하실 것이다.”","너희가 진심으로 형제들을 서로 용서하지 않으면 하늘에 계신 내 아버지께서도 너희에게 이와 같이 하실 것이다.\"","너희가 각각 마음으로부터 형제를 용서하지 아니하면 나의 하늘 아버지께서도 너희에게 이와 같이 하시리라","너희가 각각 중심으로 형제를 용서하지 아니하면 내 천부께서도 너희에게 이와 같이 하시리라","그러므로 만일 너희가 진심으로 네 형제들을 용서하지 않으면 하늘에 계신 내 아버지께서도 너희에게 이와 같이 하실 것이다.\"","So will my heavenly Father do to you, unless each of you forgives his brother from his heart.”","So likewise shall my heavenly Father do also unto you, if ye from your hearts forgive not every one his brother their trespasses.","\"This is how my heavenly Father will treat each of you unless you forgive your brother from your heart.\"","Sic et Pater meus caelestis faciet vobis, si non remiseritis unusquisque fratri suo de cordibus vestris “.","ככה יעשה לכם גם אבי שבשמים אם לא תסלחו איש איש לאחיו בכל לבבכם את חטאתם׃"],["47","19","1","예수님께서는 이 말씀들을 마치시고 갈릴래아를 떠나, 요르단 건너편 유다 지방으로 가셨다.","예수께서는 이 말씀을 마치시고 갈릴래아를 떠나 요르단 강 건너편 유다 지방으로 가셨는데","예수께서 이 말씀을 마치시고 갈릴리를 떠나 요단 강 건너 유대 지경에 이르시니","예수께서 이 말씀을 마치시고 갈릴리에서 떠나 요단강 건너 유대 지경에 이르시니","예수께서는 이 말씀을 마치고 갈릴리를 떠나 요단강 건너편 유대 지방으로 가셨다.","When Jesus finished these words, he left Galilee and went to the district of Judea across the Jordan.","And it came to pass, that when Jesus had finished these sayings, he departed from Galilee, and came into the coasts of Judaea beyond Jordan;","When Jesus had finished saying these things, he left Galilee and went into the region of Judea to the other side of the Jordan.","Et factum est, cum consum masset Iesus sermones istos, migravit a Galilaea et venit in fines Iudaeae trans Iordanem.","ויהי ככלות ישוע לדבר את הדברים האלה ויסע מן הגליל ויבא אל גבול יהודה בעבר הירדן׃"],["47","19","2","많은 군중이 그분을 따라오자 그분께서는 그곳에서도 그들을 고쳐 주셨다.","사람들이 또 많이 몰려왔으므로 거기서도 병자들을 고쳐주셨다.","큰 무리가 따르거늘 예수께서 거기서 그들의 병을 고치시더라","큰 무리가 좇거늘 예수께서 거기서 저희 병을 고치시더라","많은 군중이 예수를 따라오자 예수께서는 거기서도 일일이 그들의 병을 고쳐주셨다.","Great crowds followed him, and he cured them there.","And great multitudes followed him; and he healed them there.","Large crowds followed him, and he healed them there.","Et secutae sunt eum turbae multae, et curavit eos ibi.","וילכו אחריו המון עם רב וירפאם שם׃"],["47","19","3","그런데 바리사이들이 다가와 예수님을 시험하려고, “무엇이든지 이유만 있으면 남편이 아내를 버려도 됩니까?” 하고 물었다.","바리사이파 사람들이 와서 예수의 속을 떠보려고 \"무엇이든지 이유가 닿기만 하면 남편이 아내를 버려도 좋습니까?\" 하고 물었다.","바리새인들이 예수께 나아와 그를 시험하여 이르되 사람이 어떤 이유가 있으면 그 아내를 버리는 것이 옳으니이까","바리새인들이 예수께 나아와 그를 시험하여 가로되 사람이 아무 연고를 물론하고 그 아내를 내어버리는 것이 옳으니이까","바리새파 사람들 몇이 예수께 와서 말로 올무를 걸어 예수를 함정에 빠뜨리려고, \"어떤 경우든지 이유가 있으면 남편이 아내를 버려도 상관없습니까?\" 하고 물었다.","Some Pharisees approached him, and tested him, saying, “Is it lawful for a man to divorce his wife for any cause whatever?”","The Pharisees also came unto him, tempting him, and saying unto him, Is it lawful for a man to put away his wife for every cause?","Some Pharisees came to him to test him. They asked, \"Is it lawful for a man to divorce his wife for any and every reason?\"","Et accesserunt ad eum pharisaei tentantes eum et dicentes:  “Licet homini dimittere uxorem suam quacumque ex causa? “.","ויגשו אליו הפרושים לנסותו לאמר היוכל איש לשלח את אשתו על כל דבר׃"],["47","19","4","그러자 예수님께서 이렇게 대답하셨다. “너희는 읽어 보지 않았느냐? 창조주께서 처음부터 ‘그들을 남자와 여자로 만드시고’ 나서,","그러자 예수께서는 \"처음부터 창조주께서 사람을 남자와 여자로 만드셨다는 것과","예수께서 대답하여 이르시되 사람을 지으신 이가 본래 그들을 남자와 여자로 지으시고","예수께서 대답하여 가라사대 사람을 지으신 이가 본래 저희를 남자와 여자로 만드시고","예수께서 대답하셨다. \"성경을 읽어 보지 못하였느냐? 성경에는 ㄱ) 하나님께서 처음부터 남자와 여자를 창조하셨다는 것과 (ㄱ. 70인역 창1:27(참조,5:2))","He said in reply, “Have you not read that from the beginning the Creator ‘made them male and female’","And he answered and said unto them, Have ye not read, that he which made them at the beginning made them male and female,","\"Haven't you read,\" he replied, \"that at the beginning the Creator 'made them male and female,'","Qui respondens ait:  “Non legistis quia, qui creavit ab initio, masculum et feminam fecit eos","ויען ויאמר אליהם הלא קראתם כי עשה בראשית זכר ונקבה עשה אתם׃"],["47","19","5","‘그러므로 남자는 아버지와 어머니를 떠나 아내와 결합하여, 둘이 한 몸이 될 것이다.’ 하고 이르셨다.","또 '그러므로 남자는 부모를 떠나 제 아내와 합하여 한 몸을 이루리라.' 하신 말씀을 아직 읽어보지 못하였느냐?","말씀하시기를 ㄱ)그러므로 사람이 그 부모를 떠나서 아내에게 합하여 그 둘이 한 몸이 될지니라 하신 것을 읽지 못하였느냐","말씀하시기를 ㄱ)이러므로 사람이 그 부모를 떠나서 아내에게 합하여 그 둘이 한 몸이 될찌니라 하신 것을 읽지 못하였느냐 창 2:24","남자는 그의 부모를 떠나 제 아내와 합하여 한 몸을 이루리라고 기록되어 있다.","and said, ‘For this reason a man shall leave his father and mother and be joined to his wife, and the two shall become one flesh’?","And said, For this cause shall a man leave father and mother, and shall cleave to his wife: and they twain shall be one flesh?","and said, 'For this reason a man will leave his father and mother and be united to his wife, and the two will become one flesh'?","et dixit:  “Propter hoc dimittet homo patrem et matrem et adhaerebit uxori suae, et erunt duo in carne una? “.","ואמר על כן יעזב איש את אביו ואת אמו ודבק באשתו והיו שניהם לבשר אחד׃"],["47","19","6","따라서 그들은 이제 둘이 아니라 한 몸이다. 그러므로 하느님께서 맺어 주신 것을 사람이 갈라놓아서는 안 된다.”","따라서 그들은 이제 둘이 아니라 한 몸이다. 그러니 하느님께서 짝지어 주신 것을 사람이 갈라놓아서는 안 된다.\" 하고 대답하셨다.","그런즉 이제 둘이 아니요 한 몸이니 그러므로 하나님이 짝지어 주신 것을 사람이 나누지 못할지니라 하시니","이러한즉 이제 둘이 아니요 한 몸이니 그러므로 하나님이 짝지어 주신 것을 사람이 나누지 못할찌니라 하시니","두 사람은 이제 둘이 아니라 한 몸이다. 하나님께서 짝지어 주신 것을 사람이 나눌 수 없는 것이다.\"","So they are no longer two, but one flesh. Therefore, what God has joined together, no human being must separate.”","Wherefore they are no more twain, but one flesh. What therefore God hath joined together, let not man put asunder.","So they are no longer two, but one. Therefore what God has joined together, let man not separate.\"","Itaque iam non sunt duo sed una caro. Quod ergo Deus coniunxit, homo non separet “.","אם כן אינם עוד שנים כי אם בשר אחד לכן את אשר חבר האלהים אל יפרידנו האדם׃"],["47","19","7","그들이 다시 예수님께, “그렇다면 어찌하여 모세는 ‘이혼장을 써 주고 아내를 버려라.’ 하고 명령하였습니까?” 하자,","그들은 다시 \"모세는 '1)아내를 버리려 할 때에는 이혼장을 써주어라.' 했으니 그것은 무슨 까닭입니까?\" 하고 물었다. 신명 24:1.","여짜오되 그러면 어찌하여 ㄴ)모세는 이혼 증서를 주어서 버리라 명하였나이까","여짜오되 그러하면 어찌하여 ㄴ)모세는 이혼 증서를 주어서 내어버리라 명하였나이까 신 24:1-4","\"그러면 왜 모세는 ㄷ) 이혼장을 써주면 아내를 버려도 좋다고 하였습니까?\" 하고 그들이 다시 묻자 (ㄷ. 신24:1-4)","They said to him, “Then why did Moses command that the man give the woman a bill of divorce and dismiss [her]?”","They say unto him, Why did Moses then command to give a writing of divorcement, and to put her away?","\"Why then,\" they asked, \"did Moses command that a man give his wife a certificate of divorce and send her away?\"","Dicunt illi:  “Quid ergo Moyses mandavit dari libellum repudii et dimittere? “.","ויאמרו אליו ולמה זה צוה משה לתת לה ספר כריתת ולשלחה׃"],["47","19","8","예수님께서 그들에게 말씀하셨다. “모세는 너희의 마음이 완고하기 때문에 너희가 아내를 버리는 것을 허락하였다. 그러나 처음부터 그렇게 된 것은 아니다.","예수께서는 \"모세는 너희의 마음이 굳을 대로 굳어져서 아내와 이혼을 해도 좋다고 하였지만 처음부터 그랬던 것은 아니다.","예수께서 이르시되 모세가 너희 마음의 완악함 때문에 아내 버림을 허락하였거니와 본래는 그렇지 아니하니라","예수께서 가라사대 모세가 너희 마음의 완악함을 인하여 아내 내어버림을 허락하였거니와 본래는 그렇지 아니하니라","예수께서 대답하셨다. \"모세는 너희의 완고하고 악한 마음을 알고 그런 말을 하였지만 그것은 본래 하나님께서 정하신 것이 아니다.","He said to them, “Because of the hardness of your hearts Moses allowed you to divorce your wives, but from the beginning it was not so.","He saith unto them, Moses because of the hardness of your hearts suffered you to put away your wives: but from the beginning it was not so.","Jesus replied, \"Moses permitted you to divorce your wives because your hearts were hard. But it was not this way from the beginning.","Ait illis:  “Moyses ad duritiam cordis vestri permisit vobis dimittere uxores vestras; ab initio autem non sic fuit.","ויאמר אליהם בעבור קשי לבבכם הניח לכם משה לשלח את נשיכם אך מראש לא היתה ככה׃"],["47","19","9","내가 너희에게 말한다. 불륜을 저지른 경우 외에 아내를 버리고 다른 여자와 혼인하는 자는 간음하는 것이다.”","나는 이렇게 말한다. 2)음행한 까닭 외에 아내를 버리고 다른 여자와 결혼하면 간음하는 것이다.\" 하고 대답하셨다.5:31 주 참조.","내가 너희에게 말하노니 누구든지 음행한 이유 외에 아내를 버리고 다른 데 장가 드는 자는 간음함이니라","내가 너희에게 말하노니 누구든지 음행한 연고 외에 아내를 내어버리고 다른데 장가 드는 자는 간음함이니라","나는 분명히 말한다. 누구든지 음행한 까닭이 아니고서는 아내를 버리고 다른 여자와 결혼하면 간음을 행하는 것이다.\"","I say to you, whoever divorces his wife (unless the marriage is unlawful) and marries another commits adultery.”","And I say unto you, Whosoever shall put away his wife, except it be for fornication, and shall marry another, committeth adultery: and whoso marrieth her which is put away doth commit adultery.","I tell you that anyone who divorces his wife, except for marital unfaithfulness, and marries another woman commits adultery.\"","Dico autem vobis quia quicumque dimiserit uxorem suam, nisi ob fornicationem, et aliam duxerit, moechatur “.","ואני אמר לכם המשלח את אשתו בלתי על דבר זנות ולקח לו אחרת נאף הוא והלקח את הגרושה נאף הוא׃"],["47","19","10","그러자 제자들이 예수님께, “아내에 대한 남편의 처지가 그러하다면 혼인하지 않는 것이 좋겠습니다.” 하고 말하였다.","제자들이 이 말씀을 듣고 예수께 \"남편과 아내의 관계가 그런 것이라면 차라리 결혼하지 않는 것이 좋겠습니다.\" 하였더니","제자들이 이르되 만일 사람이 아내에게 이같이 할진대 장가 들지 않는 것이 좋겠나이다","제자들이 가로되 만일 사람이 아내에게 이같이 할찐대 장가 들지 않는 것이 좋삽나이다","그때 제자들이 예수께 물었다. \"만일 꼭 그래야 한다면 차라리 결혼하지 않는 것이 낫겠습니다.\"","[His] disciples said to him, “If that is the case of a man with his wife, it is better not to marry.”","His disciples say unto him, If the case of the man be so with his wife, it is not good to marry.","The disciples said to him, \"If this is the situation between a husband and wife, it is better not to marry.\"","Dicunt ei discipuli eius:  “Si ita est causa hominis cum uxore, non expedit nubere “.","ויאמרו אליו התלמידים אם ככה הוא ענין איש ואשתו לא טוב לקחת אשה׃"],["47","19","11","예수님께서 그들에게 이르셨다. “모든 사람이 이 말을 받아들일 수 있는 것은 아니다. 허락된 이들만 받아들일 수 있다.","예수께서 이렇게 대답하셨다. \"그것은 아무나 할 수 있는 일이 아니다. 다만 하느님께서 허락하신 사람만이 할 수 있다.","예수께서 이르시되 사람마다 이 말을 받지 못하고 오직 타고난 자라야 할지니라","예수께서 가라사대 사람마다 이 말을 받지 못하고 오직 타고난 자라야 할찌니라","예수께서 말씀하셨다. \"그것은 아무나 할 수 있는 일이 아니다. 하나님께서 도와주셔야 할 수가 있다.","He answered, “Not all can accept [this] word, but only those to whom that is granted.","But he said unto them, All men cannot receive this saying, save they to whom it is given.","Jesus replied, \"Not everyone can accept this word, but only those to whom it has been given.","Qui dixit eis:  “Non omnes capiunt verbum istud, sed quibus datum est.","ויאמר אליהם לא יוכל כל אדם קבל את הדבר הזה כי אם אלה אשר נתן להם להבין׃"],["47","19","12","사실 모태에서부터 고자로 태어난 이들도 있고, 사람들 손에 고자가 된 이들도 있으며, 하늘 나라 때문에 스스로 고자가 된 이들도 있다. 받아들일 수 있는 사람은 받아들여라.”","처음부터 결혼하지 못할 몸으로 태어난 사람도 있고 사람의 손으로 그렇게 된 사람도 있고 또 하늘 나라를 위하여 스스로 결혼하지 않는 사람도 있다. 이 말을 받아들일 만한 사람은 받아들여라.\"","어머니의 태로부터 된 고자도 있고 사람이 만든 고자도 있고 천국을 위하여 스스로 된 고자도 있도다 이 말을 받을 만한 자는 받을지어다","어미의 태로부터 된 고자도 있고 사람이 만든 고자도 있고 천국을 위하여 스스로 된 고자도 있도다 이 말을 받을만한 자는 받을찌어다","어떤 사람은 날 때부터 결혼하지 못할 몸으로 태어나고, 어떤 사람은 사람의 손으로 그렇게 되며, 또 어떤 사람은 하늘나라를 위해 스스로 결혼하지 않는다. 이 말을 받아들일 수 있는 사람은 받아들여라.\"","Some are incapable of marriage because they were born so; some, because they were made so by others; some, because they have renounced marriage for the sake of the kingdom of heaven. Whoever can accept this ought to accept it.”","For there are some eunuchs, which were so born from their mother's womb: and there are some eunuchs, which were made eunuchs of men: and there be eunuchs, which have made themselves eunuchs for the kingdom of heaven's sake. He that is able to receive it, let him receive it.","For some are eunuchs because they were born that way; others were made that way by men; and others have renounced marriage because of the kingdom of heaven. The one who can accept this should accept it.\"","Sunt enim eunuchi, qui de matris utero sic nati sunt; et sunt eunuchi, qui facti sunt ab hominibus; et sunt eunuchi, qui seipsos castraverunt propter regnum caelorum. Qui potest capere, capiat “.","יש סריסים אשר נולדו כן מבטן אמם ויש סריסים המסרסים על ידי אדם ויש סריסים אשר סרסו את עצמם למען מלכות השמים מי שיוכל לקבל יקבל׃"],["47","19","13","그때에 사람들이 어린이들을 예수님께 데리고 와서 그들에게 손을 얹고 기도해 달라고 하였다. 그러자 제자들이 사람들을 꾸짖었다.","그 때 사람들이 어린이들을 예수께 데리고 와서 머리에 손을 얹어 기도해 주시기를 청하였다. 제자들이 그들을 나무라자","그 때에 사람들이 예수께서 안수하고 기도해 주심을 바라고 어린 아이들을 데리고 오매 제자들이 꾸짖거늘","때에 사람들이 예수의 안수하고 기도하심을 바라고 어린 아이들을 데리고 오매 제자들이 꾸짖거늘","그때 사람들이 어린아이들을 예수께 데리고 와서 머리에 손을 얹어 기도해 달라고 청하였다. 그러자 제자들이 데리고 온 사람들을 보고 \"우리 선생님을 괴롭히지 마시오\" 하고 나무랐다.","Then children were brought to him that he might lay his hands on them and pray. The disciples rebuked them,","Then were there brought unto him little children, that he should put his hands on them, and pray: and the disciples rebuked them.","Then little children were brought to Jesus for him to place his hands on them and pray for them. But the disciples rebuked those who brought them.","Tunc oblati sunt ei parvuli, ut manus eis imponeret et oraret; discipuli autem increpabant eis.","אז יביאו אליו ילדים למען ישים עליהם את ידיו ויתפלל עליהם ויגערו בם התלמידים׃"],["47","19","14","그러나 예수님께서는 이렇게 이르셨다. “어린이들을 그냥 놓아두어라. 나에게 오는 것을 막지 마라. 사실 하늘 나라는 이 어린이들과 같은 사람들의 것이다.”","예수께서는 \"어린이들이 나에게 오는 것을 막지 말고 그대로 두어라. 하늘 나라는 이런 어린이와 같은 사람들의 것이다.\" 하고 말씀하셨다.","예수께서 이르시되 어린 아이들을 용납하고 내게 오는 것을 금하지 말라 천국이 이런 사람의 것이니라 하시고","예수께서 가라사대 어린 아이들을 용납하고 내게 오는 것을 금하지 말라 천국이 이런 자의 것이니라 하시고","그러자 예수께서 \"어린아이들이 내게 오는 것을 막지 말라. 하늘나라는 이런 어린아이들과 같은 자들의 것이다\" 하시고","but Jesus said, “Let the children come to me, and do not prevent them; for the kingdom of heaven belongs to such as these.”","But Jesus said, Suffer little children, and forbid them not, to come unto me: for of such is the kingdom of heaven.","Jesus said, \"Let the little children come to me, and do not hinder them, for the kingdom of heaven belongs to such as these.\"","Iesus vero ait:  “Sinite parvulos et nolite eos prohibere ad me venire; talium est enim regnum caelorum “.","והוא ישוע אמר הניחו לילדים ואל תמנעום מבוא אלי כי לאלה מלכות השמים׃"],["47","19","15","그리고 그들에게 손을 얹어 주시고 나서 그곳을 떠나셨다.","그리고 그들의 머리 위에 손을 얹어 축복해 주시고 나서 그 곳을 떠나셨다.","그들에게 안수하시고 거기를 떠나시니라","저희 위에 안수하시고 거기서 떠나시니라","그들의 머리 위에 손을 얹어 축복해 주시고 그곳을 떠나셨다.","After he placed his hands on them, he went away.","And he laid his hands on them, and departed thence.","When he had placed his hands on them, he went on from there.","Et cum imposuisset eis manus, abiit inde.","וישם את ידיו עליהם ויעבר משם׃"],["47","19","16","그런데 어떤 사람이 예수님께 다가와, “스승님, 제가 영원한 생명을 얻으려면 무슨 선한 일을 해야 합니까?” 하고 물었다.","한번은 어떤 사람이 예수께 와서 \"선생님, 제가 무슨 선한 일을 해야 영원한 생명을 얻겠습니까?\" 하고 물었다.","어떤 사람이 주께 와서 이르되 선생님이여 내가 무슨 선한 일을 하여야 영생을 얻으리이까","어떤 사람이 주께 와서 가로되 선생님이여 내가 무슨 선한 일을 하여야 영생을 얻으리이까","어떤 젊은이가 예수께 와서 물었다. \"선생님, 제가 무슨 선한 일을 해야 영원한 생명을 얻겠습니까?\"","Now someone approached him and said, “Teacher, what good must I do to gain eternal life?”","And, behold, one came and said unto him, Good Master, what good thing shall I do, that I may have eternal life?","Now a man came up to Jesus and asked, \"Teacher, what good thing must I do to get eternal life?\"","Et ecce unus accedens ait illi:  “Magister, quid boni faciam, ut habeam vitam aeternam? “. Qui dixit ei:","והנה איש נגש אליו ויאמר רבי הטוב אי זה הטוב אשר אעשנו לקנות חיי עולמים׃"],["47","19","17","그러자 예수님께서 말씀하셨다. “어찌하여 나에게 선한 일을 묻느냐? 선하신 분은 한 분뿐이시다. 네가 생명에 들어가려면 계명들을 지켜라.”","예수께서는 \"왜 너는 나에게 와서 선한 일에 대하여 묻느냐? 참으로 선하신 분은 오직 한 분뿐이시다. 네가 생명의 나라로 들어가려거든 계명을 지켜라.\" 하고 대답하셨다.","예수께서 이르시되 어찌하여 선한 일을 내게 묻느냐 선한 이는 오직 한 분이시니라 네가 생명에 들어 가려면 계명들을 지키라","예수께서 가라사대 어찌하여 선한 일을 내게 묻느냐 선한이는 오직 한 분이시니라 네가 생명에 들어 가려면 계명들을 지키라","예수께서 대답하셨다. \"네가 어찌하여 내게 선한 일에 대하여 묻느냐? 선한 분은 오직 하나님 한분뿐이시다. 생명으로 들어가려거든 계명을 지켜라\"","He answered him, “Why do you ask me about the good? There is only One who is good. If you wish to enter into life, keep the commandments.”","And he said unto him, Why callest thou me good? there is none good but one, that is, God: but if thou wilt enter into life, keep the commandments.","\"Why do you ask me about what is good?\" Jesus replied. \"There is only One who is good. If you want to enter life, obey the commandments.\"","Quid me interrogas de bono? Unus est bonus. Si autem vis ad vitam ingredi, serva mandata.","ויאמר אליו מה תקראני טוב אין טוב כי אם אחד האלהים ואם חפצך לבוא אל החיים שמר את המצות׃"],["47","19","18","그가 “어떤 것들입니까?” 하고 또 묻자 예수님께서 이르셨다. “‘살인해서는 안 된다. 간음해서는 안 된다. 도둑질해서는 안 된다. 거짓 증언을 해서는 안 된다.","그 젊은이가 \"어느 계명입니까?\" 하고 묻자 예수께서는 \"'3)살인하지 마라. 간음하지 마라. 도둑질하지 마라. 거짓 증언하지 마라. 출애 20:12-16(신명 5:16-20).","이르되 어느 계명이오니이까 예수께서 이르시되 ㄷ)살인하지 말라, 간음하지 말라, 도둑질하지 말라, 거짓 증언 하지 말라,","가로되 어느 계명이오니이까 예수께서 가라사대 ㄷ)살인하지 말라, 간음하지 말라, 도적질하지 말라, 거짓증거하지 말라, 출 20:12-16, 신 5:16-20","\"어느 계명입니까?\" 그가 다시 묻자 예수께서 말씀하셨다. ㄱ) \"살인하지 말라. 간음하지 말라. 도둑질하지 말라. 거짓말하지 말라. (ㄱ. 출20:12-16,레19:18(참조,신5:16-20))","He asked him, “Which ones?” And Jesus replied, “ ‘You shall not kill; you shall not commit adultery; you shall not steal; you shall not bear false witness;","He saith unto him, Which? Jesus said, Thou shalt do no murder, Thou shalt not commit adultery, Thou shalt not steal, Thou shalt not bear false witness,","\"Which ones?\" the man inquired. Jesus replied, \"'Do not murder, do not commit adultery, do not steal, do not give false testimony,","Dicit illi:  “Quae? “. Iesus autem dixit:  “Non homicidium facies, non adulterabis, non facies furtum, non falsum testimonium dices,","ויאמר אליו מה הנה ויאמר ישוע אלה הן לא תרצח לא תנאף לא תגנב לא תענה עד שקר׃"],["47","19","19","아버지와 어머니를 공경하여라.’ 그리고 ‘네 이웃을 너 자신처럼 사랑해야 한다.’는 것이다.”","부모를 공경하여라.' 그리고 '4)네 이웃을 네 몸같이 사랑하여라.' 하는 계명이다.\" 하고 대답하셨다. 레위 19:18.","네 부모를 공경하라, ㄹ)네 이웃을 네 자신과 같이 사랑하라 하신 것이니라","네 부모를 공경하라, ㄹ)네 이웃을 네 몸과 같이 사랑하라 하신 것이니라 레 19:18","네 부모를 공경하라. 그리고 네 이웃을 네 몸같이 사랑하라\"","honor your father and your mother’; and ‘you shall love your neighbor as yourself.’”","Honour thy father and thy mother: and, Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself.","honor your father and mother,' and 'love your neighbor as yourself.'\"","honora patrem et matrem et diliges proximum tuum sicut teipsum “.","כבד את אביך ואת אמך ואהבת לרעך כמוך׃"],["47","19","20","그 젊은이가 “그런 것들은 제가 다 지켜 왔습니다. 아직도 무엇이 부족합니까?” 하고 다시 묻자,","그 젊은이가 \"저는 그 모든 것을 다 지켰습니다. 그런데 아직도 무엇을 더 해야 되겠습니까?\" 하고 다시 묻자","그 청년이 이르되 이 모든 것을 내가 지키었사온대 아직도 무엇이 부족하니이까","그 청년이 가로되 이 모든 것을 내가 지키었사오니 아직도 무엇이 부족하니이까","\"저는 언제나 그 계명들을 다 지키고 있습니다. 아직도 무엇을 더 해야 합니까?\" 하고 그 젊은이가 말하자","The young man said to him, “All of these I have observed. What do I still lack?”","The young man saith unto him, All these things have I kept from my youth up: what lack I yet?","\"All these I have kept,\" the young man said. \"What do I still lack?\"","Dicit illi adulescens:  “Omnia haec custodivi. Quid adhuc mihi deest? “.","ויאמר אליו הבחור את כל אלה שמרתי מנעורי ומה חסרתי עוד׃"],["47","19","21","예수님께서 그에게 이르셨다. “네가 완전한 사람이 되려거든, 가서 너의 재산을 팔아 가난한 이들에게 주어라. 그러면 네가 하늘에서 보물을 차지하게 될 것이다. 그리고 와서 나를 따라라.”","예수께서는 \"네가 완전한 사람이 되려거든 가서 너의 재산을 다 팔아 가난한 사람들에게 나누어주어라. 그러면 하늘에서 보화를 얻게 될 것이다. 그러니 내가 시키는 대로 하고 나서 나를 따라오너라.\" 하셨다.","예수께서 이르시되 네가 온전하고자 할진대 가서 네 소유를 팔아 가난한 자들에게 주라 그리하면 하늘에서 보화가 네게 있으리라 그리고 와서 나를 따르라 하시니","예수께서 가라사대 네가 온전하고자 할찐대 가서 네 소유를 팔아 가난한 자들을 주라 그리하면 하늘에서 보화가 네게 있으리라 그리고 와서 나를 좇으라 하시니","예수께서 말씀하셨다. \"만일 네가 완전하게 되려거든 가서 네가 가진 것을 다 팔아 그 돈을 가난한 사람들에게 주어라. 그러면 하늘에서 보화를 얻게 될 것이다. 그리고 와서 나를 따르라.\"","Jesus said to him, “If you wish to be perfect, go, sell what you have and give to [the] poor, and you will have treasure in heaven. Then come, follow me.”","Jesus said unto him, If thou wilt be perfect, go and sell that thou hast, and give to the poor, and thou shalt have treasure in heaven: and come and follow me.","Jesus answered, \"If you want to be perfect, go, sell your possessions and give to the poor, and you will have treasure in heaven. Then come, follow me.\"","Ait illi Iesus:  “Si vis perfectus esse, vade, vende, quae habes, et da pauperibus, et habebis thesaurum in caelo; et veni, sequere me “.","ויאמר ישוע אליו אם חפצך להיות שלם לך מכר את רכשך ותן לעניים והיה לך אוצר בשמים ושוב הלם ולך אחרי׃"],["47","19","22","그러나 그 젊은이는 이 말씀을 듣고 슬퍼하며 떠나갔다. 그가 많은 재물을 가지고 있었기 때문이다.","그러나 그 젊은이는 재산이 많았기 때문에 이 말씀을 듣고 풀이 죽어 떠나갔다.","그 청년이 재물이 많으므로 이 말씀을 듣고 근심하며 가니라","그 청년이 재물이 많으므로 이 말씀을 듣고 근심하며 가니라","이 말씀을 들은 젊은이는 큰 부자였으므로 침울한 표정으로 돌아갔다.","When the young man heard this statement, he went away sad, for he had many possessions.","But when the young man heard that saying, he went away sorrowful: for he had great possessions.","When the young man heard this, he went away sad, because he had great wealth.","Cum audisset autem adulescens verbum, abiit tristis; erat enim habens multas possessiones.","ויהי כשמע הבחור את הדבר הזה וילך משם נעצב כי היו לו נכסים רבים׃"],["47","19","23","예수님께서 제자들에게 말씀하셨다. “내가 진실로 너희에게 말한다. 부자는 하늘 나라에 들어가기가 어려울 것이다.","예수께서는 제자들에게 이렇게 말씀하셨다. \"나는 분명히 말한다. 부자는 하늘 나라에 들어가기가 어렵다.","예수께서 제자들에게 이르시되 내가 진실로 너희에게 이르노니 부자는 천국에 들어가기가 어려우니라","예수께서 제자들에게 이르시되 내가 진실로 너희에게 이르노니 부자는 천국에 들어가기가 어려우니라","그러자 예수께서 제자들에게 말씀하셨다. \"내가 진정으로 말한다. 부자는 하늘나라에 들어가기가 매우 어렵다.","Then Jesus said to his disciples, “Amen, I say to you, it will be hard for one who is rich to enter the kingdom of heaven.","Then said Jesus unto his disciples, Verily I say unto you, That a rich man shall hardly enter into the kingdom of heaven.","Then Jesus said to his disciples, \"I tell you the truth, it is hard for a rich man to enter the kingdom of heaven.","Iesus autem dixit discipulis suis:  “Amen dico vobis: Dives difficile intrabit in regnum caelorum.","ויאמר ישוע אל תלמידיו אמן אמר אני לכם קשה לעשיר לבוא אל מלכות השמים׃"],["47","19","24","내가 다시 너희에게 말한다. 부자가 하느님 나라에 들어가는 것보다 낙타가 바늘구멍으로 빠져나가는 것이 더 쉽다.”","거듭 말하지만 부자가 하느님 나라에 들어가는 것보다는 낙타가 바늘귀로 빠져 나가는 것이 더 쉬울 것이다.\"","다시 너희에게 말하노니 낙타가 바늘귀로 들어가는 것이 부자가 하나님의 나라에 들어가는 것보다 쉬우니라 하시니","다시 너희에게 말하노니 약대가 바늘귀로 들어가는 것이 부자가 하나님의 나라에 들어가는 것보다 쉬우니라 하신대","다시 말하지만 부자가 하늘나라에 들어가는 것보다는 낙타가 바늘귀로 빠져 나가는 것이 더 쉬울 것이다\"","Again I say to you, it is easier for a camel to pass through the eye of a needle than for one who is rich to enter the kingdom of God.”","And again I say unto you, It is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle, than for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of God.","Again I tell you, it is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle than for a rich man to enter the kingdom of God.\"","Et iterum dico vobis: Facilius est camelum per foramen acus transire, quam divitem intrare in regnum Dei “.","ועוד אני אמר לכם כי נקל לגמל לעבר דרך נקב המחט מבא עשיר אל מלכות האלהים׃"],["47","19","25","제자들이 이 말씀을 듣고 몹시 놀라서, “그렇다면 누가 구원받을 수 있는가?” 하고 말하였다.","제자들이 이 말씀을 듣고 깜짝 놀라서 \"그러면 구원받을 사람이 어디 있겠습니까?\" 하고 물었다.","제자들이 듣고 몹시 놀라 이르되 그렇다면 누가 구원을 얻을 수 있으리이까","제자들이 듣고 심히 놀라 가로되 그런즉 누가 구원을 얻을 수 있으리이까","이 말씀을 듣고 제자들은 놀라서 \"그러면 세상에서 구원받을 사람이 어디 있겠습니까?\" 하고 물었다.","When the disciples heard this, they were greatly astonished and said, “Who then can be saved?”","When his disciples heard it, they were exceedingly amazed, saying, Who then can be saved?","When the disciples heard this, they were greatly astonished and asked, \"Who then can be saved?\"","Auditis autem his, discipuli mirabantur valde dicentes:  “Quis ergo poterit salvus esse? “.","והתלמידים כשמעם זאת השתוממו מאד ויאמרו מי אפוא יוכל להושע׃"],["47","19","26","예수님께서는 그들을 눈여겨보며 이르셨다. “사람에게는 그것이 불가능하지만 하느님께는 모든 것이 가능하다.”","예수께서는 그들을 똑바로 보시며 \"그것은 사람의 힘으로 할 수 없는 일이다. 그러나 하느님께서는 무슨 일이든 하실 수 있다.\" 하고 말씀하셨다.","예수께서 그들을 보시며 이르시되 사람으로는 할 수 없으나 하나님으로서는 다 하실 수 있느니라","예수께서 저희를 보시며 가라사대 사람으로는 할 수 없으되 하나님으로서는 다 할 수 있느니라","예수께서는 그들을 바라보시며 말씀하셨다. \"사람으로서는 할 수가 없다. 그러나 하나님께서는 무슨 일이나 다 하실 수 있다\"","Jesus looked at them and said, “For human beings this is impossible, but for God all things are possible.”","But Jesus beheld them, and said unto them, With men this is impossible; but with God all things are possible.","Jesus looked at them and said, \"With man this is impossible, but with God all things are possible.\"","Aspiciens autem Iesus dixit illis:  “Apud homines hoc impossibile est, apud Deum autem omnia possibilia sunt “.","ויבט בן ישוע ויאמר להם מבני אדם יפלא הדבר אבל מהאלהים לא יפלא כל דבר׃"],["47","19","27","그때에 베드로가 그 말씀을 받아 예수님께 물었다. “보시다시피 저희는 모든 것을 버리고 스승님을 따랐습니다. 그러니 저희는 무엇을 받겠습니까?”","그 때에 베드로가 나서서 \"보시다시피 저희는 모든 것을 버리고 주님을 따랐습니다. 그러니 저희는 무엇을 받게 되겠습니까?\" 하고 물었다.","이에 베드로가 대답하여 이르되 보소서 우리가 모든 것을 버리고 주를 따랐사온대 그런즉 우리가 무엇을 얻으리이까","이에 베드로가 대답하여 가로되 보소서 우리가 모든 것을 버리고 주를 좇았사오니 그런즉 우리가 무엇을 얻으리이까","그때 베드로가 예수께 말하였다. \"저희는 모든 것을 버리고 주님을 따랐습니다. 그러니 저희는 무엇을 받게 되겠습니까?\"","Then Peter said to him in reply, “We have given up everything and followed you. What will there be for us?”","Then answered Peter and said unto him, Behold, we have forsaken all, and followed thee; what shall we have therefore?","Peter answered him, \"We have left everything to follow you! What then will there be for us?\"","Tunc respondens Petrus dixit ei:  “Ecce nos reliquimus omnia et secuti sumus te. Quid ergo erit nobis? “.","ויען פטרוס ויאמר אליו הן אנחנו עזבנו את הכל ונלך אחריך מה יהיה לנו׃"],["47","19","28","예수님께서 말씀하셨다. “내가 진실로 너희에게 말한다. 사람의 아들이 영광스러운 자기 옥좌에 앉게 되는 새 세상이 오면, 나를 따른 너희도 열두 옥좌에 앉아 이스라엘의 열두 지파를 심판할 것이다.","예수께서는 이렇게 대답하셨다. \"나는 분명히 말한다. 너희는 나를 따랐으니 새 세상이 와서 사람의 아들이 영광스러운 옥좌에 앉을 때에 너희도 열두 옥좌에 앉아 이스라엘 열두 지파를 심판하게 될 것이다.","예수께서 이르시되 내가 진실로 너희에게 이르노니 세상이 새롭게 되어 인자가 자기 영광의 보좌에 앉을 때에 나를 따르는 너희도 열두 보좌에 앉아 이스라엘 열두 지파를 심판하리라","예수께서 가라사대 내가 진실로 너희에게 이르노니 세상이 새롭게 되어 인자가 자기 영광의 보좌에 앉을 때에 나를 좇는 너희도 열 두 보좌에 앉아 이스라엘 열 두 지파를 심판하리라","예수께서 말씀하셨다. \"새 세상이 되어 인자가 그 나라에서 영광스러운 보좌에 앉을 때에 나를 좇는 너희도 열두 보좌에 앉아 이스라엘 열두 지파를 심판할 것이다.","Jesus said to them, “Amen, I say to you that you who have followed me, in the new age, when the Son of Man is seated on his throne of glory, will yourselves sit on twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel.","And Jesus said unto them, Verily I say unto you, That ye which have followed me, in the regeneration when the Son of man shall sit in the throne of his glory, ye also shall sit upon twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel.","Jesus said to them, \"I tell you the truth, at the renewal of all things, when the Son of Man sits on his glorious throne, you who have followed me will also sit on twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel.","Iesus autem dixit illis:  “Amen dico vobis quod vos, qui secuti estis me, in regeneratione, cum sederit Filius hominis in throno gloriae suae, sedebitis et vos super thronos duodecim, iudicantes duodecim tribus Israel.","ויאמר ישוע אליהם אמן אמר אני לכם אתם ההלכים אחרי בהתחדש הבריאה כאשר ישב בן האדם על כסא כבודו תשבו גם אתם על שנים עשר כסאות לשפט את שנים עשר שבטי ישראל׃"],["47","19","29","그리고 내 이름 때문에 집이나 형제나 자매, 아버지나 어머니, 자녀나 토지를 버린 사람은 모두 백 배로 받을 것이고 영원한 생명도 받을 것이다.","나를 따르려고 제 집이나 형제나 자매나 5)부모나 자식이나 토지를 버린 사람은 백 배의 상을 받을 것이며, 또 영원한 생명을 얻을 것이다. 어떤 사본에는 \"부모나\" 다음에 \"아내나\"라는 말이 있다.","또 내 이름을 위하여 집이나 형제나 자매나 부모나 자식이나 전토를 버린 자마다 여러 배를 받고 또 영생을 상속하리라","또 내 이름을 위하여 집이나 형제나 자매나 1)부모나 자식이나 전토를 버린 자마다 여러 배를 받고 또 영생을 상속하리라 어떤 사본에는, 「부모나」아래에 「아내나」가 있음","그리고 누구든지 나를 따르려고 집이나 형제나 자매나 아버지나 어머니나 아내나 자식이나 재산을 버린 사람은 백 배의 상을 받을 것이고 또 영원한 생명을 얻을 것이다.","And everyone who has given up houses or brothers or sisters or father or mother or children or lands for the sake of my name will receive a hundred times more, and will inherit eternal life.","And every one that hath forsaken houses, or brethren, or sisters, or father, or mother, or wife, or children, or lands, for my name's sake, shall receive an hundredfold, and shall inherit everlasting life.","And everyone who has left houses or brothers or sisters or father or mother or children or fields for my sake will receive a hundred times as much and will inherit eternal life.","Et omnis, qui reliquit domos vel fratres aut sorores aut patrem aut matrem aut filios aut agros propter nomen meum, centuplum accipiet et vitam aeternam possidebit.","וכל איש אשר עזב את בתיו ואת אחיו ואת אחיותיו ואת אביו ואת אמו ואת אשתו ואת בניו ואת שדותיו למען שמי הוא יקח מאה שערים וחיי עולמים יירש׃"],["47","19","30","그런데 첫째가 꼴찌 되고 꼴찌가 첫째 되는 이들이 많을 것이다.”","그러나 첫째였다가 꼴찌가 되고 꼴찌였다가 첫째가 되는 사람들이 많을 것이다.\"","그러나 먼저 된 자로서 나중 되고 나중 된 자로서 먼저 될 자가 많으니라","그러나 먼저 된 자로서 나중 되고 나중 된 자로서 먼저 될 자가 많으니라","그러나 먼저 된 자가 나중 되고 나중 된 자가 먼저 될 자가 많을 것이다.","But many who are first will be last, and the last will be first.","But many that are first shall be last; and the last shall be first.","But many who are first will be last, and many who are last will be first.","Multi autem erunt primi novissimi, et novissimi primi.","ואולם רבים מן הראשונים אשר יהיו אחרונים ומן האחרונים יהיו ראשונים׃"],["47","20","1","“하늘 나라는 자기 포도밭에서 일할 일꾼들을 사려고 이른 아침에 집을 나선 밭 임자와 같다.","\"하늘 나라는 이렇게 비유할 수 있다. 어떤 포도원 주인이 포도원에서 일할 일꾼을 얻으려고 이른 아침에 나갔다.","천국은 마치 품꾼을 얻어 포도원에 들여보내려고 이른 아침에 나간 집 주인과 같으니","천국은 마치 품군을 얻어 포도원에 들여보내려고 이른 아침에 나간 집 주인과 같으니","하늘나라는 또 이렇게 비유할 수 있다. 어느 포도원 주인이 자기 포도원에서 일할 일꾼을 얻으려고 아침 일찍이 나갔다.","“The kingdom of heaven is like a landowner who went out at dawn to hire laborers for his vineyard.","For the kingdom of heaven is like unto a man that is an householder, which went out early in the morning to hire labourers into his vineyard.","\"For the kingdom of heaven is like a landowner who went out early in the morning to hire men to work in his vineyard.","Simile est enim regnum cae lorum homini patri familias, qui exiit primo mane conducere operarios in vineam suam;","כי דומה מלכות השמים לאדם בעל בית אשר השכים לצאת בבקר לשכר פעלים לכרמו׃"],["47","20","2","그는 일꾼들과 하루 한 데나리온으로 합의하고 그들을 자기 포도밭으로 보냈다.","그는 일꾼들과 하루 품삯을 돈 한 데나리온으로 정하고 그들을 포도원으로 보냈다.","그가 하루 한 데나리온씩 품꾼들과 약속하여 포도원에 들여보내고","저가 하루 한 1)데나리온씩 품군들과 약속하여 포도원에 들여보내고 은전의 명칭","그는 일꾼들과 하루 품삯을 한 데나리온으로 정하고 그들을 포도원으로 보냈다.","After agreeing with them for the usual daily wage, he sent them into his vineyard.","And when he had agreed with the labourers for a penny a day, he sent them into his vineyard.","He agreed to pay them a denarius for the day and sent them into his vineyard.","conventione autem facta cum operariis ex denario diurno, misit eos in vineam suam.","והתנה עם הפעלים שכר דינר ליום וישלחם אל כרמו׃"],["47","20","3","그가 또 아홉 시쯤에 나가 보니 다른 이들이 하는 일 없이 장터에 서 있었다.","아홉 시쯤에 다시 나가서 장터에 할 일 없이 서 있는 사람들을 보고","또 제삼시에 나가 보니 장터에 놀고 서 있는 사람들이 또 있는지라","또 제 삼시에 나가보니 장터에 놀고 섰는 사람들이 또 있는지라","아홉 시쯤에 품꾼들이 대기하는 곳을 지나다가 보니 몇 사람이 일거리를 얻으려고 기다리고 있었다.","Going out about nine o’clock, he saw others standing idle in the marketplace,","And he went out about the third hour, and saw others standing idle in the marketplace,","\"About the third hour he went out and saw others standing in the marketplace doing nothing.","Et egressus circa horam tertiam vidit alios stantes in foro otiosos","ויצא בשעה השלישית וירא אחרים עמדים בטלים בשוק׃"],["47","20","4","그래서 그들에게, ‘당신들도 포도밭으로 가시오. 정당한 삯을 주겠소.’ 하고 말하자,","당신들도 내 포도원에 가서 일하시오. 그러면 일한 만큼 품삯을 주겠소.' 하고 말하니","그들에게 이르되 너희도 포도원에 들어가라 내가 너희에게 상당하게 주리라 하니 그들이 가고","저희에게 이르되 너희도 포도원에 들어가라 내가 너희에게 상당하게 주리라 하니 저희가 가고","그래서 주인은 그 사람들도 포도원으로 보내며 그날의 일이 끝나는 시간에 적당한 품삯을 주겠다고 하였다.","and he said to them, ‘You too go into my vineyard, and I will give you what is just.’","And said unto them; Go ye also into the vineyard, and whatsoever is right I will give you. And they went their way.","He told them, 'You also go and work in my vineyard, and I will pay you whatever is right.'","et illis dixit:  “Ite et vos in vineam; et, quod iustum fuerit, dabo vobis “.","ויאמר להם לכו גם אתם אל כרמי וכישר אתן לכם וילכו׃"],["47","20","5","그들이 갔다. 그는 다시 열두 시와 오후 세 시쯤에도 나가서 그와 같이 하였다.","그들도 일하러 갔다. 주인은 열두 시와 오후 세 시쯤에도 나가서 그와 같이 하였다.","제육시와 제구시에 또 나가 그와 같이 하고","제 육시와 제 구시에 또 나가 그와 같이 하고","정오와 오후 세 시쯤에도 주인은 나가서 이와 같이 하였다.","So they went off. [And] he went out again around noon, and around three o’clock, and did likewise.","Again he went out about the sixth and ninth hour, and did likewise.","So they went. \"He went out again about the sixth hour and the ninth hour and did the same thing.","Illi autem abierunt. Iterum autem exiit circa sextam et nonam horam et fecit similiter.","ויצא גם בשעה הששית גם בתשיעית ויעש כדבר הזה׃"],["47","20","6","그리고 오후 다섯 시쯤에도 나가 보니 또 다른 이들이 서 있었다. 그래서 그들에게 ‘당신들은 왜 온종일 하는 일 없이 여기 서 있소?’ 하고 물으니,","오후 다섯 시쯤에 다시 나가보니 할 일 없이 서 있는 사람들이 또 있어서 '왜 당신들은 하루 종일 이렇게 빈둥거리며 서 있기만 하오?' 하고 물었다.","제십일시에도 나가 보니 서 있는 사람들이 또 있는지라 이르되 너희는 어찌하여 종일토록 놀고 여기 서 있느냐","제 십일시에도 나가 보니 섰는 사람들이 또 있는지라","그날 저녁 다섯 시쯤 다시 마을에 나갔다가 몇 사람이 더 서 있는 것을 본 주인은","Going out about five o’clock, he found others standing around, and said to them, ‘Why do you stand here idle all day?’","And about the eleventh hour he went out, and found others standing idle, and saith unto them, Why stand ye here all the day idle?","About the eleventh hour he went out and found still others standing around. He asked them, 'Why have you been standing here all day long doing nothing?'","Circa undecimam vero exiit et invenit alios stantes et dicit illis:  “Quid hic statis tota die otiosi? “.","ויצא בשעת עשתי עשרה וימצא אחרים עמדים ויאמר אליהם למה אתם עמדים פה בטלים כל היום׃"],["47","20","7","그들이 ‘아무도 우리를 사지 않았기 때문입니다.’ 하고 대답하였다. 그러자 그는 ‘당신들도 포도밭으로 가시오.’ 하고 말하였다.","그들은 '아무도 우리에게 일을 시키지 않아서 이러고 있습니다.' 하고 대답하였다. 그래서 주인은 '당신들도 내 포도원으로 가서 일하시오.' 하고 말하였다.","이르되 우리를 품꾼으로 쓰는 이가 없음이니이다 이르되 너희도 포도원에 들어가라 하니라","가로되 너희는 어찌하여 종일토록 놀고 여기 섰느뇨 가로되 우리를 품군으로 쓰는이가 없음이니이다 가로되 너희도 포도원에 들어가라 하니라","\"왜 자네들은 하루 종일 일하지 않는가?\" 하고 물었다. \"아무도 우리에게 일거리를 주는 사람이 없습니다\" 하고 그들이 대답하자 주인은 \"그러면 내 포도원으로 가서 다른 사람들을 도와주게\" 하고 말하였다.","They answered, ‘Because no one has hired us.’ He said to them, ‘You too go into my vineyard.’","They say unto him, Because no man hath hired us. He saith unto them, Go ye also into the vineyard; and whatsoever is right, that shall ye receive.","\"'Because no one has hired us,' they answered. \"He said to them, 'You also go and work in my vineyard.'","Dicunt ei:  “Quia nemo nos conduxit “. Dicit illis:  “Ite et vos in vineam “.","ויאמרו לו כי לא שכר אותנו איש ויאמר אליהם לכו גם אתם אל הכרם וכישר יתן לכם׃"],["47","20","8","저녁때가 되자 포도밭 주인은 자기 관리인에게 말하였다. ‘일꾼들을 불러 맨 나중에 온 이들부터 시작하여 맨 먼저 온 이들에게까지 품삯을 내주시오.’","날이 저물자 포도원 주인은 자기 관리인에게 '일꾼들을 불러 맨 나중에 온 사람들부터 시작하여 맨 먼저 온 사람들에게까지 차례로 품삯을 치르시오.' 하고 일렀다.","저물매 포도원 주인이 청지기에게 이르되 품꾼들을 불러 나중 온 자로부터 시작하여 먼저 온 자까지 삯을 주라 하니","저물매 포도원 주인이 청지기에게 이르되 품군들을 불러 나중 온 자로부터 시작하여 먼저 온 자까지 삯을 주라 하니","저녁이 되자 주인은 관리인에게 사람들을 불러 맨 나중에 온 사람부터 품삯을 주라고 하였다.","When it was evening the owner of the vineyard said to his foreman, ‘Summon the laborers and give them their pay, beginning with the last and ending with the first.’","So when even was come, the lord of the vineyard saith unto his steward, Call the labourers, and give them their hire, beginning from the last unto the first.","\"When evening came, the owner of the vineyard said to his foreman, 'Call the workers and pay them their wages, beginning with the last ones hired and going on to the first.'","Cum sero autem factum esset, dicit dominus vineae procuratori suo:  “Voca operarios et redde illis mercedem incipiens a novissimis usque ad primos “.","ויהי בערב ויאמר בעל הכרם אל פקידו קרא את הפעלים ושלם להם את שכרם החל באחרונים וכלה בראשונים׃"],["47","20","9","그리하여 오후 다섯 시쯤부터 일한 이들이 와서 한 데나리온씩 받았다.","오후 다섯 시쯤부터 일한 일꾼들이 와서 한 데나리온씩을 받았다.","제십일시에 온 자들이 와서 한 데나리온씩을 받거늘","제 십일시에 온 자들이 와서 한 1)데나리온씩을 받거늘 은전의 명칭","오후 다섯 시에 온 사람들이 한 데나리온씩을 받았다.","When those who had started about five o’clock came, each received the usual daily wage.","And when they came that were hired about the eleventh hour, they received every man a penny.","\"The workers who were hired about the eleventh hour came and each received a denarius.","Et cum venissent, qui circa undecimam horam venerant, acceperunt singuli denarium.","ויבאו הנשכרים בשעת אחת עשרה ויקחו איש איש דינר אחד׃"],["47","20","10","그래서 맨 먼저 온 이들은 차례가 되자 자기들은 더 받으려니 생각하였는데, 그들도 한 데나리온씩만 받았다.","그런데 맨 처음부터 일한 사람들은 품삯을 더 많이 받으려니 했지만 그들도 한 데나리온씩밖에 받지 못하였다.","먼저 온 자들이 와서 더 받을 줄 알았더니 그들도 한 데나리온씩 받은지라","먼저 온 자들이 와서 더 받을 줄 알았더니 저희도 한 1)데나리온씩 받은지라 은전의 명칭","그러자 아침 일찍 온 사람들은 그보다 훨씬 더 많이 받을 것으로 기대하고 있었다. 그러나 그들이 받은 품삯 역시 한 데나리온씩이었다.","So when the first came, they thought that they would receive more, but each of them also got the usual wage.","But when the first came, they supposed that they should have received more; and they likewise received every man a penny.","So when those came who were hired first, they expected to receive more. But each one of them also received a denarius.","Venientes autem primi arbitrati sunt quod plus essent accepturi; acceperunt autem et ipsi singuli denarium.","ובבא הראשונים דמו בנפשם כי יקחו יותר ויקחו גם הם איש איש דינר אחד׃"],["47","20","11","그것을 받아 들고 그들은 밭 임자에게 투덜거리면서,","그들은 돈을 받아들고 주인에게 투덜거리며","받은 후 집 주인을 원망하여 이르되","받은 후 집 주인을 원망하여 가로되","그들이 투덜거렸다.","And on receiving it they grumbled against the landowner,","And when they had received it, they murmured against the goodman of the house,","When they received it, they began to grumble against the landowner.","Accipientes autem murmurabant adversus patrem familias","ויהי בקחתם וילונו על בעל הבית לאמר׃"],["47","20","12","‘맨 나중에 온 저자들은 한 시간만 일했는데도, 뙤약볕 아래에서 온종일 고생한 우리와 똑같이 대우하시는군요.’ 하고 말하였다.","막판에 와서 한 시간밖에 일하지 않은 저 사람들을 온종일 뙤약볕 밑에서 수고한 우리들과 똑같이 대우하십니까?' 하고 따졌다.","나중 온 이 사람들은 한 시간밖에 일하지 아니하였거늘 그들을 종일 수고하며 더위를 견딘 우리와 같게 하였나이다","나중 온 이 사람들은 한 시간만 일하였거늘 저희를 종일 수고와 더위를 견딘 우리와 같게 하였나이다","\"한 시간밖에 일하지 않은 이 사람들과 온종일 뙤약볕에서 일한 우리들에게 똑같은 품삯을 주신단 말입니까?\"","saying, ‘These last ones worked only one hour, and you have made them equal to us, who bore the day’s burden and the heat.’","Saying, These last have wrought but one hour, and thou hast made them equal unto us, which have borne the burden and heat of the day.","'These men who were hired last worked only one hour,' they said, 'and you have made them equal to us who have borne the burden of the work and the heat of the day.'","dicentes:  “Hi novissimi una hora fecerunt, et pares illos nobis fecisti, qui portavimus pondus diei et aestum! “.","אלה האחרונים לא עשו כי אם שעה אחת ואתה השויתם אלינו אשר סבלנו את כבד היום ואת חמו׃"],["47","20","13","그러자 그는 그들 가운데 한 사람에게 말하였다. ‘친구여, 내가 당신에게 불의를 저지르는 것이 아니오. 당신은 나와 한 데나리온으로 합의하지 않았소?","그러자 주인은 그들 가운데 한 사람을 보고 '내가 당신에게 잘못한 것이 무엇이오? 당신은 나와 품삯을 한 데나리온으로 정하지 않았소?","주인이 그 중의 한 사람에게 대답하여 이르되 친구여 내가 네게 잘못한 것이 없노라 네가 나와 한 데나리온의 약속을 하지 아니하였느냐","주인이 그 중의 한 사람에게 대답하여 가로되 친구여 내가 네게 잘못한 것이 없노라 네가 나와 한 1)데나리온의 약속을 하지 아니하였느냐 은전의 명칭","그러자 주인이 그들 가운데 한 사람에게 말하였다. \"이보게, 나는 자네에게 잘못한 것이 없네. 자네는 하루 품삯으로 한 데나리온을 받기로 처음부터 정하지 않았는가?","He said to one of them in reply, ‘My friend, I am not cheating you. Did you not agree with me for the usual daily wage?","But he answered one of them, and said, Friend, I do thee no wrong: didst not thou agree with me for a penny?","\"But he answered one of them, 'Friend, I am not being unfair to you. Didn't you agree to work for a denarius?","At ille respondens uni eorum dixit:  “Amice, non facio tibi iniuriam; nonne ex denario convenisti mecum?","ויען ויאמר אל אחד מהם רעי לא עשקתיך הלא שכר דינר התנית עמי׃"],["47","20","14","당신 품삯이나 받아서 돌아가시오. 나는 맨 나중에 온 이 사람에게도 당신에게처럼 품삯을 주고 싶소.","당신의 품삯이나 가지고 가시오. 나는 이 마지막 사람에게도 당신에게 준 만큼의 삯을 주기로 한 것이오.","네 것이나 가지고 가라 나중 온 이 사람에게 너와 같이 주는 것이 내 뜻이니라","네 것이나 가지고 가라 나중 온 이 사람에게 너와 같이 주는 것이 내 뜻이니라","자네 품삯이나 가지고 가게. 이 모든 사람에게 똑같이 준 것은 내 마음에 달린 것일세.","Take what is yours and go. What if I wish to give this last one the same as you?","Take that thine is, and go thy way: I will give unto this last, even as unto thee.","Take your pay and go. I want to give the man who was hired last the same as I gave you.","Tolle, quod tuum est, et vade; volo autem et huic novissimo dare sicut et tibi.","קח את שלך ולך ואני רצוני לתת גם לזה האחרון כמו לך׃"],["47","20","15","내 것을 가지고 내가 하고 싶은 대로 할 수 없다는 말이오? 아니면, 내가 후하다고 해서 시기하는 것이오?’","내 것을 내 마음대로 처리하는 것이 잘못이란 말이오? 내 후한 처사가 비위에 거슬린단 말이오?' 하고 말하였다.","내 것을 가지고 내 뜻대로 할 것이 아니냐 내가 선하므로 네가 악하게 보느냐","내 것을 가지고 내 뜻대로 할것이 아니냐 내가 선하므로 네가 악하게 보느냐","내 돈을 내 마음대로 주는데 무엇이 잘못인가? 네가 친절을 베푼 것이 자네 비위에 거슬린단 말인가?\"","[Or] am I not free to do as I wish with my own money? Are you envious because I am generous?’","Is it not lawful for me to do what I will with mine own? Is thine eye evil, because I am good?","Don't I have the right to do what I want with my own money? Or are you envious because I am generous?'","Aut non licet mihi, quod volo, facere de meis? An oculus tuus nequam est, quia ego bonus sum? “.","הלא אוכל לעשות בשלי כרצוני האם תרע עינך על אשר טוב אנכי׃"],["47","20","16","이처럼 꼴찌가 첫째 되고 첫째가 꼴찌 될 것이다.”","이와 같이 꼴찌가 첫째가 되고 첫째가 꼴찌가 될 것이다.\"","이와 같이 나중 된 자로서 먼저 되고 먼저 된 자로서 나중 되리라","이와 같이 나중 된 자로서 먼저 되고 먼저 된 자로서 나중 되리라","이와 같이 나중 된 자가 먼저 되고 먼저 된 자가 나중 될 것이다\"","Thus, the last will be first, and the first will be last.”","So the last shall be first, and the first last: for many be called, but few chosen.","\"So the last will be first, and the first will be last.\"","Sic erunt novissimi primi, et primi novissimi “.","ככה יהיו האחרונים ראשונים והראשונים יהיו אחרונים כי רבים הם הקרואים ומעטים הנבחרים׃"],["47","20","17","예수님께서 예루살렘으로 올라가실 때, 열두 제자를 따로 데리고 길을 가시면서 그들에게 이르셨다.","예수께서 예루살렘으로 올라가시는 도중에 열두 제자를 가까이 불러 조용히 말씀하셨다.","예수께서 예루살렘으로 올라가려 하실 때에 열두 제자를 따로 데리시고 길에서 이르시되","예수께서 예루살렘으로 올라가려 하실 때에 열 두 제자를 따로 데리시고 길에서 이르시되","예수께서 예루살렘으로 올라가시는 길에 열두 제자를 곁으로 불러","As Jesus was going up to Jerusalem, he took the twelve [disciples] aside by themselves, and said to them on the way,","And Jesus going up to Jerusalem took the twelve disciples apart in the way, and said unto them,","Now as Jesus was going up to Jerusalem, he took the twelve disciples aside and said to them,","Et ascendens Iesus Hierosolymam assumpsit Duodecim discipulos secreto et ait illis in via:","ויהי כעלות ישוע ירושלים ויקח אליו את שנים העשר לבדם ויאמר להם בדרך׃"],["47","20","18","“보다시피 우리는 예루살렘으로 올라가고 있다. 거기에서 사람의 아들은 수석 사제들과 율법 학자들에게 넘겨질 것이다. 그러면 그들은 사람의 아들에게 사형을 선고하고,","\"우리는 지금 예루살렘으로 올라가고 있다. 거기에서 사람의 아들은 대사제들과 율법학자들의 손에 넘어가 사형 선고를 받을 것이다.","보라 우리가 예루살렘으로 올라가노니 인자가 대제사장들과 서기관들에게 넘겨지매 그들이 죽이기로 결의하고","보라 우리가 예루살렘으로 올라가노니 인자가 대제사장들과 서기관들에게 넘기우매 저희가 죽이기로 결안하고","예루살렘에서 자신에게 일어날 일을 말씀하셨다. \"나는 대제사장들과 율법학자들의 손에 넘겨질 것이다.","“Behold, we are going up to Jerusalem, and the Son of Man will be handed over to the chief priests and the scribes, and they will condemn him to death,","Behold, we go up to Jerusalem; and the Son of man shall be betrayed unto the chief priests and unto the scribes, and they shall condemn him to death,","\"We are going up to Jerusalem, and the Son of Man will be betrayed to the chief priests and the teachers of the law. They will condemn him to death","Ecce ascendimus Hierosolymam, et Filius hominis tradetur principibus sacerdotum et scribis, et condemnabunt eum morte","הננו עלים ירושלימה ובן האדם ימסר לראשי הכהנים ולסופרים והרשיעהו למות׃"],["47","20","19","그를 다른 민족 사람들에게 넘겨 조롱하고 채찍질하고 나서 십자가에 못 박게 할 것이다. 그러나 사람의 아들은 사흗날에 되살아날 것이다.”","그리고 이방인들의 손에 넘어가 조롱과 채찍질을 당하며 십자가에 달려 죽었다가 사흘 만에 다시 살아나게 될 것이다.\"","이방인들에게 넘겨 주어 그를 조롱하며 채찍질하며 십자가에 못 박게 할 것이나 제삼일에 살아나리라","이방인들에게 넘겨주어 그를 능욕하며 채찍질하며 십자가에 못 박게 하리니 제 삼일에 살아나리라","그들은 나를 로마 정부에 넘겨 주어 그들의 조롱을 받으며 십자가에 달려 죽게 할 것이다. 그러나 나는 사흘 만에 다시 살아날 것이다.\"","and hand him over to the Gentiles to be mocked and scourged and crucified, and he will be raised on the third day.”","And shall deliver him to the Gentiles to mock, and to scourge, and to crucify him: and the third day he shall rise again.","and will turn him over to the Gentiles to be mocked and flogged and crucified. On the third day he will be raised to life!\"","et tradent eum gentibus ad illudendum et flagellandum et crucifigendum, et tertia die resurget “.","ומסרו אותו לגוים להתל בו ולהכות אותו בשוטים ולצלב אותו וביום השלישי קום יקום׃"],["47","20","20","그때에 제베대오의 두 아들의 어머니가 그 아들들과 함께 예수님께 다가와 엎드려 절하고 무엇인가 청하였다.","그 때에 제베대오의 두 아들이 어머니와 함께 예수께 왔는데 그 어머니는 무엇인가를 청할 양으로 엎드려 절을 하였다.","그 때에 세베대의 아들의 어머니가 그 아들들을 데리고 예수께 와서 절하며 무엇을 구하니","그 때에 세베대의 아들의 어미가 그 아들들을 데리고 예수께 와서 절하며 무엇을 구하니","그때 세베대의 두 아들, 야고보와 요한의 어머니가 아들들과 함께 예수께 와서 절을 하며 청을 드렸다.","Then the mother of the sons of Zebedee approached him with her sons and did him homage, wishing to ask him for something.","Then came to him the mother of Zebedees children with her sons, worshipping him, and desiring a certain thing of him.","Then the mother of Zebedee's sons came to Jesus with her sons and, kneeling down, asked a favor of him.","Tunc accessit ad eum mater filiorum Zebedaei cum filiis suis, adorans et petens aliquid ab eo.","אז נגשה אליו אם בני זבדי עם בניה ותשתחו לו לבקש ממנו דבר׃"],["47","20","21","예수님께서 그 부인에게 “무엇을 원하느냐?” 하고 물으시자, 그 부인이 “스승님의 나라에서 저의 이 두 아들이 하나는 스승님의 오른쪽에, 하나는 왼쪽에 앉을 것이라고 말씀해 주십시오.” 하고 말하였다.","예수께서 그 부인에게 \"원하는 것이 무엇이냐?\" 하고 물으시자 그 부인은 \"주님의 나라가 서면 저의 이 두 아들을 하나는 주님의 오른편에, 하나는 왼편에 앉게 해주십시오.\" 하고 부탁하였다.","예수께서 이르시되 무엇을 원하느냐 이르되 나의 이 두 아들을 주의 나라에서 하나는 주의 우편에, 하나는 주의 좌편에 앉게 명하소서","예수께서 가라사대 무엇을 원하느뇨 가로되 이 나의 두 아들을 주의 나라에서 하나는 주의 우편에, 하나는 주의 좌편에 앉게 명하소서","\"무엇을 원하느냐?\" 예수께서 물으시자 그 부인이 대답하였다. \"주님의 나라가 서거든 저의 이 두 아들을 하나는 주님의 오른편에 하나는 왼편에 앉게 해주십시오\"","He said to her, “What do you wish?” She answered him, “Command that these two sons of mine sit, one at your right and the other at your left, in your kingdom.”","And he said unto her, What wilt thou? She saith unto him, Grant that these my two sons may sit, the one on thy right hand, and the other on the left, in thy kingdom.","\"What is it you want?\" he asked. She said, \"Grant that one of these two sons of mine may sit at your right and the other at your left in your kingdom.\"","Qui dixit ei:  “Quid vis? “. Ait illi:  “Dic ut sedeant hi duo filii mei unus ad dexteram tuam et unus ad sinistram in regno tuo “.","ויאמר אליה מה בקשתך ותאמר אליו אמר נא כי ישבו שני בני אלה אחד לימינך ואחד לשמאלך במלכותך׃"],["47","20","22","예수님께서 “너희는 너희가 무엇을 청하는지 알지도 못한다. 내가 마시려는 잔을 너희가 마실 수 있느냐?” 하고 물으셨다. 그들이 “할 수 있습니다.” 하고 대답하자,","그래서 예수께서 그 형제들에게 \"너희가 청하는 것이 무엇인지나 알고 있느냐? 내가 마시게 될 잔을 너희도 마실 수 있느냐?\" 하고 물으셨다. 그들이 \"마실 수 있습니다.\" 하고 대답하자","예수께서 대답하여 이르시되 너희는 너희가 구하는 것을 알지 못하는도다 내가 마시려는 잔을 너희가 마실 수 있느냐 그들이 말하되 할 수 있나이다","예수께서 대답하여 가라사대 너희 구하는 것을 너희가 알지 못하는도다 나의 마시려는 잔을 너희가 마실 수 있느냐 저희가 말하되 할 수 있나이다","그러자 예수께서 그 부인에게 \"내가 청하는 것이 무엇인지 알고 하는 말이냐?\" 하고 말씀하신 뒤에 야고보와 요한을 향하여 다시 \"너희는 내가 마시게 될 그 무서운 잔을 마실 수 있겠느냐?\" 하고 물으시자 그들이 대답하였다. \"예, 저희는 마실 수 있습니다.\"","Jesus said in reply, “You do not know what you are asking. Can you drink the cup that I am going to drink?” They said to him, “We can.”","But Jesus answered and said, Ye know not what ye ask. Are ye able to drink of the cup that I shall drink of, and to be baptized with the baptism that I am baptized with? They say unto him, We are able.","\"You don't know what you are asking,\" Jesus said to them. \"Can you drink the cup I am going to drink?\" \"We can,\" they answered.","Respondens autem Iesus dixit:  “Nescitis quid petatis. Potestis bibere calicem, quem ego bibiturus sum? “. Dicunt ei:  “Possumus “.","ויען ישוע ויאמר לא ידעתם את אשר שאלתם היכל תוכלו שתות את הכוס אשר אני עתיד לשתותו והטבל בטבילה אשר אני נבטל בה ויאמרו אליו נוכל׃"],["47","20","23","예수님께서 그들에게 말씀하셨다. “너희는 내 잔을 마실 것이다. 그러나 내 오른쪽과 왼쪽에 앉는 것은 내가 허락할 일이 아니라, 내 아버지께서 정하신 이들에게 돌아가는 것이다.”","예수께서는 다시 이렇게 말씀하셨다. \"너희도 내 잔을 마시게 될 것이다. 그러나 내 오른편과 내 왼편 자리에 앉는 특권은 내가 주는 것이 아니다. 그 자리에 앉을 사람들은 내 아버지께서 미리 정해 놓으셨다.\"","이르시되 너희가 과연 내 잔을 마시려니와 내 좌우편에 앉는 것은 내가 주는 것이 아니라 내 아버지께서 누구를 위하여 예비하셨든지 그들이 얻을 것이니라","가라사대 너희가 과연 내 잔을 마시려니와 내 좌우편에 앉는 것은 나의 줄것이 아니라 내 아버지께서 누구를 위하여 예비하셨든지 그들이 얻을 것이니라","예수께서 그들에게 다시 말씀하셨다. \"너희도 정녕 내 잔을 마시게 될 것이다. 그러나 내 오른편과 내 왼편 자리에 누가 앉게 될 것인가 하는 것은 내 권한이 아니다. 그 자리에 앉은 사람들은 내 아버지께서 미리 정해 놓으셨다\"","He replied, “My cup you will indeed drink, but to sit at my right and at my left [, this] is not mine to give but is for those for whom it has been prepared by my Father.”","And he saith unto them, Ye shall drink indeed of my cup, and be baptized with the baptism that I am baptized with: but to sit on my right hand, and on my left, is not mine to give, but it shall be given to them for whom it is prepared of my Father.","Jesus said to them, \"You will indeed drink from my cup, but to sit at my right or left is not for me to grant. These places belong to those for whom they have been prepared by my Father.\"","Ait illis:  “Calicem quidem meum bibetis, sedere autem ad dexteram meam et sinistram non est meum dare illud, sed quibus paratum est a Patre meo “.","ויאמר אליהם הן את כוסי תשתו ובטבילה אשר אני נטבל בה תטבלו אך שבת לימימי ולשמאלי אין בידי לתתה בלתי לאשר הוכן להם מאת אבי׃"],["47","20","24","다른 열 제자가 이 말을 듣고 그 두 형제를 불쾌하게 여겼다.","이 말을 듣고 있던 다른 열 제자가 그 형제를 보고 화를 냈다.","열 제자가 듣고 그 두 형제에 대하여 분히 여기거늘","열 제자가 듣고 그 두 형제에 대하여 분히 여기거늘","다른 열 제자들은 이 말을 듣고 야고보와 요한에게 분개하였다.","When the ten heard this, they became indignant at the two brothers.","And when the ten heard it, they were moved with indignation against the two brethren.","When the ten heard about this, they were indignant with the two brothers.","Et audientes decem indignati sunt de duobus fratribus.","ויהי כאשר שמעו זאת העשרה ויכעסו אל שני האחים׃"],["47","20","25","예수님께서는 그들을 가까이 불러 이르셨다. “너희도 알다시피 다른 민족들의 통치자들은 백성 위에 군림하고, 고관들은 백성에게 세도를 부린다.","예수께서는 그들을 가까이 불러놓고 \"너희도 알다시피 세상에서는 통치자들이 백성을 강제로 지배하고 높은 사람들이 백성을 권력으로 내리누른다.","예수께서 제자들을 불러다가 이르시되 이방인의 집권자들이 그들을 임의로 주관하고 그 고관들이 그들에게 권세를 부리는 줄을 너희가 알거니와","예수께서 제자들을 불러다가 가라사대 이방인의 집권자들이 저희를 임의로 주관하고 그 대인들이 저희에게 권세를 부리는 줄을 너희가 알거니와","그리자 예수께서 제자들을 불러 말씀하셨다. \"이방인이 왕들은 백성을 강제로 지배하고 권력을 가진 사람들은 백성을 내리누른다.","But Jesus summoned them and said, “You know that the rulers of the Gentiles lord it over them, and the great ones make their authority over them felt.","But Jesus called them unto him, and said, Ye know that the princes of the Gentiles exercise dominion over them, and they that are great exercise authority upon them.","Jesus called them together and said, \"You know that the rulers of the Gentiles lord it over them, and their high officials exercise authority over them.","Iesus autem vocavit eos ad se et ait:  “Scitis quia principes gentium dominantur eorum et, qui magni sunt, potestatem exercent in eos.","וישוע קרא להם ויאמר אתם ידעתם כי שרי הגוים רדים בהם והגדולים שלטים עליהם׃"],["47","20","26","그러나 너희는 그래서는 안 된다. 너희 가운데에서 높은 사람이 되려는 이는 너희를 섬기는 사람이 되어야 한다.","그러나 너희는 그래서는 안 된다. 너희 사이에서 높은 사람이 되고자 하는 사람은 남을 섬기는 사람이 되어야 하고","너희 중에는 그렇지 않아야 하나니 너희 중에 누구든지 크고자 하는 자는 너희를 섬기는 자가 되고","너희 중에는 그렇지 아니하니 너희 중에 누구든지 크고자 하는 자는 너희를 섬기는 자가 되고","그러나 너희들은 그렇게 하지 말라. 너희 가운데 누구든지 높은 사람이 되기를 원하는 사람은 남을 섬기는 사람이 되어야 한다.","But it shall not be so among you. Rather, whoever wishes to be great among you shall be your servant;","But it shall not be so among you: but whosoever will be great among you, let him be your minister;","Not so with you. Instead, whoever wants to become great among you must be your servant,","Non ita erit inter vos, sed quicumque voluerit inter vos magnus fieri, erit vester minister;","ואתם אל יהי כן ביניכם כי אם החפז להיות גדול בכם יהי לכם למשרת׃"],["47","20","27","또한 너희 가운데에서 첫째가 되려는 이는 너희의 종이 되어야 한다.","으뜸이 되고자 하는 사람은 종이 되어야 한다.","너희 중에 누구든지 으뜸이 되고자 하는 자는 너희의 종이 되어야 하리라","너희 중에 누구든지 으뜸이 되고자 하는 자는 너희 종이 되어야 하리라","만일 너희가 으뜸이 되기를 원하거든 반드시 종처럼 섬기는 사람이 되라.","whoever wishes to be first among you shall be your slave.","And whosoever will be chief among you, let him be your servant:","and whoever wants to be first must be your slave--","et, quicumque voluerit inter vos primus esse, erit vester servus;","והחפץ להיות בכם לראש יהי לכם עבד׃"],["47","20","28","사람의 아들도 섬김을 받으러 온 것이 아니라 섬기러 왔고, 또 많은 이들의 몸값으로 자기 목숨을 바치러 왔다.”","사실은 사람의 아들도 섬김을 받으러 온 것이 아니라 섬기러 왔고 많은 사람을 위하여 목숨을 바쳐 몸값을 치르러 온 것이다.\" 하셨다.","인자가 온 것은 섬김을 받으려 함이 아니라 도리어 섬기려 하고 자기 목숨을 많은 사람의 대속물로 주려 함이니라","인자가 온것은 섬김을 받으려 함이 아니라 도리어 섬기려 하고 자기 목숨을 많은 사람의 대속물로 주려 함이니라","인자도 섬김을 받으러 온 것이 아니라 섬기러 왔고 많은 사람의 죄값을 치르기 위하여 목숨을 내주려고 온 것이다.\"","Just so, the Son of Man did not come to be served but to serve and to give his life as a ransom for many.”","Even as the Son of man came not to be ministered unto, but to minister, and to give his life a ransom for many.","just as the Son of Man did not come to be served, but to serve, and to give his life as a ransom for many.\"","sicut Filius hominis non venit ministrari sed ministrare et dare animam suam redemptionem pro multis “.","כאשר בן האדם לא בא למען ישרתוהו כי אם לשרת ולתת את נפשו כפר תחת רבים׃"],["47","20","29","그들이 예리코를 떠날 때에 많은 군중이 예수님을 따랐다.","그들이 예리고를 떠날 때에 큰 군중이 예수를 따라왔다.","그들이 여리고에서 떠나 갈 때에 큰 무리가 예수를 따르더라","저희가 여리고에서 떠나 갈 때에 큰 무리가 예수를 좇더라","예수와 제자들이 여리고를 떠난 때 큰 무리가 그 뒤를 따랐다.","As they left Jericho, a great crowd followed him.","And as they departed from Jericho, a great multitude followed him.","As Jesus and his disciples were leaving Jericho, a large crowd followed him.","Et egredientibus illis ab Iericho, secuta est eum turba multa.","ויהי כצאתם מיריחו וילך אחריו המון עם רב׃"],["47","20","30","그런데 눈먼 사람 둘이 길가에 앉아 있다가 예수님께서 지나가신다는 말을 듣고, “다윗의 자손이신 주님, 저희에게 자비를 베풀어 주십시오.” 하고 외쳤다.","그런데 소경 두 사람이 길가에 앉아 있다가 예수께서 지나가신다는 말을 듣고 큰소리로, \"다윗의 자손이신 주님, 우리에게 자비를 베풀어주십시오.\" 하고 외쳤다.","맹인 두 사람이 길 가에 앉았다가 예수께서 지나가신다 함을 듣고 소리 질러 이르되 주여 우리를 불쌍히 여기소서 다윗의 자손이여 하니","소경 둘이 길 가에 앉았다가 예수께서 지나가신다 함을 듣고 소리질러 가로되 주여 우리를 불쌍히 여기소서 다윗의 자손이여 하니","맹인 두 사람이 길가에 앉아 있다가 예수께서 지나가신다는 말을 듣고 큰소리로 \"선생님, 다윗의 자손이여, 저희에게 자비를 베풀어 주십시오\" 하고 부르짖었다.","Two blind men were sitting by the roadside, and when they heard that Jesus was passing by, they cried out, “[Lord,] Son of David, have pity on us!”","And, behold, two blind men sitting by the way side, when they heard that Jesus passed by, cried out, saying, Have mercy on us, O Lord, thou son of David.","Two blind men were sitting by the roadside, and when they heard that Jesus was going by, they shouted, \"Lord, Son of David, have mercy on us!\"","Et ecce duo caeci sedentes secus viam audierunt quia Iesus transiret et clamaverunt dicentes:  “Domine, miserere nostri, fili David! “.","והנה שני עורים ישבים על יד הדרך וישמעו כי ישוע עבר ויצעקו לאמר חננו נא אדנינו בן דוד׃"],["47","20","31","군중이 그들에게 잠자코 있으라고 꾸짖었지만, 그들은 더욱 큰 소리로 “주님, 다윗의 자손이시여, 저희에게 자비를 베풀어 주십시오.” 하고 외쳤다.","사람들이 떠들지 말라고 꾸짖었으나 그들은 더욱 큰소리로 \"다윗의 자손이신 주님, 우리에게 자비를 베풀어주십시오.\" 하고 외쳤다.","무리가 꾸짖어 잠잠하라 하되 더욱 소리 질러 이르되 주여 우리를 불쌍히 여기소서 다윗의 자손이여 하는지라","무리가 꾸짖어 잠잠하라 하되 더욱 소리질러 가로되 주여 우리를 불쌍히 여기소서 다윗의 자손이여 하는지라","사람들이 조용히 하라고 하였으나 그들은 더욱 큰소리로 부르짖었다.","The crowd warned them to be silent, but they called out all the more, “Lord, Son of David, have pity on us!”","And the multitude rebuked them, because they should hold their peace: but they cried the more, saying, Have mercy on us, O Lord, thou son of David.","The crowd rebuked them and told them to be quiet, but they shouted all the louder, \"Lord, Son of David, have mercy on us!\"","Turba autem increpabat eos, ut tacerent; at illi magis clamabant dicentes:  “Domine, miserere nostri, fili David! “.","ויגער בם העם להשתיקם והם הרבו לצעק ויאמרו אדנינו חננו נא בן דוד׃"],["47","20","32","예수님께서 걸음을 멈추시고 그들을 부르신 다음, “내가 너희에게 무엇을 해 주기를 바라느냐?” 하고 물으셨다.","예수께서 걸음을 멈추시고 그들을 부르신 다음, \"나에게 바라는 것이 무엇이냐?\" 하고 물으셨다.","예수께서 머물러 서서 그들을 불러 이르시되 너희에게 무엇을 하여 주기를 원하느냐","예수께서 머물러 서서 저희를 불러","예수께서는 그들이 있는 곳에서 걸음을 멈추시고","Jesus stopped and called them and said, “What do you want me to do for you?”","And Jesus stood still, and called them, and said, What will ye that I shall do unto you?","Jesus stopped and called them. \"What do you want me to do for you?\" he asked.","Et stetit Iesus et vocavit eos et ait:  “Quid vultis, ut faciam vobis? “.","ויעמד ישוע ויקרא להם ויאמר מה תחפצו ואעשה לכם׃"],["47","20","33","그들이 “주님, 저희 눈을 뜨게 해 주십시오.” 하고 대답하였다.","\"주님, 눈을 뜨게 해주십시오.\" 이 말에","이르되 주여 우리의 눈 뜨기를 원하나이다","가라사대 너희에게 무엇을 하여주기를 원하느냐 가로되 주여 우리 눈 뜨기를 원하나이다","\"내가 너희에게 무엇을 해주기를 원하느냐?\" 하고 물으셨다. \"선생님, 눈을 뜨게 해주십시오\" 하고 그들이 간청하자","They answered him, “Lord, let our eyes be opened.”","They say unto him, Lord, that our eyes may be opened.","\"Lord,\" they answered, \"we want our sight.\"","Dicunt illi:  “Domine, ut aperiantur oculi nostri “.","ויאמרו אליו אדנינו עשה שתפקחנה עינינו׃"],["47","20","34","예수님께서 가엾은 마음이 들어 그들의 눈에 손을 대시자, 그들이 곧 다시 보게 되었다. 그리고 그들은 예수님을 따랐다.","예수께서 측은한 마음이 들어 그들의 눈에 손을 대시자 그들은 곧 눈을 뜨게 되었다. 그리고 예수를 따랐다.","예수께서 불쌍히 여기사 그들의 눈을 만지시니 곧 보게 되어 그들이 예수를 따르니라","예수께서 민망히 여기사 저희 눈을 만지시니 곧 보게 되어 저희가 예수를 좇으니라","예수께서는 측은히 여기시고 그들의 눈에 손을 대셨다. 그러자 즉시 그들은 눈을 뜨게 되어 예수를 따라갔다.","Moved with pity, Jesus touched their eyes. Immediately they received their sight, and followed him.","So Jesus had compassion on them, and touched their eyes: and immediately their eyes received sight, and they followed him.","Jesus had compassion on them and touched their eyes. Immediately they received their sight and followed him. MAT","Misertus autem Iesus, tetigit oculos eorum; et confestim viderunt et secuti sunt eum.","ורחמי ישוע נכמרו ויגע בעיניהם ופתאם החלו עיניהם לראות וילכו אחריו׃"],["47","21","1","그들이 예루살렘에 가까이 이르러 올리브 산 벳파게에 다다랐을 때, 예수님께서 제자 둘을 보내며","그들이 예루살렘에 가까이 와서 올리브 산 근처 벳파게에 이르렀을 때에 예수께서는 두 제자를 보내시며","그들이 예루살렘에 가까이 가서 감람 산 벳바게에 이르렀을 때에 예수께서 두 제자를 보내시며","저희가 예루살렘에 가까이 와서 감람산 벳바게에 이르렀을 때에 예수께서 두 제자를 보내시며","예수와 제자들이 예루살렘에서 멀지 않은 감람산 위에 있는 벳바게 동네 근처에 이르렀을 때였다. 예수께서는 제자 두 사람을 보내시며","When they drew near Jerusalem and came to Bethphage on the Mount of Olives, Jesus sent two disciples,","And when they drew nigh unto Jerusalem, and were come to Bethphage, unto the mount of Olives, then sent Jesus two disciples,","As they approached Jerusalem and came to Bethphage on the Mount of Olives, Jesus sent two disciples,","Et cum appropinquassent Hierosolymis et venissent Bethfage, ad montem Oliveti, tunc Iesus misit duos discipulos","ויהי כאשר קרבו לירושלים ובאו אל בית פגי בהר הזיתים וישלח ישוע שנים מן התלמידים׃"],["47","21","2","말씀하셨다. “너희 맞은쪽 동네로 가거라. 매여 있는 암나귀와 그 곁의 어린 나귀를 곧바로 보게 될 것이다. 그것들을 풀어 나에게 끌고 오너라.","이렇게 이르셨다. \"맞은편 마을로 가보아라. 그러면 나귀 한 마리가 매여 있을 터인데 그 새끼도 곁에 있을 것이다. 그 나귀를 풀어 나에게로 끌고 오너라.","이르시되 너희는 맞은편 마을로 가라 그리하면 곧 매인 나귀와 나귀 새끼가 함께 있는 것을 보리니 풀어 내게로 끌고 오라","이르시되 너희 맞은편 마을로 가라 곧 매인 나귀와 나귀 새끼가 함께 있는 것을 보리니 풀어 내게로 끌고 오너라","말씀하셨다. \"너희가 저 동네로 들어가면 나귀 한 마리가 그 새끼와 같이 매여 있을 것이다. 그 나귀를 풀어 끌고 오너라.","saying to them, “Go into the village opposite you, and immediately you will find an ass tethered, and a colt with her. Untie them and bring them here to me.","Saying unto them, Go into the village over against you, and straightway ye shall find an ass tied, and a colt with her: loose them, and bring them unto me.","saying to them, \"Go to the village ahead of you, and at once you will find a donkey tied there, with her colt by her. Untie them and bring them to me.","dicens eis:  “Ite in castellum, quod contra vos est, et statim invenietis asinam alligatam et pullum cum ea; solvite et adducite mihi.","ויאמר אליהם לכו אל הכפר אשר ממולכם שם תמצאו אתון אסורה ועיר עמה התירו אתם והביאו אלי׃"],["47","21","3","누가 너희에게 무어라고 하거든, ‘주님께서 필요하시답니다.’ 하고 대답하여라. 그러면 그것들을 곧 보내 줄 것이다.”","혹시 누가 무어라고 하거든 '주께서 쓰시겠답니다.' 하고 말하여라. 그러면 곧 내어줄 것이다.\"","만일 누가 무슨 말을 하거든 주가 쓰시겠다 하라 그리하면 즉시 보내리라 하시니","만일 누가 무슨 말을 하거든 주가 쓰시겠다 하라 1)그리하면 즉시 보내리라 하시니 혹 즉시 돌려 보내리라 하라 하시니","만일 누가 무슨 말을 하거든 \"주께서 쓰시겠답니다\"하고 말하라. 그러면 아무 일이 없을 것이다.\"","And if anyone should say anything to you, reply, ‘The master has need of them.’ Then he will send them at once.”","And if any man say ought unto you, ye shall say, The Lord hath need of them; and straightway he will send them.","If anyone says anything to you, tell him that the Lord needs them, and he will send them right away.\"","Et si quis vobis aliquid dixerit, dicite:  “Dominus eos necessarios habet “, et confestim dimittet eos “.","וכי יאמר איש אליכם דבר ואמרתם האדון צריך להם וברגע ישלחם׃"],["47","21","4","예언자를 통하여 하신 말씀이 이루어지려고 이 일이 일어난 것이다.","이리하여 예언자를 시켜,","이는 선지자를 통하여 하신 말씀을 이루려 하심이라 일렀으되","이는 선지자로 하신 말씀을 이루려 하심이라 일렀으되","\"이 일은 옛 예언이 이루어지기 위한 것이었다.","This happened so that what had been spoken through the prophet might be fulfilled:","All this was done, that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the prophet, saying,","This took place to fulfill what was spoken through the prophet:","Hoc autem factum est, ut impleretur, quod dictum est per prophetam dicentem:","וכל זאת היתה למלאת הנאמר ביד הנביא לאמר׃"],["47","21","5","“딸 시온에게 말하여라. 보라, 너의 임금님이 너에게 오신다. 그분은 겸손하시어 암나귀를, 짐바리 짐승의 새끼, 어린 나귀를 타고 오신다.”","\"1)시온의 딸에게 알려라. 네 임금이 너에게 오신다. 그는 겸손하시어 암나귀를 타시고 멍에 메는 짐승의 새끼, 어린 나귀를 타고 오신다.\" 하신 말씀이 이루어졌다.이사 62:11; 즈가 9:9.","ㄱ)시온 딸에게 이르기를 네 왕이 네게 임하나니 그는 겸손하여 나귀, 곧 멍에 메는 짐승의 새끼를 탔도다 하라 하였느니라","ㄱ)시온 딸에게 이르기를 네 왕이 네게 임하나니 그는 겸손하여 나귀, 곧 멍에 메는 짐승의 새끼를 탔도다 하라 하였느니라 사 62:11, 슥 9:9","ㄱ) \"너 시온성아, 기뻐 뛰어라! 너희 예루살렘 시민들아, 환호성을 올려라! 보아라. 네 왕께서 네게로 오실 것이다. 그분은 의로우시고 노련한 해방자이시다. 그런데도 겸비하여 나귀를 타고 오신다. 잡종도 아니고 전투용도 아닌 새끼 나귀를 타고 오신다.\" (ㄱ. 사62:11,슥9:9)","“Say to daughter Zion, ‘Behold, your king comes to you, meek and riding on an ass, and on a colt, the foal of a beast of burden.’”","Tell ye the daughter of Sion, Behold, thy King cometh unto thee, meek, and sitting upon an ass, and a colt the foal of an ass.","\"Say to the Daughter of Zion, 'See, your king comes to you, gentle and riding on a donkey, on a colt, the foal of a donkey.'\"","Dicite filiae Sion: Ecce Rex tuus venit tibi, mansuetus et sedens super asinam et super pullum filium subiugalis.","אמרו לבת ציון הנה מלכך יבוא לך עני ורכב על חמור ועל עיר בן אתנות׃"],["47","21","6","제자들은 가서 예수님께서 지시하신 대로 하였다.","제자들은 가서 예수께서 일러주신 대로","제자들이 가서 예수께서 명하신 대로 하여","제자들이 가서 예수의 명하신대로 하여","두 제자가 가서 예수께서 일러주신 대로","The disciples went and did as Jesus had ordered them.","And the disciples went, and did as Jesus commanded them,","The disciples went and did as Jesus had instructed them.","Euntes autem discipuli fecerunt, sicut praecepit illis Iesus,","וילכו התלמידים ויעשו כאשר צוה אתם ישוע׃"],["47","21","7","그들은 그렇게 암나귀와 어린 나귀를 끌고 와서 그 위에 겉옷을 펴 놓았다. 예수님께서 그 위에 앉으시자,","나귀와 나귀 새끼를 끌고 와서 그 위에 겉옷을 얹어놓았다. 예수께서 거기에 올라앉으시자","나귀와 나귀 새끼를 끌고 와서 자기들의 겉옷을 그 위에 얹으매 예수께서 그 위에 타시니","나귀와 나귀 새끼를 끌고 와서 자기들의 겉옷을 그 위에 얹으매 예수께서 그 위에 타시니","나귀와 나귀 새끼를 끌고와서 그 위에 자기들의 겉옷을 얹어 놓았다. 예수께서 올라타시자","They brought the ass and the colt and laid their cloaks over them, and he sat upon them.","And brought the ass, and the colt, and put on them their clothes, and they set him thereon.","They brought the donkey and the colt, placed their cloaks on them, and Jesus sat on them.","et adduxerunt asinam et pullum; et imposuerunt super eis vestimenta sua, et sedit super ea.","ויביאו את האתון ואת העיר וישימו עליהם את בגדיהם וירכיבהו עליהם׃"],["47","21","8","수많은 군중이 자기들의 겉옷을 길에 깔았다. 또 어떤 이들은 나뭇가지를 꺾어다가 길에 깔았다.","많은 사람들이 겉옷을 벗어 길에 펴놓는가 하면 어떤 사람들은 나뭇가지를 꺾어다가 길에 깔아놓기도 하였다.","무리의 대다수는 그들의 겉옷을 길에 펴고 다른 이들은 나뭇가지를 베어 길에 펴고","무리의 대부분은 그 겉옷을 길에 펴며 다른이는 나무 가지를 베어 길에 펴고","무리 가운데 많은 사람이 겉옷을 벗어 길에 폈으며, 어떤 사람은 나뭇가지를 꺾어다가 길에 깔았다.","The very large crowd spread their cloaks on the road, while others cut branches from the trees and strewed them on the road.","And a very great multitude spread their garments in the way; others cut down branches from the trees, and strawed them in the way.","A very large crowd spread their cloaks on the road, while others cut branches from the trees and spread them on the road.","Plurima autem turba straverunt vestimenta sua in via; alii autem caedebant ramos de arboribus et sternebant in via.","ורב ההמון פרשו את בגדיהם על הדרך ואחרים כרתו ענפי עצים וישטחום על הדרך׃"],["47","21","9","그리고 앞서 가는 군중과 뒤따라가는 군중이 외쳤다. “다윗의 자손께 호산나! 주님의 이름으로 오시는 분은 복되시어라. 지극히 높은 곳에 호산나!”","그리고 앞뒤에서 따르는 사람들이 모두 환성을 올렸다. \"2)호산나! 다윗의 자손! 주의 이름으로 오시는 이여, 찬미받으소서. 지극히 높은 하늘에서도 호산나!\"시편 118:25-26.","앞에서 가고 뒤에서 따르는 무리가 소리 높여 이르되 호산나 다윗의 자손이여 찬송하리로다 주의 이름으로 오시는 이여 가장 높은 곳에서 호산나 하더라","앞에서 가고 뒤에서 따르는 무리가 소리질러 가로되 호산나 다윗의 자손이여 찬송하리로다 주의 이름으로 오시는이여 가장 높은 곳에서 호산나 하더라","군중이 예수를 앞뒤에서 에워싸고 따라가면서 크게 환성을 올렸다. ㄴ) \"호산나! 다윗의 자손이여! 주님의 이름으로 오시는 이여. 비오니, 우리를 구하소서. 한없이 높은 하늘에 계시는 하나님이여. 호산나!\" (ㄴ. 시118:25-26)","The crowds preceding him and those following kept crying out and saying: “Hosanna to the Son of David; blessed is he who comes in the name of the Lord; hosanna in the highest.”","And the multitudes that went before, and that followed, cried, saying, Hosanna to the son of David: Blessed is he that cometh in the name of the Lord; Hosanna in the highest.","The crowds that went ahead of him and those that followed shouted, \"Hosanna to the Son of David!\" \"Blessed is he who comes in the name of the Lord!\" \"Hosanna in the highest!\"","Turbae autem, quae praecedebant eum et quae sequebantur, clamabant dicentes:  “Hosanna filio David! Benedictus, qui venit in nomine Domini! Hosanna in altissimis! “.","והמון העם ההלכים לפניו ואחריו קראו לאמר הושע נא לבן דוד ברוך הבא בשם יהוה הושע נא במרומים׃"],["47","21","10","이렇게 하여 예수님께서 예루살렘에 들어가시니 온 도성이 술렁거리며, “저분이 누구냐?” 하고 물었다.","예수께서 예루살렘에 들어가시자 온 시민이 들떠서 \"이분이 누구냐?\" 하고 물었다.","예수께서 예루살렘에 들어가시니 온 성이 소동하여 이르되 이는 누구냐 하거늘","예수께서 예루살렘에 들어가시니 온 성이 소동하여 가로되 이는 누구뇨 하거늘","예수께서 예루살렘에 들어가시자 온 도시가 들끓었고 사람들마다 \"이분이 누구요?\"하고 물었다.","And when he entered Jerusalem the whole city was shaken and asked, “Who is this?”","And when he was come into Jerusalem, all the city was moved, saying, Who is this?","When Jesus entered Jerusalem, the whole city was stirred and asked, \"Who is this?\"","Et cum intrasset Hierosolymam, commota est universa civitas dicens:  “Quis est hic? “.","ויהי בבאו ירושלים ותהם כל העיר לאמר מי הוא זה׃"],["47","21","11","그러자 군중이 “저분은 갈릴래아 나자렛 출신 예언자 예수님이시오.” 하고 대답하였다.","사람들은 \"이분은 갈릴래아 나자렛에서 오신 예언자 예수요.\" 하고 대답하였다.","무리가 이르되 갈릴리 나사렛에서 나온 선지자 예수라 하니라","무리가 가로되 갈릴리 나사렛에서 나온 선지자 예수라 하니라","무리는 \"이분은 예수님이요. 갈릴리 나사렛에서 오신 예언자요\" 하고 대답하였다.","And the crowds replied, “This is Jesus the prophet, from Nazareth in Galilee.”","And the multitude said, This is Jesus the prophet of Nazareth of Galilee.","The crowds answered, \"This is Jesus, the prophet from Nazareth in Galilee.\"","Turbae autem dicebant:  “Hic est Iesus propheta a Nazareth Galilaeae “.","ויאמרו המני העם זה הוא הנביא ישוע מנצרת אשר בגליל׃"],["47","21","12","예수님께서는 성전에 들어가시어, 그곳에서 사고팔고 하는 자들을 모두 쫓아내시고, 환전상들의 탁자와 비둘기 장수들의 의자를 둘러엎으셨다.","예수께서는 성전 뜰 안으로 들어가 거기에서 팔고 사고 하는 사람들을 다 쫓아내시고 환금상들의 탁자와 비둘기 장수들의 의자를 둘러엎으셨다.","예수께서 성전에 들어가사 성전 안에서 매매하는 모든 사람들을 내쫓으시며 돈 바꾸는 사람들의 상과 비둘기 파는 사람들의 의자를 둘러 엎으시고","예수께서 성전에 들어가사 성전 안에서 매매하는 모든 자를 내어쫓으시며 돈 바꾸는 자들의 상과 비둘기 파는 자들의 의자를 둘러 엎으시고","예수께서는 성전뜰 안으로 들어가셔서 그곳에 있던 장사꾼들을 다 쫓아내시고 환전상들의 탁자와 비둘기 장수들의 의자를 둘러 엎으셨다.","Jesus entered the temple area and drove out all those engaged in selling and buying there. He overturned the tables of the money changers and the seats of those who were selling doves.","And Jesus went into the temple of God, and cast out all them that sold and bought in the temple, and overthrew the tables of the moneychangers, and the seats of them that sold doves,","Jesus entered the temple area and drove out all who were buying and selling there. He overturned the tables of the money changers and the benches of those selling doves.","Et intravit Iesus in templum et eiciebat omnes vendentes et ementes in templo, et mensas nummulariorum evertit et cathedras vendentium columbas,","ויבא ישוע אל מקדש האלהים ויגרש משם את כל המוכרים והקונים במקדש ויהפך את שלחנות השלחנים ואת מושבות מכרי היונים׃"],["47","21","13","그리고 그들에게 말씀하셨다. “‘나의 집은 기도의 집이라 불릴 것이다.’라고 기록되어 있다. 그런데 너희는 이 곳을 ‘강도들의 소굴’로 만드는구나.”","그리고 그들에게 \"성서에 '3)내 집은 기도하는 집이라고 불리리라.' 했는데 너희는 이 집을 '4)강도의 소굴'로 만들었다.\" 하고 나무라셨다.이사 56:7 하반.예레 7:11.","그들에게 이르시되 기록된 바 ㄴ)내 집은 기도하는 집이라 일컬음을 받으리라 하였거늘 너희는 ㄷ)강도의 소굴을 만드는도다 하시니라","저희에게 이르시되 기록된바 ㄴ)내 집은 기도하는 집이라 일컬음을 받으리라 하였거늘 너희는 ㄷ)강도의 굴혈을 만드는도다 하시니라 사 56:7렘 7:11","그리고 그들을 큰소리로 꾸짖으셨다. ㄷ) \"성경에 내 집은 기도하는 집이라 불리리라고 기록되어 있다. 그런데 너희는 어찌하여 이 집을 ㄹ) 강도의 소굴로 만들고 있느냐?\" (ㄷ. 사56:7 하반절. ㄹ. 렘7:11)","And he said to them, “It is written: ‘My house shall be a house of prayer,’ but you are making it a den of thieves.”","And said unto them, It is written, My house shall be called the house of prayer; but ye have made it a den of thieves.","\"It is written,\" he said to them, \"'My house will be called a house of prayer,' but you are making it a 'den of robbers.'\"","et dicit eis:  “Scriptum est:  “Domus mea domus orationis vocabitur “. Vos autem facitis eam speluncam latronum “.","ויאמר אליהם הן כתוב כי ביתי בית תפלה יקרא ואתם שמתם אתו למערת פריצים׃"],["47","21","14","그때에 성전에서 눈먼 이들과 절름거리는 이들이 다가오자, 예수님께서는 그들을 고쳐 주셨다.","그 때 예수께서는 성전 뜰 안에 있던 소경들과 절름발이들이 앞으로 나오자 그들을 모두 고쳐주셨다.","맹인과 저는 자들이 성전에서 예수께 나아오매 고쳐주시니","소경과 저는 자들이 성전에서 예수께 나아오매 고쳐주시니","성전뜰 안에는 맹인들과 절름발이들도 있었는데 그들이 예수께로 나오자 예수께서는 그들을 모두 고쳐 주셨다.","The blind and the lame approached him in the temple area, and he cured them.","And the blind and the lame came to him in the temple; and he healed them.","The blind and the lame came to him at the temple, and he healed them.","Et accesserunt ad eum caeci et claudi in templo, et sanavit eos.","ויגשו אליו עורים ופסחים במקדש וירפאם׃"],["47","21","15","수석 사제들과 율법 학자들이 예수님께서 일으키신 기적들을 보고, 또 성전에서 “다윗의 자손께 호산나!” 하고 외치는 아이들을 보고 불쾌해하며,","대사제들과 율법학자들은 예수께서 행하신 여러 가지 놀라운 일이며 성전 뜰에서 \"호산나! 다윗의 자손!\" 하고 외치는 아이들을 보고 화가 치밀어서","대제사장들과 서기관들이 예수께서 하시는 이상한 일과 또 성전에서 소리 질러 호산나 다윗의 자손이여 하는 어린이들을 보고 노하여","대제사장들과 서기관들이 예수의 하시는 이상한 일과 또 성전에서 소리질러 호산나 다윗의 자손이여 하는 아이들을 보고 분하여","이런 이적을 놀라서 지켜 보던 대제사장들과 율법학자들은 어린아이들까지 성전 안에서 \"호산나, 다윗의 자손이여, 우리를 구하소서\" 하고 외치는 것을 보자 화가 나서","When the chief priests and the scribes saw the wondrous things he was doing, and the children crying out in the temple area, “Hosanna to the Son of David,” they were indignant","And when the chief priests and scribes saw the wonderful things that he did, and the children crying in the temple, and saying, Hosanna to the son of David; they were sore displeased,","But when the chief priests and the teachers of the law saw the wonderful things he did and the children shouting in the temple area, \"Hosanna to the Son of David,\" they were indignant.","Videntes autem principes sacerdotum et scribae mirabilia, quae fecit, et pueros clamantes in templo et dicentes:  “Hosanna filio David “, indignati sunt","ויהי כראות הכהנים הגדולים והסופרים את הנפלאות אשר עשה ואת הילדים הצעקים במקדש ואמרים הושע נא לבן דוד ויחר להם׃"],["47","21","16","예수님께 “저 아이들이 무어라고 하는지 듣고 있소?” 하였다. 예수님께서 그들에게 말씀하셨다. “그렇다. ‘당신께서는 아기들과 젖먹이들의 입에서 찬양이 나오게 하셨습니다.’라는 말씀을 너희는 읽어 본 적이 없느냐?”","예수께 \"이 아이들이 하는 말이 들립니까?\" 하고 물었다. 예수께서는 그들에게 \"들린다. '5)주께서 어린이들과 젖먹이들의 입으로 주를 찬양하게 하시리라.' 하신 말씀을 읽어본 일이 없느냐?\" 하고 대답하셨다. 칠십인역 시편 8:2.","예수께 말하되 그들이 하는 말을 듣느냐 예수께서 이르시되 ㄹ)그렇다 어린 아기와 젖먹이들의 입에서 나오는 찬미를 온전하게 하셨나이다 함을 너희가 읽어 본 일이 없느냐 하시고","예수께 말하되 저희의 하는 말을 듣느뇨 예수께서 가라사대 ㄹ)그렇다 어린 아기와 젖먹이들의 입에서 나오는 찬미를 온전케 하셨나이다 함을 너희가 읽어 본 일이 없느냐 하시고 시 8:2","\"이 아이들이 뭐라고 하는지 들립니까?\" 하고 예수께 물었다. 예수께서 말씀하셨다. \"듣고 있다. 너희는 ㅁ) \"어린이와 젖먹이까지도 주님의 권능을 찬송하오니\"라고 한 성경말씀을 읽어 보지 못하였느냐?\" (ㅁ. 70인역 시8:2)","and said to him, “Do you hear what they are saying?” Jesus said to them, “Yes; and have you never read the text, ‘Out of the mouths of infants and nurslings you have brought forth praise’?”","And said unto him, Hearest thou what these say? And Jesus saith unto them, Yea; have ye never read, Out of the mouth of babes and sucklings thou hast perfected praise?","\"Do you hear what these children are saying?\" they asked him. \"Yes,\" replied Jesus, \"have you never read, \"'From the lips of children and infants you have ordained praise'?\"","et dixerunt ei:  “Audis quid isti dicant? “. Iesus autem dicit eis:  “Utique; numquam legistis:  “Ex ore infantium et lactantium perfecisti laudem “? “.","ויאמרו אליו השמע אתה את אשר אלה אמרים ויאמר ישוע אליהם כן הכי קרא לא קראתם מפי עוללים ויונקים יסדת עז׃"],["47","21","17","예수님께서는 그들을 두고 성을 나와 베타니아로 가시어 그곳에서 밤을 지내셨다.","그리고 예수께서는 그들을 떠나 성밖에 있는 베다니아로 가셔서 밤을 지내셨다.","그들을 떠나 성 밖으로 베다니에 가서 거기서 유하시니라","그들을 떠나 성밖으로 베다니에 가서 거기서 유하시니라","예수께서는 그들을 떠나 예루살렘 성밖에 있는 베다니로 가셔서 거기서 밤을 보내셨다.","And leaving them, he went out of the city to Bethany, and there he spent the night.","And he left them, and went out of the city into Bethany; and he lodged there.","And he left them and went out of the city to Bethany, where he spent the night.","Et relictis illis, abiit foras extra civitatem in Bethaniam ibique mansit.","ויעזבם ויצא מחוץ לעיר אל בית היני וילן שם׃"],["47","21","18","예수님께서는 새벽에 성안으로 되돌아가실 때에 시장하셨다.","이튿날 아침에 예수께서 성안으로 들어오시다가 마침 시장하시던 참에","이른 아침에 성으로 들어오실 때에 시장하신지라","이른 아침에 성으로 들어오실 때에 시장하신지라","이튿날 아침 예루살렘으로 되돌아오시던 예수께서는 매우 시장하셨다.","When he was going back to the city in the morning, he was hungry.","Now in the morning as he returned into the city, he hungered.","Early in the morning, as he was on his way back to the city, he was hungry.","Mane autem revertens in civitatem, esuriit.","ובבקר שב אל העיר והוא רעב׃"],["47","21","19","마침 길가에 있는 무화과나무 한 그루를 보시고 가까이 가셨다. 그러나 잎사귀밖에는 달리 아무것도 보이지 않았으므로 그 나무를 향하여 말씀하셨다. “이제부터 너는 영원히 열매 맺는 일이 없을 것이다.” 그러자 나무가 즉시 말라 버렸다.","길가에 무화과나무 한 그루가 서 있는 것을 보시고 그리로 가셨다. 그러나 잎사귀밖에는 아무것도 보이지 않았으므로 그 나무를 향하여 \"이제부터 너는 영원히 열매를 맺지 못하리라.\" 하고 말씀하셨다. 그러자 무화과나무는 곧 말라버렸다.","길 가에서 한 무화과나무를 보시고 그리로 가사 잎사귀 밖에 아무 것도 찾지 못하시고 나무에게 이르시되 이제부터 영원토록 네가 열매를 맺지 못하리라 하시니 무화과나무가 곧 마른지라","길 가에서 한 무화과나무를 보시고 그리로 가사 잎사귀 밖에 아무 것도 얻지 못하시고 나무에게 이르시되 이제부터 영원토록 네게 열매가 맺지 못하리라 하시니 무화과나무가 곧 마른지라","그때 마침 길가에 무화과나무 한 그루가 서 있는 것을 보시고 그리로 가까이 가보셨다. 그러나 잎사귀만 무성할 뿐 열매는 보이지 않자 \"네가 다시는 열매를 맺지 못할 것이다\" 하고 말씀하셨다. 그러자 그 무화과나무는 곧 말라 버렸다.","Seeing a fig tree by the road, he went over to it, but found nothing on it except leaves. And he said to it, “May no fruit ever come from you again.” And immediately the fig tree withered.","And when he saw a fig tree in the way, he came to it, and found nothing thereon, but leaves only, and said unto it, Let no fruit grow on thee henceforward for ever. And presently the fig tree withered away.","Seeing a fig tree by the road, he went up to it but found nothing on it except leaves. Then he said to it, \"May you never bear fruit again!\" Immediately the tree withered.","Et videns fici arborem unam secus viam, venit ad eam; et nihil invenit in ea nisi folia tantum et ait illi:  “Numquam ex te fructus nascatur in sempiternum “. Et arefacta est continuo ficulnea.","וירא תאנה אחת על הדרך ויקרב אליה ולא מצא בה מאומה מלבד העלים ויאמר אליה מעתה לא יהיה ממך פרי עד עולם ותיבש התאנה פתאם׃"],["47","21","20","제자들이 그것을 보고 놀라서, “어째서 무화과나무가 즉시 말라 버렸습니까?” 하고 물었다.","제자들이 이것을 보고 놀라서 \"무화과나무가 어찌하여 그렇게 당장 말라버렸습니까?\" 하고 물었다.","제자들이 보고 이상히 여겨 이르되 무화과나무가 어찌하여 곧 말랐나이까","제자들이 보고 이상히 여겨 가로되 무화과나무가 어찌하여 곧 말랐나이까","제자들은 이것을 보고 놀라 \"어떻게 무화과나무가 금방 말라버렸습니까?\" 하고 물었다.","When the disciples saw this, they were amazed and said, “How was it that the fig tree withered immediately?”","And when the disciples saw it, they marvelled, saying, How soon is the fig tree withered away!","When the disciples saw this, they were amazed. \"How did the fig tree wither so quickly?\" they asked.","Et videntes discipuli mirati sunt dicentes:  “Quomodo continuo aruit ficulnea? “.","ויראו התלמידים ויתמהו לאמר איך יבשה התאנה פתאם׃"],["47","21","21","예수님께서 그들에게 대답하셨다. “내가 진실로 너희에게 말한다. 너희가 믿음을 가지고 의심하지 않으면, 이 무화과나무에 일어난 일을 할 수 있을 뿐만 아니라, 이 산더러 ‘들려서 저 바다에 빠져라.’ 하여도 그대로 이루어질 것이다.","예수께서는 이렇게 말씀하셨다. \"나는 분명히 말한다. 너희가 의심하지 않고 믿는다면 이 무화과나무에서 본 일을 할 수 있을 뿐만 아니라 이 산더러 '번쩍 들려서 바다에 빠져라.' 하더라도 그대로 될 것이다.","예수께서 대답하여 이르시되 내가 진실로 너희에게 이르노니 만일 너희가 믿음이 있고 의심하지 아니하면 이 무화과나무에게 된 이런 일만 할 뿐 아니라 이 산더러 들려 바다에 던져지라 하여도 될 것이요","예수께서 대답하여 가라사대 내가 진실로 너희에게 이르노니 만일 너희가 믿음이 있고 의심치 아니하면 이 무화과나무에게 된 이런 일만 할뿐 아니라 이 산더러 들려 바다에 던지우라 하여도 될것이요","그때 예수께서 그들에게 말씀하셨다. \"내가 진정으로 말한다. 만일 너희가 믿고 의심하지 않는다면 너희는 이와 같은 일뿐만 아니라 더 큰일도 할 수 있다. 너희가 이 산더러 \"땅에서 들려 바다로 옮겨 가라\" 하더라도 그대로 될 것이다.","Jesus said to them in reply, “Amen, I say to you, if you have faith and do not waver, not only will you do what has been done to the fig tree, but even if you say to this mountain, ‘Be lifted up and thrown into the sea,’ it will be done.","Jesus answered and said unto them, Verily I say unto you, If ye have faith, and doubt not, ye shall not only do this which is done to the fig tree, but also if ye shall say unto this mountain, Be thou removed, and be thou cast into the sea; it shall be done.","Jesus replied, \"I tell you the truth, if you have faith and do not doubt, not only can you do what was done to the fig tree, but also you can say to this mountain, 'Go, throw yourself into the sea,' and it will be done.","Respondens autem Iesus ait eis:  “Amen dico vobis: Si habueritis fidem et non haesitaveritis, non solum de ficulnea facietis, sed et si monti huic dixeritis:  “Tolle et iacta te in mare “, fiet.","ויען ישוע ויאמר אליהם אמן אמר אני לכם אם תהיה לכם אמונה ואינכם מסתפקים לא לבד כמעשה התאנה הזאת תעשו כי גם באמרכם אל ההר הזה הנשא והעתק אל תוך הים היו תהיה׃"],["47","21","22","그리고 너희가 기도할 때에 믿고 청하는 것은 무엇이든지 다 받을 것이다.”","또 너희가 기도할 때에 믿고 구하는 것은 무엇이든지 다 받을 것이다.\"","너희가 기도할 때에 무엇이든지 믿고 구하는 것은 다 받으리라 하시니라","너희가 기도할 때에 무엇이든지 믿고 구하는 것은 다 받으리라 하시니라","너희가 믿고 기도하면 너희가 기도한 것은 무엇이나 다 얻을 수 있다.\"","Whatever you ask for in prayer with faith, you will receive.”","And all things, whatsoever ye shall ask in prayer, believing, ye shall receive.","If you believe, you will receive whatever you ask for in prayer.\"","Et omnia, quaecumque petieritis in oratione credentes, accipietis “.","וכל אשר תשאלו בתפלה ואתם מאמינים תקחהו׃"],["47","21","23","예수님께서 성전에 가서 가르치고 계실 때, 수석 사제들과 백성의 원로들이 예수님께 다가와 말하였다. “당신은 무슨 권한으로 이런 일을 하는 것이오? 그리고 누가 당신에게 이런 권한을 주었소?”","예수께서 성전에 들어가서 가르치고 계실 때에 대사제들과 백성의 원로들이 와서 \"당신은 무슨 권한으로 이런 일들을 합니까? 누가 이런 권한을 주었습니까?\" 하고 물었다.","예수께서 성전에 들어가 가르치실새 대제사장들과 백성의 장로들이 나아와 이르되 네가 무슨 권위로 이런 일을 하느냐 또 누가 이 권위를 주었느냐","예수께서 성전에 들어가 가르치실쌔 대제사장들과 백성의 장로들이 나아와 가로되 네가 무슨 권세로 이런 일을 하느뇨 또 누가 이 권세를 주었느뇨","예수께서 성전에 되돌아오셔서 가르치고 계실 때 대제사장들과 유대 지도자들이 와서 무슨 권한으로 이런 일을 하며 누가 이런 권한을 주었는지 알려 달라고 추궁하였다.","When he had come into the temple area, the chief priests and the elders of the people approached him as he was teaching and said, “By what authority are you doing these things? And who gave you this authority?”","And when he was come into the temple, the chief priests and the elders of the people came unto him as he was teaching, and said, By what authority doest thou these things? and who gave thee this authority?","Jesus entered the temple courts, and, while he was teaching, the chief priests and the elders of the people came to him. \"By what authority are you doing these things?\" they asked. \"And who gave you this authority?\"","Et cum venisset in templum, accesserunt ad eum docentem principes sacerdotum et seniores populi dicentes:  “In qua potestate haec facis? Et quis tibi dedit hanc potestatem? “.","ויבא אל המקדש ויהי בלמדו שם ויגשו אליו ראשי הכהנים וזקני העם ויאמרו באי זו רשות אתה עשה אלה ומי נתן לך הרשות הזאת׃"],["47","21","24","그러자 예수님께서 말씀하셨다. “나도 너희에게 한 가지 묻겠다. 너희가 나에게 대답하면, 나도 무슨 권한으로 이런 일을 하는지 너희에게 말해 주겠다.","\"나도 한 가지 물어보겠다. 너희가 대답하면 나도 무슨 권한으로 이 일을 하는지 말하겠다.","예수께서 대답하시되 나도 한 말을 너희에게 물으리니 너희가 대답하면 나도 무슨 권위로 이런 일을 하는지 이르리라","예수께서 대답하시되 나도 한 말을 너희에게 물으리니 너희가 대답하면 나도 무슨 권세로 이런 일을 하는지 이르리라","예수께서 말씀하셨다. \" 질문에 먼저 대답하면 내가 알려 주겠다.","Jesus said to them in reply, “I shall ask you one question, and if you answer it for me, then I shall tell you by what authority I do these things.","And Jesus answered and said unto them, I also will ask you one thing, which if ye tell me, I in like wise will tell you by what authority I do these things.","Jesus replied, \"I will also ask you one question. If you answer me, I will tell you by what authority I am doing these things.","Respondens autem Iesus dixit illis:  “Interrogabo vos et ego unum sermonem, quem si dixeritis mihi, et ego vobis dicam, in qua potestate haec facio:","ויען יושע ויאמר אליהם גם אני אשאלה אתכם דבר אחד אשר אם תגידו אתו לי גם אני אגיד לכם באי זו רשות אני עשה אלה׃"],["47","21","25","요한의 세례가 어디에서 온 것이냐? 하늘에서냐, 아니면 사람에게서냐?” 그들은 저희끼리 의논하였다. “‘하늘에서 왔다.’ 하면, ‘어찌하여 그를 믿지 않았느냐?’ 하고 우리에게 말할 것이오.","요한은 누구에게서 권한을 받아 세례를 베풀었느냐? 하늘이 준 것이냐? 사람이 준 것이냐?\" 하고 반문하시자 그들은 자기들끼리 \"그 권한을 하늘이 주었다고 하면 왜 그를 믿지 않았느냐 할 것이고","요한의 세례가 어디로부터 왔느냐 하늘로부터냐 사람으로부터냐 그들이 서로 의논하여 이르되 만일 하늘로부터라 하면 어찌하여 그를 믿지 아니하였느냐 할 것이요","요한의 세례가 어디로서 왔느냐 하늘로서냐 사람에게로서냐 저희가 서로 의논하여 가로되 만일 하늘로서라 하면 어찌하여 저를 믿지 아니하였느냐 할것이요","요한은 무슨 권한으로 침례를 베풀었느냐? 하나님께 받은 권한이냐? 아니면 사람에게서 받은 권한이냐?\" 그들은 자기들끼리 의논하였다. \"만일 우리가 하나님께 받은 것이라고 하면 그런데 왜 요한을 믿지 않느냐고 할 것이요,","Where was John’s baptism from? Was it of heavenly or of human origin?” They discussed this among themselves and said, “If we say ‘Of heavenly origin,’ he will say to us, ‘Then why did you not believe him?’","The baptism of John, whence was it? from heaven, or of men? And they reasoned with themselves, saying, If we shall say, From heaven; he will say unto us, Why did ye not then believe him?","John's baptism--where did it come from? Was it from heaven, or from men?\" They discussed it among themselves and said, \"If we say, 'From heaven,' he will ask, 'Then why didn't you believe him?'","Baptismum Ioannis unde erat? A caelo an ex hominibus? “. At illi cogitabant inter se dicentes:  “Si dixerimus:  “E caelo “, dicet nobis:  “Quare ergo non credidistis illi? “;","טבילת יוחנן מאין היתה המן השמים אם מבני אדם ויחשבו בלבבם לאמר׃"],["47","21","26","그렇다고 ‘사람에게서 왔다.’ 하자니 군중이 두렵소. 그들이 모두 요한을 예언자로 여기니 말이오.”","사람이 주었다고 하면 모두들 요한을 예언자로 여기고 있으니 군중이 가만 있지 않을 테지?\" 하고 의논한 끝에","만일 사람으로부터라 하면 모든 사람이 요한을 선지자로 여기니 백성이 무섭다 하여","만일 사람에게로서라 하면 모든 사람이 요한을 선지자로 여기니 백성이 무섭다 하여","또 사람에게서 받은 것이라 해도 궁지에 몰리기는 마찬가지일 것이오. 군중이 모두 요한을 예언자로 알고 있으니 말이오.\"","But if we say, ‘Of human origin,’ we fear the crowd, for they all regard John as a prophet.”","But if we shall say, Of men; we fear the people; for all hold John as a prophet.","But if we say, 'From men'--we are afraid of the people, for they all hold that John was a prophet.\"","si autem dixerimus:  “Ex hominibus “, timemus turbam; omnes enim habent Ioannem sicut prophetam “.","אם נאמר מן השמים יאמר אלינו מדוע אפוא לא האמונתם לו ואם נאמר מבני אדם יראים אנחנו את המון העם כי כלם חשבים את יוחנן לנביא׃"],["47","21","27","그래서 그들이 예수님께 “모르겠소.” 하고 대답하였다. 그러자 예수님께서 그들에게 말씀하셨다. “나도 무슨 권한으로 이런 일을 하는지 너희에게 말하지 않겠다.”","\"모르겠습니다.\" 하고 대답하였다. 예수께서는 \"나도 무슨 권한으로 이런 일을 하는지 말하지 않겠다.\" 하고 말씀하셨다.","예수께 대답하여 이르되 우리가 알지 못하노라 하니 예수께서 이르시되 나도 무슨 권위로 이런 일을 하는지 너희에게 이르지 아니하리라","예수께 대답하여 가로되 우리가 알지 못하노라 하니 예수께서 가라사대 나도 무슨 권세로 이런 일을 하는지 너희에게 이르지 아니하리라","결국 그들은 \"우리는 모르겠습니다\" 하고 대답하였다. 그러자 예수께서는 \"그렇다면 나도 너희 질문에 대답하지 않겠다\" 하고 말씀하셨다.","So they said to Jesus in reply, “We do not know.” He himself said to them, “Neither shall I tell you by what authority I do these things.","And they answered Jesus, and said, We cannot tell. And he said unto them, Neither tell I you by what authority I do these things.","So they answered Jesus, \"We don't know.\" Then he said, \"Neither will I tell you by what authority I am doing these things.","Et respondentes Iesu dixerunt:  “Nescimus “. Ait illis et ipse:  “Nec ego dico vobis in qua potestate haec facio “.","ויענו את ישוע ויאמרו לא ידענו ויאמר אליהם גם אני לא אמר לכם באי זו רשות אני עשה אלה׃"],["47","21","28","“너희는 어떻게 생각하느냐? 어떤 사람에게 아들이 둘 있었는데, 맏아들에게 가서 ‘얘야, 너 오늘 포도밭에 가서 일하여라.’ 하고 일렀다.","\"또 이런 것은 어떻게 생각하느냐? 6)어떤 사람이 두 아들을 두었는데 먼저 맏아들에게 가서 '얘야, 너 오늘 포도원에 가서 일을 하여라.' 하고 일렀다. 다른 사본에는 맏아들과 둘째 아들의 경우가 바뀌어져 있다.","그러나 너희 생각에는 어떠하냐 어떤 사람에게 두 아들이 있는데 맏아들에게 가서 이르되 얘 오늘 포도원에 가서 일하라 하니","그러나 너희 생각에는 어떠하뇨 한 사람이 두 아들이 있는데 맏아들에게 가서 이르되 얘 오늘 포도원에 가서 일하라 하니","\"이것은 어떻게 생각하느냐? 두 아들을 둔 사람이 있었다. 아버지가 큰아들에게 기서 \"얘야, 오늘은 포도원에 가서 일을 하거라\" 하고 말하였다.","“What is your opinion? A man had two sons. He came to the first and said, ‘Son, go out and work in the vineyard today.’","But what think ye? A certain man had two sons; and he came to the first, and said, Son, go work to day in my vineyard.","\"What do you think? There was a man who had two sons. He went to the first and said, 'Son, go and work today in the vineyard.'","Quid autem vobis videtur? Homo quidam habebat duos filios. Et accedens ad primum dixit: Fili, vade hodie, operare in vinea “.","אבל מה דעתכם איש היה ולו שני בנים ויגש אל הראשון ויאמר בני לך היום ועבד בכרמי׃"],["47","21","29","그는 ‘싫습니다.’ 하고 대답하였지만, 나중에 생각을 바꾸어 일하러 갔다.","맏아들은 처음에는 싫다고 하였지만 나중에 뉘우치고 일하러 갔다.","대답하여 이르되 아버지 가겠나이다 하더니 가지 아니하고","대답하여 가로되 아버지여 가겠소이다 하더니 가지 아니하고","그러자 큰아들이 \"싫습니다\" 하고 대답하였지만 후에 뉘우치고 일하러 갔다.","He said in reply, ‘I will not,’ but afterwards he changed his mind and went.","He answered and said, I will not: but afterward he repented, and went.","\"'I will not,' he answered, but later he changed his mind and went.","Ille autem respondens ait:  “Nolo “; postea autem paenitentia motus abiit.","ויען ויאמר אינני אבא ואחרי כן נחם וילך׃"],["47","21","30","아버지는 또 다른 아들에게 가서 같은 말을 하였다. 그는 ‘가겠습니다, 아버지!’ 하고 대답하였지만 가지는 않았다.","아버지는 둘째 아들에게 가서도 같은 말을 하였다. 둘째 아들은 가겠다는 대답만 하고 가지는 않았다.","둘째 아들에게 가서 또 그와 같이 말하니 대답하여 이르되 싫소이다 하였다가 그 후에 뉘우치고 갔으니","둘째 아들에게 가서 또 이같이 말하니 대답하여 가로되 싫소이다 하더니 그 후에 뉘우치고 갔으니","아버지는 또 작은아들에게 가서 같은 말을 하였다. 작은아들은 \"예, 아버지, 가겠습니다\" 하고 대답하고는 가지 않았다.","The man came to the other son and gave the same order. He said in reply, ‘Yes, sir,’ but did not go.","And he came to the second, and said likewise. And he answered and said, I go, sir: and went not.","\"Then the father went to the other son and said the same thing. He answered, 'I will, sir,' but he did not go.","Accedens autem ad alterum dixit similiter. At ille respondens ait:  “Eo, domine “; et non ivit.","ויגש אל השני וידבר כזאת גם אליו ויען ויאמר הנני אדני ולא הלך׃"],["47","21","31","이 둘 가운데 누가 아버지의 뜻을 실천하였느냐?” 그들이 “맏아들입니다.” 하고 대답하자, 예수님께서 그들에게 말씀하셨다. “내가 진실로 너희에게 말한다. 세리와 창녀들이 너희보다 먼저 하느님의 나라에 들어간다.","이 둘 중에 아버지의 뜻을 받든 아들은 누구이겠느냐?\" 하고 예수께서 물으셨다. 그들이 \"맏아들입니다.\" 하고 대답하자 예수께서는 이렇게 말씀하셨다. \"나는 분명히 말한다. 세리와 창녀들이 너희보다 먼저 하느님의 나라에 들어가고 있다.","그 둘 중의 누가 아버지의 뜻대로 하였느냐 이르되 둘째 아들이니이다 예수께서 그들에게 이르시되 내가 진실로 너희에게 이르노니 세리들과 창녀들이 너희보다 먼저 하나님의 나라에 들어가리라","그 둘 중에 누가 아비의 뜻대로 하였느뇨 가로되 둘째 아들이니이다 예수께서 저희에게 이르시되 내가 진실로 너희에게 이르노니 세리들과 창기들이 너희보다 먼저 하나님의 나라에 들어가리라","두 아들 중에 그의 아버지에게 순종한 아들은 어느 쪽이냐?\" 하고 예수께서 물으셨다. 그들이 \"물론, 큰아들입니다\" 하고 대답하자 예수께서 그 말씀하신 뜻을 설명해 주셨다. \"내가 진정으로 말한다. 분명히 못된 짓만 일삼는다는 세리들과 창녀들이 너희보다 먼저 하나님의 나라에 들어갈 것이다.","Which of the two did his father’s will?” They answered, “The first.” Jesus said to them, “Amen, I say to you, tax collectors and prostitutes are entering the kingdom of God before you.","Whether of them twain did the will of his father? They say unto him, The first. Jesus saith unto them, Verily I say unto you, That the publicans and the harlots go into the kingdom of God before you.","\"Which of the two did what his father wanted?\" \"The first,\" they answered. Jesus said to them, \"I tell you the truth, the tax collectors and the prostitutes are entering the kingdom of God ahead of you.","Quis ex duobus fecit voluntatem patris? “. Dicunt:  “Primus “. Dicit illis Iesus:  “Amen dico vobis: Publicani et meretrices praecedunt vos in regnum Dei.","מי משניהם עשה את רצון האב ויאמרו אליו הראשון ויאמר להם ישוע אמן אמר אני לכם המוכסים והזונות יקדמו אתכם לבוא אל מלכות האלהים׃"],["47","21","32","사실 요한이 너희에게 와서 의로운 길을 가르칠 때, 너희는 그를 믿지 않았지만 세리와 창녀들은 그를 믿었다. 너희는 그것을 보고도 생각을 바꾸지 않고 끝내 그를 믿지 않았다.”","사실 요한이 너희를 찾아와서 올바른 길을 가르쳐줄 때에 너희는 그의 말을 믿지 않았지만 세리와 창녀들은 믿었다. 너희는 그것을 보고도 끝내 뉘우치지 않고 그를 믿지 않았다.\"","요한이 의의 도로 너희에게 왔거늘 너희는 그를 믿지 아니하였으되 세리와 창녀는 믿었으며 너희는 이것을 보고도 끝내 뉘우쳐 믿지 아니하였도다","요한이 의의 도로 너희에게 왔거늘 너희는 저를 믿지 아니하였으되 세리와 창기는 믿었으며 너희는 이것을 보고도 종시 뉘우쳐 믿지 아니하였도다","침례 요한이 너희에게 회개하고 하나님께로 돌아오라고 하였을 때 세리들과 창녀들은 그 말을 들었지만 너희는 듣지 않았다. 너희는 그것을 보고도 끝내 회개하지 않고 그를 믿지 않았다.","When John came to you in the way of righteousness, you did not believe him; but tax collectors and prostitutes did. Yet even when you saw that, you did not later change your minds and believe him.","For John came unto you in the way of righteousness, and ye believed him not: but the publicans and the harlots believed him: and ye, when ye had seen it, repented not afterward, that ye might believe him.","For John came to you to show you the way of righteousness, and you did not believe him, but the tax collectors and the prostitutes did. And even after you saw this, you did not repent and believe him.","Venit enim ad vos Ioannes in via iustitiae, et non credidistis ei; publicani autem et meretrices crediderunt ei. Vos autem videntes nec paenitentiam habuistis postea, ut crederetis ei.","כי יוחנן בא אליכם בדרך צדקה ולא האמנתם לו אבל המוכסים והזונות הם האמינו לו ואתם ראיתם ולא שבתם אחרי כן להאמין לו׃"],["47","21","33","“다른 비유를 들어 보아라. 어떤 밭 임자가 ‘포도밭을 일구어 울타리를 둘러치고 포도 확을 파고 탑을 세웠다.’ 그리고 소작인들에게 내주고 멀리 떠났다.","\"또 다른 비유를 들겠다. 어떤 지주가 7)포도원을 하나 만들고 울타리를 둘러치고는 그 안에 포도즙을 짜는 큰 확을 파고 망대를 세웠다. 그리고는 그것을 소작인들에게 도지로 주고 멀리 떠나갔다.이사 5:1-2.","다른 한 비유를 들으라 한 집 주인이 포도원을 만들어 산울타리로 두르고 거기에 즙 짜는 틀을 만들고 망대를 짓고 농부들에게 세로 주고 타국에 갔더니","다시 한 비유를 들으라 한 집 주인이 포도원을 만들고 산울로 두르고 거기 즙 짜는 구유를 파고 망대를 짓고 농부들에게 세로 주고 타국에 갔더니","이제 이 비유를 들어라. 어떤 지주가 포도원을 만들고 울타리를 둘러쳤다. 그러고는 포도즙을 짤 큰 확을 파고 망대를 세운 뒤 그것을 소작인들에게 도지로 주고 다른 나라로 갔다.","“Hear another parable. There was a landowner who planted a vineyard, put a hedge around it, dug a wine press in it, and built a tower. Then he leased it to tenants and went on a journey.","Hear another parable: There was a certain householder, which planted a vineyard, and hedged it round about, and digged a winepress in it, and built a tower, and let it out to husbandmen, and went into a far country:","\"Listen to another parable: There was a landowner who planted a vineyard. He put a wall around it, dug a winepress in it and built a watchtower. Then he rented the vineyard to some farmers and went away on a journey.","Aliam parabolam audite. Homo erat pater familias, qui plantavit vineam et saepem circumdedit ei et fodit in ea torcular et aedificavit turrim et locavit eam agricolis et peregre profectus est.","משל אחר שמעו איש בעל בית היה ויטע האיש כרם ויעש גדר סביב לו ויחצב יקב ויבן מגדל בתוכו ויתנהו אל כרמים וילך בדרך מרחוק׃"],["47","21","34","포도 철이 가까워지자 그는 자기 몫의 소출을 받아 오라고 소작인들에게 종들을 보냈다.","포도 철이 되자 그는 그 도조를 받아오라고 종들을 보냈다.","열매 거둘 때가 가까우매 그 열매를 받으려고 자기 종들을 농부들에게 보내니","실과 때가 가까우매 그 실과를 받으려고 자기 종들을 농부들에게 보내니","포도를 거두어들일 철이 되자 그는 소출을 받아오라고 종들을 소작인들에게 보냈다.","When vintage time drew near, he sent his servants to the tenants to obtain his produce.","And when the time of the fruit drew near, he sent his servants to the husbandmen, that they might receive the fruits of it.","When the harvest time approached, he sent his servants to the tenants to collect his fruit.","Cum autem tempus fructuum appropinquasset, misit servos suos ad agricolas, ut acciperent fructus eius.","ויהי בהגיע עת האסיף וישלח עבדיו אל הכרמים לקחת את פריו׃"],["47","21","35","그런데 소작인들은 그들을 붙잡아 하나는 매질하고 하나는 죽이고 하나는 돌을 던져 죽이기까지 하였다.","그런데 소작인들은 그 종들을 붙잡아, 하나는 때려주고 하나는 죽이고 하나는 돌로 쳐죽였다.","농부들이 종들을 잡아 하나는 심히 때리고 하나는 죽이고 하나는 돌로 쳤거늘","농부들이 종들을 잡아 하나는 심히 때리고 하나는 죽이고 하나는 돌로 쳤거늘","그런데 소작인들은 종들을 붙잡아 하나는 때려 주고 하나는 죽이고 하나는 돌로 쳤다.","But the tenants seized the servants and one they beat, another they killed, and a third they stoned.","And the husbandmen took his servants, and beat one, and killed another, and stoned another.","\"The tenants seized his servants; they beat one, killed another, and stoned a third.","Et agricolae, apprehensis servis eius, alium ceciderunt, alium occiderunt, alium vero lapidaverunt.","ויחזיקו הכרמים בעבדיו את זה הכו ואת זה הרגו ואת זה סקלו׃"],["47","21","36","주인이 다시 처음보다 더 많은 종을 보냈지만, 소작인들은 그들에게도 같은 짓을 하였다.","지주는 더 많은 종들을 다시 보냈다. 소작인들은 이번에도 그들에게 똑같은 짓을 했다.","다시 다른 종들을 처음보다 많이 보내니 그들에게도 그렇게 하였는지라","다시 다른 종들을 처음보다 많이 보내니 저희에게도 그렇게 하였는지라","지주는 다시 더 많은 종들을 보냈으나 결과는 마찬가지였다.","Again he sent other servants, more numerous than the first ones, but they treated them in the same way.","Again, he sent other servants more than the first: and they did unto them likewise.","Then he sent other servants to them, more than the first time, and the tenants treated them the same way.","Iterum misit alios servos plures prioribus, et fecerunt illis similiter.","ויוסף שלח עבדים אחרים רבים מן הראשונים ויעשו ככה גם להם׃"],["47","21","37","주인은 마침내 ‘내 아들이야 존중해 주겠지.’ 하며 그들에게 아들을 보냈다.","주인은 마지막으로 '내 아들이야 알아보겠지.' 하며 자기 아들을 보냈다.","후에 자기 아들을 보내며 이르되 그들이 내 아들은 존대하리라 하였더니","후에 자기 아들을 보내며 가로되 저희가 내 아들은 공경하리라 하였더니","마지막으로 주인은 그의 아들을 보내며 \"내 아들이야 함부로 대하지 않겠지\" 하고 생각하였다.","Finally, he sent his son to them, thinking, ‘They will respect my son.’","But last of all he sent unto them his son, saying, They will reverence my son.","Last of all, he sent his son to them. 'They will respect my son,' he said.","Novissime autem misit ad eos filium suum dicens:  “Verebuntur filium meum “.","ובאחרונה שלח אליהם את בנו באמרו מפני בני יגורו׃"],["47","21","38","그러나 소작인들은 아들을 보자, ‘저자가 상속자다. 자, 저자를 죽여 버리고 우리가 그의 상속 재산을 차지하자.’ 하고 저희끼리 말하면서,","그러나 소작인들은 그 아들을 보자 '저자는 상속자다. 자, 저자를 죽이고 그가 차지할 이 포도원을 우리가 가로채자.' 하면서 서로 짜고는","농부들이 그 아들을 보고 서로 말하되 이는 상속자니 자 죽이고 그의 유산을 차지하자 하고","농부들이 그 아들을 보고 서로 말하되 이는 상속자니 자 죽이고 그의 유업을 차지하자 하고","그러나 소작인들은 그 아들이 오는 것을 보자 서로 말하였다. \"저기 상속자가 오는구나. 잘됐다. 저놈을 죽여 버리고 이 포도원을 우리가 차지하자.\"","But when the tenants saw the son, they said to one another, ‘This is the heir. Come, let us kill him and acquire his inheritance.’","But when the husbandmen saw the son, they said among themselves, This is the heir; come, let us kill him, and let us seize on his inheritance.","\"But when the tenants saw the son, they said to each other, 'This is the heir. Come, let's kill him and take his inheritance.'","Agricolae autem videntes filium dixerunt intra se:  “Hic est heres. Venite, occidamus eum et habebimus hereditatem eius “.","ויהי כראות הכרמים את הבן ויאמרו איש אל אחיו זה הוא היורש לכו ונהרגהו ונאחזה בנחלתו׃"],["47","21","39","그를 붙잡아 포도밭 밖으로 던져 죽여 버렸다.","그를 잡아 포도원 밖으로 끌어내어 죽였다.","이에 잡아 포도원 밖에 내쫓아 죽였느니라","이에 잡아 포도원 밖에 내어좇아 죽였느니라","그러고는 그를 잡아 포도원 밖으로 끌어다 죽여 버렸다.","They seized him, threw him out of the vineyard, and killed him.","And they caught him, and cast him out of the vineyard, and slew him.","So they took him and threw him out of the vineyard and killed him.","Et apprehensum eum eiecerunt extra vineam et occiderunt.","ויחזיקו בו וידחפוהו אל מחוץ לכרם ויהרגו אתו׃"],["47","21","40","그러니 포도밭 주인이 와서 그 소작인들을 어떻게 하겠느냐?”","그렇게 했으니 포도원 주인이 돌아오면 그 소작인들을 어떻게 하겠느냐?\"","그러면 포도원 주인이 올 때에 그 농부들을 어떻게 하겠느냐","그러면 포도원 주인이 올 때에 이 농부들을 어떻게 하겠느뇨","그렇다면 포도원 주인이 돌아왔을 때 그 주인이 소작인들을 어떻게 할 것이라고 생각하느냐?\"","What will the owner of the vineyard do to those tenants when he comes?”","When the lord therefore of the vineyard cometh, what will he do unto those husbandmen?","\"Therefore, when the owner of the vineyard comes, what will he do to those tenants?\"","Cum ergo venerit dominus vineae, quid faciet agricolis illis? “.","והנה כבוא בעל הכרם מה יעשה לכרמים ההם׃"],["47","21","41","“그렇게 악한 자들은 가차 없이 없애 버리고, 제때에 소출을 바치는 다른 소작인들에게 포도밭을 내줄 것입니다.” 하고 그들이 대답하자,","사람들은 이렇게 대답하였다. \"그 악한 자들을 모조리 죽여버리고 제때에 도조를 바칠 다른 소작인들에게 포도원을 맡길 것입니다.\"","그들이 말하되 그 악한 자들을 진멸하고 포도원은 제 때에 열매를 바칠 만한 다른 농부들에게 세로 줄지니이다","저희가 말하되 이 악한 자들을 진멸하고 포도원은 제때에 실과를 바칠만한 다른 농부들에게 세로 줄찌니이다","유대인 지도자들이 대답하였다. \"악한 자들을 모조리 죽여 버리고 그 포도원은 제때에 소출을 바칠 다른 소작인들에게 세줄 것입니다.\"","They answered him, “He will put those wretched men to a wretched death and lease his vineyard to other tenants who will give him the produce at the proper times.”","They say unto him, He will miserably destroy those wicked men, and will let out his vineyard unto other husbandmen, which shall render him the fruits in their seasons.","\"He will bring those wretches to a wretched end,\" they replied, \"and he will rent the vineyard to other tenants, who will give him his share of the crop at harvest time.\"","Aiunt illi:  “Malos male perdet et vineam locabit aliis agricolis, qui reddant ei fructum temporibus suis “.","ויאמרו אליו ירע לרעים ויאבדם ואת הכרם יתן לכרמים אחרים אשר ישיבו לו את הפרי בעתו׃"],["47","21","42","예수님께서 그들에게 말씀하셨다. “너희는 성경에서 이 말씀을 읽어 본 적이 없느냐? ‘집 짓는 이들이 내버린 돌 그 돌이 모퉁이의 머릿돌이 되었네. 이는 주님께서 이루신 일 우리 눈에 놀랍기만 하네.’","그래서 예수께서는 그들에게 이렇게 말씀하셨다. \"너희는 성서에서, '8)집 짓는 사람들이 버린 돌이 모퉁이의 머릿돌이 되었다. 주께서 하시는 일이라, 우리에게는 놀랍게만 보인다.' 한 말을 읽어본 일이 없느냐? 시편 118:22-23.","예수께서 이르시되 너희가 성경에 ㅁ)건축자들이 버린 돌이 모퉁이의 머릿돌이 되었나니 이것은 주로 말미암아 된 것이요 우리 눈에 기이하도다 함을 읽어 본 일이 없느냐","예수께서 가라사대 너희가 성경에 ㅁ)건축자들의 버린 돌이 모퉁이의 머릿돌이 되었나니 이것은 주로 말미암아 된것이요 우리 눈에 기이하도다 함을 읽어 본 일이 없느냐 시 118:22 이하","그러자 예수께서 말씀하셨다. \"너희는 성경에서 이런 말씀을 읽지 못하였느냐? ㄱ) \"집 짓는 이 쓸모없다 버린 돌이 이제는 어떤 돌보다도 더욱 소중한 돌이 되었다. 여호와께서 이루신 이 일 그저 놀랍기만 하여라. 엄청나기만 하여라.\" (ㄱ. 시118:22-23)","Jesus said to them, “Did you never read in the scriptures: ‘The stone that the builders rejected has become the cornerstone; by the Lord has this been done, and it is wonderful in our eyes’?","Jesus saith unto them, Did ye never read in the scriptures, The stone which the builders rejected, the same is become the head of the corner: this is the Lord's doing, and it is marvellous in our eyes?","Jesus said to them, \"Have you never read in the Scriptures: \"'The stone the builders rejected has become the capstone; the Lord has done this, and it is marvelous in our eyes'?","Dicit illis Iesus:  “Numquam legistis in Scripturis:  “Lapidem quem reprobaverunt aedificantes, hic factus est in caput anguli; a Domino factum est istud et est mirabile in oculis nostris “ ?","ויאמר ישוע אליהם הכי קרא לא קראתם בכתובים אבן מאסו הבונים היתה לראש פנה מאת יהוה היתה זאת היא נפלאת בעינינו׃"],["47","21","43","그러므로 내가 너희에게 말한다. 하느님께서는 너희에게서 하느님의 나라를 빼앗아, 그 소출을 내는 민족에게 주실 것이다.","잘 들어라. 너희는 하느님의 나라를 빼앗길 것이며 도조를 잘 내는 백성들이 그 나라를 차지할 것이다.","그러므로 내가 너희에게 이르노니 하나님의 나라를 너희는 빼앗기고 그 나라의 열매 맺는 백성이 받으리라","그러므로 내가 너희에게 이르노니 하나님의 나라를 너희는 빼앗기고 그 나라의 열매 맺는 백성이 받으리라","잘 들어라. 너희는 하늘나라를 빼앗길 것이다. 하나님께서는 소출을 잘 내는 백성들에게 그 나라를 맡기실 것이다.","Therefore, I say to you, the kingdom of God will be taken away from you and given to a people that will produce its fruit.","Therefore say I unto you, The kingdom of God shall be taken from you, and given to a nation bringing forth the fruits thereof.","\"Therefore I tell you that the kingdom of God will be taken away from you and given to a people who will produce its fruit.","Ideo dico vobis quia auferetur a vobis regnum Dei et dabitur genti facienti fructus eius.","על כן אני אמר לכם כי תקח מכם מלכות האלהים ותנתן לגוי אשר יעשה את פריה׃"],["47","21","44","그리고 그 돌 위에 떨어지는 자는 부서지고, 그 돌에 맞는 자는 누구나 으스러질 것이다.”","9)(그리고 그 돌 위에 떨어지는 사람은 산산조각이 날 것이며 그 돌 밑에 깔리는 사람은 가루가 되고 말 것이다.\") 어떤 사본에는 44절이 없다.","이 돌 위에 떨어지는 자는 깨지겠고 이 돌이 사람 위에 떨어지면 그를 가루로 만들어 흩으리라 하시니","이 돌 위에 떨어지는 자는 깨어지겠고 이 돌이 사람 위에 떨어지면 저를 가루로 만들어 흩으리라 하시니","이 진리의 반석에 걸려 넘어지는 사람은 모두 깨어질 것이고 이 돌밑에 깔리는 사람은 먼지처럼 흩어지고 말 것이다.\"","[ The one who falls on this stone will be dashed to pieces; and it will crush anyone on whom it falls.]”","And whosoever shall fall on this stone shall be broken: but on whomsoever it shall fall, it will grind him to powder.","He who falls on this stone will be broken to pieces, but he on whom it falls will be crushed.\"","Et, qui ceciderit super lapidem istum confringetur; super quem vero ceciderit, conteret eum “.","והנפל על האבן ההיא ישבר ואשר תפל עליו תשחקהו׃"],["47","21","45","수석 사제들과 바리사이들은 이 비유들을 듣고서 자기들을 두고 하신 말씀인 것을 알아차리고,","대사제들과 바리사이파 사람들은 이 비유가 자기들을 두고 하신 말씀인 것을 알고","대제사장들과 바리새인들이 예수의 비유를 듣고 자기들을 가리켜 말씀하심인 줄 알고","대제사장들과 바리새인들이 예수의 비유를 듣고 자기들을 가리켜 말씀하심인줄 알고","대제사장들과 바리새인 지도자들은 이 비유가 자기들을 두고 하시는 말씀인 것을 알고","When the chief priests and the Pharisees heard his parables, they knew that he was speaking about them.","And when the chief priests and Pharisees had heard his parables, they perceived that he spake of them.","When the chief priests and the Pharisees heard Jesus' parables, they knew he was talking about them.","Et cum audissent principes sacerdotum et pharisaei parabolas eius, cognoverunt quod de ipsis diceret;","ויהי כשמע הכהנים הגדולים והפרושים את משליו ויבינו כי עליהם דבר׃"],["47","21","46","그분을 붙잡으려고 하였으나 군중이 두려웠다. 군중이 예수님을 예언자로 여겼기 때문이다.","예수를 잡으려 하였으나 군중이 두려워서 손을 대지 못하였다. 군중이 예수를 예언자로 알고 있었기 때문이다.","잡고자 하나 무리를 무서워하니 이는 그들이 예수를 선지자로 앎이었더라","잡고자 하나 무리를 무서워하니 이는 저희가 예수를 선지자로 앎이었더라","예수를 붙잡으려 하였다. 그러나 예수를 예언자로 믿고 있는 군중이 두려워서 그렇게 하지 못하였다.","And although they were attempting to arrest him, they feared the crowds, for they regarded him as a prophet.","But when they sought to lay hands on him, they feared the multitude, because they took him for a prophet.","They looked for a way to arrest him, but they were afraid of the crowd because the people held that he was a prophet.","et quaerentes eum tenere, timuerunt turbas, quoniam sicut prophetam eum habebant.","ויבקשו לתפשו אך יראו מפני המון העם כי לנביא חשבהו׃"],["47","22","1","예수님께서는 또 여러 가지 비유로 그들에게 말씀하셨다.","예수께서 또 비유를 들어 그들에게 말씀하셨다.","예수께서 다시 비유로 대답하여 이르시되","예수께서 다시 비유로 대답하여 가라사대","예수께서는 다시 비유를 들어 말씀하셨다.","Jesus again in reply spoke to them in parables, saying,","And Jesus answered and spake unto them again by parables, and said,","Jesus spoke to them again in parables, saying:","Et respondens Iesus dixit ite rum in parabolis eis dicens:","ויען ישוע ויסף דבר במשלים אליהם לאמר׃"],["47","22","2","“하늘 나라는 자기 아들의 혼인 잔치를 베푼 어떤 임금에게 비길 수 있다.","\"하늘 나라는 어느 임금이 자기 아들의 혼인 잔치를 베푼 것에 비길 수 있다.","천국은 마치 자기 아들을 위하여 혼인 잔치를 베푼 어떤 임금과 같으니","천국은 마치 자기 아들을 위하여 혼인 잔치를 베푼 어떤 임금과 같으니","\"하늘나라는 어떤 왕이 자기 아들의 결혼 잔치를 크게 베푼 일에 비할 수 있다.","“The kingdom of heaven may be likened to a king who gave a wedding feast for his son.","The kingdom of heaven is like unto a certain king, which made a marriage for his son,","\"The kingdom of heaven is like a king who prepared a wedding banquet for his son.","Simile factum est regnum caelorum homini regi, qui fecit nuptias filio suo.","דומה מלכות השמים למלך בשר ודם אשר עשה חתנה לבנו׃"],["47","22","3","그는 종들을 보내어 혼인 잔치에 초대받은 이들을 불러오게 하였다. 그러나 그들은 오려고 하지 않았다.","임금이 종들을 보내어 잔치에 초청받은 사람들을 불렀으나 오려 하지 않았다.","그 종들을 보내어 그 청한 사람들을 혼인 잔치에 오라 하였더니 오기를 싫어하거늘","그 종들을 보내어 그 청한 사람들을 혼인 잔치에 오라 하였더니 오기를 싫어하거늘","많은 손님을 초청한 왕은 잔치 준비가 끝나자 신하를 보내 시간이 다 되었음을 알리게 하였다. 그러나 모두 오기를 거절하였다.","He dispatched his servants to summon the invited guests to the feast, but they refused to come.","And sent forth his servants to call them that were bidden to the wedding: and they would not come.","He sent his servants to those who had been invited to the banquet to tell them to come, but they refused to come.","Et misit servos suos vocare invitatos ad nuptias, et nolebant venire.","וישלח את עבדיו לקרא הקרואים אל החתנה ולא אבו לבוא׃"],["47","22","4","그래서 다시 다른 종들을 보내며 이렇게 일렀다. ‘초대받은 이들에게, ′내가 잔칫상을 이미 차렸소. 황소와 살진 짐승을 잡고 모든 준비를 마쳤으니, 어서 혼인 잔치에 오시오.′ 하고 말하여라.’","그래서 다른 종들을 보내면서 '초청을 받은 사람들에게 가서 이제 잔칫상도 차려놓고 소와 살진 짐승도 잡아 모든 준비를 다 갖추었으니 어서 잔치에 오라고 하여라.' 하고 일렀다.","다시 다른 종들을 보내며 이르되 청한 사람들에게 이르기를 내가 오찬을 준비하되 나의 소와 살진 짐승을 잡고 모든 것을 갖추었으니 혼인 잔치에 오소서 하라 하였더니","다시 다른 종들을 보내며 가로되 청한 사람들에게 이르기를 내가 오찬을 준비하되 나의 소와 살진 짐승을 잡고 모든 것을 갖추었으니 혼인 잔치에 오소서 하라 하였더니","그래서 왕은 다시 다른 신하들을 보내서 \"모든 준비가 끝나고 고기를 굽고 있으니 속히 오라\"고 전하게 하였다.","A second time he sent other servants, saying, ‘Tell those invited: “Behold, I have prepared my banquet, my calves and fattened cattle are killed, and everything is ready; come to the feast.”’","Again, he sent forth other servants, saying, Tell them which are bidden, Behold, I have prepared my dinner: my oxen and my fatlings are killed, and all things are ready: come unto the marriage.","\"Then he sent some more servants and said, 'Tell those who have been invited that I have prepared my dinner: My oxen and fattened cattle have been butchered, and everything is ready. Come to the wedding banquet.'","Iterum misit alios servos dicens:  “Dicite invitatis: Ecce prandium meum paravi, tauri mei et altilia occisa, et omnia parata; venite ad nuptias “.","ויסף שלח עבדים אחרים לאמר אמרו אל הקרואים הנה ערכתי את סעודתי שורי ומריאי טבוחים והכל מוכן באו אל החתנה׃"],["47","22","5","그러나 그들은 아랑곳하지 않고, 어떤 자는 밭으로 가고 어떤 자는 장사하러 갔다.","그러나 초청받은 사람들은 대수롭지 않게 여기고 어떤 사람은 밭으로 가고 어떤 사람은 장사하러 가고","그들이 돌아 보지도 않고 한 사람은 자기 밭으로, 한 사람은 자기 사업하러 가고","저희가 돌아 보지도 않고 하나는 자기 밭으로, 하나는 자기 상업차로 가고","그러나 손님들은 그 초청을 대수롭지 않게 여기고 어떤 사람은 자기 밭으로 가고, 어떤 사람은 자기 상점으로 가고","Some ignored the invitation and went away, one to his farm, another to his business.","But they made light of it, and went their ways, one to his farm, another to his merchandise:","\"But they paid no attention and went off--one to his field, another to his business.","Illi autem neglexerunt et abierunt, alius in villam suam, alius vero ad negotiationem suam;","והם לא שתו לבם לזאת וילכו להם זה אל שדהו וזה אל מסחרו׃"],["47","22","6","그리고 나머지 사람들은 종들을 붙잡아 때리고 죽였다.","또 어떤 사람들은 그 종들을 붙잡아 때려주기도 하고 죽이기도 했다.","그 남은 자들은 종들을 잡아 모욕하고 죽이니","그 남은 자들은 종들을 잡아 능욕하고 죽이니","또 어떤 사람들은 왕의 신하들을 때리고 죽이기까지 하였다.","The rest laid hold of his servants, mistreated them, and killed them.","And the remnant took his servants, and entreated them spitefully, and slew them.","The rest seized his servants, mistreated them and killed them.","reliqui vero tenuerunt servos eius et contumelia affectos occiderunt.","והנשארים תפשו את עבדיו ויתעללו בם ויהרגום׃"],["47","22","7","임금은 진노하였다. 그래서 군대를 보내어 그 살인자들을 없애고 그들의 고을을 불살라 버렸다.","그래서 임금은 몹시 노하여 군대를 풀어서 그 살인자들을 잡아죽이고 그들의 동네를 불살라 버렸다.","임금이 노하여 군대를 보내어 그 살인한 자들을 진멸하고 그 동네를 불사르고","임금이 노하여 군대를 보내어 그 살인한 자들을 진멸하고 그 동네를 불사르고","그러자 왕은 몹시 화가 나서 군대를 보내 그 살인자들을 잡아 죽이고 동네를 불살라 버렸다.","The king was enraged and sent his troops, destroyed those murderers, and burned their city.","But when the king heard thereof, he was wroth: and he sent forth his armies, and destroyed those murderers, and burned up their city.","The king was enraged. He sent his army and destroyed those murderers and burned their city.","Rex autem iratus est et, missis exercitibus suis, perdidit homicidas illos et civitatem illorum succendit.","ויקצף המלך וישלח צבאותיו ויאבד את המרצחים ההם ואת עירם שרף באש׃"],["47","22","8","그러고 나서 종들에게 말하였다. ‘혼인 잔치는 준비되었는데 초대받은 자들은 마땅하지 않구나.","그리고 나서 종들에게 '혼인 잔치는 준비되었지만 전에 초청받은 자들은 그만한 자격이 없는 자들이었다.","이에 종들에게 이르되 혼인 잔치는 준비되었으나 청한 사람들은 합당하지 아니하니","이에 종들에게 이르되 혼인 잔치는 예비되었으나 청한 사람들은 합당치 아니하니","그러고 나서 신하들에게 말하였다. \"결혼 잔치는 준비되었는데 초청받은 사람들은 올 자격이 없는 자들이었다.","Then he said to his servants, ‘The feast is ready, but those who were invited were not worthy to come.","Then saith he to his servants, The wedding is ready, but they which were bidden were not worthy.","\"Then he said to his servants, 'The wedding banquet is ready, but those I invited did not deserve to come.","Tunc ait servis suis:  “Nuptiae quidem paratae sunt, sed qui invitati erant, non fuerunt digni;","אז אמר אל עבדיו הן החתנה מוכנה והקרואים לא היו ראוים לה׃"],["47","22","9","그러니 고을 어귀로 가서 아무나 만나는 대로 잔치에 불러 오너라.’","그러니 너희는 거리에 나가서 아무나 만나는 대로 잔치에 청해 오너라.' 하고 말하였다.","네거리 길에 가서 사람을 만나는 대로 혼인 잔치에 청하여 오라 한대","사거리 길에 가서 사람을 만나는대로 혼인 잔치에 청하여 오너라 한대","이제 길거리에 나가서 아무나 만나는 대로 잔치에 초대하여라.\"","Go out, therefore, into the main roads and invite to the feast whomever you find.’","Go ye therefore into the highways, and as many as ye shall find, bid to the marriage.","Go to the street corners and invite to the banquet anyone you find.'","ite ergo ad exitus viarum, et quoscumque inveneritis, vocate ad nuptias “.","לכן לכו נא אל ראשי הדרכים וכל איש אשר תמצאו קראו אתו אל החתנה׃"],["47","22","10","그래서 그 종들은 거리에 나가 악한 사람 선한 사람 할 것 없이 만나는 대로 데려왔다. 잔칫방은 손님들로 가득 찼다.","그래서 종들은 거리에 나가 나쁜 사람 좋은 사람 할 것 없이 만나는 대로 다 데려왔다. 그리하여 잔칫집은 손님으로 가득 찼다.","종들이 길에 나가 악한 자나 선한 자나 만나는 대로 모두 데려오니 혼인 잔치에 손님들이 가득한지라","종들이 길에 나가 악한 자나 선한 자나 만나는 대로 모두 데려오니 혼인자리에 손이 가득한지라","신하들은 거리에 나가 좋은 사람이건 나쁜 사람이건 가리지 않고 만나는 대로 데려왔다. 잔칫집은 손님으로 가득 찼다.","The servants went out into the streets and gathered all they found, bad and good alike, and the hall was filled with guests.","So those servants went out into the highways, and gathered together all as many as they found, both bad and good: and the wedding was furnished with guests.","So the servants went out into the streets and gathered all the people they could find, both good and bad, and the wedding hall was filled with guests.","Et egressi servi illi in vias, congregaverunt omnes, quos invenerunt, malos et bonos; et impletae sunt nuptiae discumbentium.","ויצאו העבדים ההם אל הדרכים ויאספו את כל אשר מצאו גם רעים גם טובים וימלא בית החתנה מסבים׃"],["47","22","11","임금이 손님들을 둘러보려고 들어왔다가, 혼인 예복을 입지 않은 사람 하나를 보고,","임금이 손님들을 보러 들어갔더니 예복을 입지 않은 사람이 하나 있었다. 그를 보고","임금이 손님들을 보러 들어올새 거기서 예복을 입지 않은 한 사람을 보고","임금이 손을 보러 들어올쌔 거기서 예복을 입지 않은 한 사람을 보고","왕이 손님을 만나러 들어와보니 한 사람이 자기에게 준비된 예복을 입지 않고 앉아 있는 것이 눈에 띄었다.","But when the king came in to meet the guests he saw a man there not dressed in a wedding garment.","And when the king came in to see the guests, he saw there a man which had not on a wedding garment:","\"But when the king came in to see the guests, he noticed a man there who was not wearing wedding clothes.","Intravit autem rex, ut videret discumbentes, et vidit ibi hominem non vestitum veste nuptiali","ויהי כבוא המלך לראות את המסבים וירא בהם איש ולא היה לבוש בגדי חתנה׃"],["47","22","12","‘친구여, 그대는 혼인 예복도 갖추지 않고 어떻게 여기 들어왔나?’ 하고 물으니, 그는 아무 말도 하지 못하였다.","예복도 입지 않고 어떻게 여기 들어왔소?' 하고 물었다. 그는 할 말이 없었다.","이르되 친구여 어찌하여 예복을 입지 않고 여기 들어왔느냐 하니 그가 아무 말도 못하거늘","가로되 친구여 어찌하여 예복을 입지 않고 여기 들어왔느냐 하니 저가 유구무언이어늘","그래서 왕이 \"이 사람아, 자네는 예복도 입지 않고 어떻게 여기 들어왔는가?\"하고 물었으나 그는 대답을 못하였다.","He said to him, ‘My friend, how is it that you came in here without a wedding garment?’ But he was reduced to silence.","And he saith unto him, Friend, how camest thou in hither not having a wedding garment? And he was speechless.","'Friend,' he asked, 'how did you get in here without wedding clothes?' The man was speechless.","et ait illi:  “Amice, quomodo huc intrasti, non habens vestem nuptialem? “. At ille obmutuit.","ויאמר אליו רעי איכה באת הנה ואין לך בגדי חתנה ויאלם׃"],["47","22","13","그러자 임금이 하인들에게 말하였다. ‘이자의 손과 발을 묶어서 바깥 어둠 속으로 내던져 버려라. 거기에서 울며 이를 갈 것이다.’","그러자 임금이 하인들에게 '이 사람의 손발을 묶어 바깥 어두운 데 내쫓아라. 거기서 가슴을 치며 통곡할 것이다.' 하고 말하였다.","임금이 사환들에게 말하되 그 손발을 묶어 바깥 어두운 데에 내던지라 거기서 슬피 울며 이를 갈게 되리라 하니라","임금이 사환들에게 말하되 그 수족을 결박하여 바깥 어두움에 내어 던지라 거기서 슬피 울며 이를 갊이 있으리라 하니라","왕은 시종들에게 명령하였다. \"이자의 손발을 묶어 바깥 어두운 데로 내쫓아라. 거기서 가슴을 치며 통곡할 것이다.\"","Then the king said to his attendants, ‘Bind his hands and feet, and cast him into the darkness outside, where there will be wailing and grinding of teeth.’","Then said the king to the servants, Bind him hand and foot, and take him away, and cast him into outer darkness, there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.","\"Then the king told the attendants, 'Tie him hand and foot, and throw him outside, into the darkness, where there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth.'","Tunc dixit rex ministris:  “Ligate pedes eius et manus et mittite eum in tenebras exteriores: ibi erit fletus et stridor dentium “.","ויאמר המלך למשרתים אסרו ידיו ורגליו ונשאתם והשלכתם אותו אל החשך החיצון שם תהיה היללה וחרק השנים׃"],["47","22","14","사실 부르심을 받은 이들은 많지만 선택된 이들은 적다.”","부르심을 받은 사람은 많지만 뽑히는 사람은 적다.\"","청함을 받은 자는 많되 택함을 입은 자는 적으니라","청함을 받은 자는 많되 택함을 입은 자는 적으니라","이와 같이 부르심을 받은 사람은 많지만 택함을 받은 사람은 적다\"","Many are invited, but few are chosen.”","For many are called, but few are chosen.","\"For many are invited, but few are chosen.\"","Multi enim sunt vocati, pauci vero electi “.","כי רבים הם הקרואים ומעטים הנבחרים׃"],["47","22","15","그때에 바리사이들이 나가서, 어떻게 하면 말로 예수님께 올가미를 씌울까 하고 의논하였다.","바리사이파 사람들은 물러가서 어떻게 하면 예수의 말씀을 트집잡아 올가미를 씌울까 하고 궁리한 끝에","이에 바리새인들이 가서 어떻게 하면 예수를 말의 올무에 걸리게 할까 상의하고","이에 바리새인들이 가서 어떻게 하여 예수로 말의 올무에 걸리게 할까 상론하고","바리새파 사람들은 어떻게 하면 예수의 말씀에서 트집을 잡아 함정에 빠뜨릴 수 있을까 하고 모여서 궁리를 하였다.","Then the Pharisees went off and plotted how they might entrap him in speech.","Then went the Pharisees, and took counsel how they might entangle him in his talk.","Then the Pharisees went out and laid plans to trap him in his words.","Tunc abeuntes pharisaei consilium inierunt, ut caperent eum in sermone.","וילכו הפרושים ויתיעצו איך יכשילהו בדבר׃"],["47","22","16","그러고는 저희 제자들을 헤로데 당원들과 함께 예수님께 보내어 이렇게 말하였다. “스승님, 저희는 스승님께서 진실하시고 하느님의 길을 참되게 가르치시며 아무도 꺼리지 않으시는 줄 압니다. 과연 스승님은 사람을 그 신분에 따라 판단하지 않으십니다.","자기네 제자들을 헤로데 당원 몇 사람과 함께 예수께 보내어 이렇게 묻게 하였다. \"선생님, 우리는 선생님이 진실하신 분으로서 사람을 겉모양으로 판단하지 않기 때문에 아무도 꺼리지 않고 하느님의 진리를 참되게 가르치시는 줄을 압니다.","자기 제자들을 헤롯 당원들과 함께 예수께 보내어 말하되 선생님이여 우리가 아노니 당신은 참되시고 진리로 하나님의 도를 가르치시며 아무도 꺼리는 일이 없으시니 이는 사람을 외모로 보지 아니하심이니이다","자기 제자들을 헤롯 당원들과 함께 예수께 보내어 말하되 선생님이여 우리가 아노니 당신은 참되시고 참으로써 하나님의 도를 가르치시며 아무라도 꺼리는 일이 없으시니 이는 사람을 외모로 보지 아니하심이니이다","그래서 자기네 제자들을 헤롯 당원들과 함께 예수께 보내어 이런 질문을 시켰다. \"선생님, 우리는 선생님이 진실하시고 또 누가 두려워서 말을 못하거나 사람의 겉모양만 보고 판단하는 일 없이 진리를 참되게 가르치시는 줄 알고 있습니다.","They sent their disciples to him, with the Herodians, saying, “Teacher, we know that you are a truthful man and that you teach the way of God in accordance with the truth. And you are not concerned with anyone’s opinion, for you do not regard a person’s status.","And they sent out unto him their disciples with the Herodians, saying, Master, we know that thou art true, and teachest the way of God in truth, neither carest thou for any man: for thou regardest not the person of men.","They sent their disciples to him along with the Herodians. \"Teacher,\" they said, \"we know you are a man of integrity and that you teach the way of God in accordance with the truth. You aren't swayed by men, because you pay no attention to who they are.","Et mittunt ei discipulos suos cum herodianis dicentes:  “Magister, scimus quia verax es et viam Dei in veritate doces, et non est tibi cura de aliquo; non enim respicis personam hominum.","וישלחו אליו את תלמידיהם עם ההורדוסיים לאמר רבי ידענו כי איש אמת אתה ותורה באמת את דרך אלהים ולא תגור מפני איש כי אינך מכיר פני אדם׃"],["47","22","17","그러니 스승님은 어떻게 생각하시는지 말씀해 주십시오. 황제에게 세금을 내는 것이 합당합니까, 합당하지 않습니까?”","그래서 선생님의 의견을 듣고자 합니다. 카이사르에게 세금을 바치는 것이 옳습니까? 옳지 않습니까?\"","그러면 당신의 생각에는 어떠한지 우리에게 이르소서 가이사에게 세금을 바치는 것이 옳으니이까 옳지 아니하니이까 하니","그러면 당신의 생각에는 어떠한지 우리에게 이르소서 가이사에게 세를 바치는 것이 가하니이까 불가하니이까 한대","이제 우리에게 가르쳐 주십시오. 로마 정부에 세금을 바치는 것이 옳습니까? 옳지 않습니까?\"","Tell us, then, what is your opinion: Is it lawful to pay the census tax to Caesar or not?”","Tell us therefore, What thinkest thou? Is it lawful to give tribute unto Caesar, or not?","Tell us then, what is your opinion? Is it right to pay taxes to Caesar or not?\"","Dic ergo nobis quid tibi videatur: Licet censum dare Caesari an non? “.","לכן הגידה נא לנו את דעתך הנכון לנו לתת מס אל הקיסר אם לא׃"],["47","22","18","예수님께서는 그들의 악의를 아시고 말씀하셨다. “위선자들아, 너희는 어찌하여 나를 시험하느냐?","예수께서 그들의 간악한 속셈을 아시고 \"이 위선자들아, 어찌하여 나의 속을 떠보느냐?","예수께서 그들의 악함을 아시고 이르시되 외식하는 자들아 어찌하여 나를 시험하느냐","예수께서 저희의 악함을 아시고 가라사대 외식하는 자들아 어찌하여 나를 시험하느냐","예수께서는 그들의 간교한 생각을 아시고 큰소리로 말씀하셨다. \"이 위선자들아, 어찌하여 나를 시험하느냐?","Knowing their malice, Jesus said, “Why are you testing me, you hypocrites?","But Jesus perceived their wickedness, and said, Why tempt ye me, ye hypocrites?","But Jesus, knowing their evil intent, said, \"You hypocrites, why are you trying to trap me?","Cognita autem Iesus nequitia eorum, ait:  “Quid me tentatis, hypocritae?","וישוע ידע את רשעתם ויאמר החנפים מה תנסוני׃"],["47","22","19","세금으로 내는 돈을 나에게 보여라.” 그들이 데나리온 한 닢을 가져오자","세금으로 바치는 돈을 나에게 보여라.\" 하셨다. 그들이 데나리온 한 닢을 가져오자","세금 낼 돈을 내게 보이라 하시니 데나리온 하나를 가져왔거늘","셋돈을 내게 보이라 하시니 1)데나리온 하나를 가져왔거늘 은전의 명칭","세금으로 내는 돈을 내게 보여라.\" 그들이 데나리온 한닢을 가져다가 보여 드리자","Show me the coin that pays the census tax.” Then they handed him the Roman coin.","Shew me the tribute money. And they brought unto him a penny.","Show me the coin used for paying the tax.\" They brought him a denarius,","Ostendite mihi nomisma census “. At illi obtulerunt ei denarium.","הראוני את מטבע המס ויביאו לו דינר׃"],["47","22","20","예수님께서, “이 초상과 글자가 누구의 것이냐?” 하고 물으셨다.","\"이 초상과 글자는 누구의 것이냐?\" 하고 물으셨다.","예수께서 말씀하시되 이 형상과 이 글이 누구의 것이냐","예수께서 말씀하시되 이 형상과 이 글이 뉘 것이냐","\"이 초상과 글자는 누구의 것이냐?\" 하고 예수께서 물으셨다.","He said to them, “Whose image is this and whose inscription?”","And he saith unto them, Whose is this image and superscription?","and he asked them, \"Whose portrait is this? And whose inscription?\"","Et ait illis:  “Cuius est imago haec et suprascriptio? “.","ויאמר אליהם של מי הצורה הזאת והמכתב אשר עליו׃"],["47","22","21","그들이 “황제의 것입니다.” 하고 대답하였다. 그때에 예수님께서 그들에게 이르셨다. “황제의 것은 황제에게 돌려주고, 하느님의 것은 하느님께 돌려 드려라.”","\"카이사르의 것입니다.\" 그들이 이렇게 대답하자 \"그러면 카이사르의 것은 카이사르에게 돌리고 하느님의 것은 하느님께 돌려라.\" 하고 말씀하셨다.","이르되 가이사의 것이니이다 이에 이르시되 그런즉 가이사의 것은 가이사에게, 하나님의 것은 하나님께 바치라 하시니","가로되 가이사의 것이니이다 이에 가라사대 그런즉 가이사의 것은 가이사에게, 하나님의 것은 하나님께 바치라 하시니","\"가이사의 것입니다\" 하고 그들이 대답하자, 예수께서 말씀하셨다. \"그러면 가이사의 것은 가이사에게, 하나님의 것은 하나님께 바쳐라.\"","They replied, “Caesar’s.” At that he said to them, “Then repay to Caesar what belongs to Caesar and to God what belongs to God.”","They say unto him, Caesar's. Then saith he unto them, Render therefore unto Caesar the things which are Caesar's; and unto God the things that are God's.","\"Caesar's,\" they replied. Then he said to them, \"Give to Caesar what is Caesar's, and to God what is God's.\"","Dicunt ei:  “Caesaris “. Tunc ait illis:  “Reddite ergo, quae sunt Caesaris, Caesari et, quae sunt Dei, Deo “.","ויאמרו אליו של הקיסר ויאמר אליהם לכן תנו לקיסר את אשר לקיסר ולאלהים את אשר לאלהים׃"],["47","22","22","그들은 이 말씀을 듣고 경탄하면서 예수님을 두고 물러갔다.","그들은 이 말씀을 듣고 경탄하면서 예수를 떠나갔다.","그들이 이 말씀을 듣고 놀랍게 여겨 예수를 떠나가니라","저희가 이 말씀을 듣고 기이히 여겨 예수를 떠나가니라","그들은 이 말씀을 듣고 놀라 당황하면서 떠났다.","When they heard this they were amazed, and leaving him they went away.","When they had heard these words, they marvelled, and left him, and went their way.","When they heard this, they were amazed. So they left him and went away.","Et audientes mirati sunt et, relicto eo, abierunt.","וכשמעם את זאת תמהו ויעזבהו וילכו להם׃"],["47","22","23","그날, 부활이 없다고 주장하는 사두가이들이 예수님께 다가와 물었다.","그 날 부활이 없다고 주장하는 사두가이파 사람들이 예수께 와서 물었다.","부활이 없다 하는 사두개인들이 그 날 예수께 와서 물어 이르되","부활이 없다 하는 사두개인들이 그 날에 예수께 와서 물어 가로되","같은 날에 사두개파 사람 몇이 예수께 왔다. 사두개파 사람들은 사람이 죽은 후에 부활하는 일은 있을 수 없다고 주장하는 사람들이었다. 그들이 예수께 물었다.","On that day Sadducees approached him, saying that there is no resurrection. They put this question to him,","The same day came to him the Sadducees, which say that there is no resurrection, and asked him,","That same day the Sadducees, who say there is no resurrection, came to him with a question.","In illo die accesserunt ad eum sadducaei, qui dicunt non esse resurrectionem, et interrogaverunt eum","ביום ההוא נגשו אליו צדוקים האמרים כי אין תחית המתים וישאלו אתו לאמר׃"],["47","22","24","“스승님, 모세는 ‘어떤 사람이 자식 없이 죽으면, 그의 형제가 죽은 이의 아내와 혼인하여 그의 후사를 일으켜 주어야 한다.’고 하였습니다.","\"선생님, 모세가 정해 준 법에는 '1)어떤 사람이 자녀가 없이 죽으면 그 동생이 형수와 결혼하여 자식을 낳아 형의 대를 이어야 한다.' 하였습니다. 신명 25:5.","선생님이여 모세가 일렀으되 ㄱ)사람이 만일 자식이 없이 죽으면 그 동생이 그 아내에게 장가 들어 형을 위하여 상속자를 세울지니라 하였나이다","선생님이여 모세가 일렀으되 ㄱ)사람이 만일 자식이 없이 죽으면 그 동생이 그 아내에게 장가들어 형을 위하여 후사를 세울찌니라 하였나이다 신 25:5","\"선생님, 모세는 ㄱ) 만일 어떤 사람이 자녀가 없이 죽으면 그 동생이 그 형수와 결혼하여 죽은 사람의 재산을 상속할 아들을 낳아 주어야 한다고 하였습니다. (ㄱ. 신25:5)","saying, “Teacher, Moses said, ‘If a man dies without children, his brother shall marry his wife and raise up descendants for his brother.’","Saying, Master, Moses said, If a man die, having no children, his brother shall marry his wife, and raise up seed unto his brother.","\"Teacher,\" they said, \"Moses told us that if a man dies without having children, his brother must marry the widow and have children for him.","dicentes:  “Magister, Moyses dixit, si quis mortuus fuerit non habens filios, ut ducat frater eius uxorem illius et suscitet semen fratri suo.","רבי הן משה אמר איש כי ימות ובנים אין לו אחיו ייבם את אשתו והקים זרע לאחיו׃"],["47","22","25","그런데 저희 가운데 일곱 형제가 있었습니다. 맏이가 혼인하여 살다가 죽었는데, 후사가 없어서 아내를 동생에게 남겨 놓았습니다.","그런데 우리 이웃에 칠 형제가 살고 있었습니다. 첫째가 결혼을 하고 살다가 자식 없이 죽어서 그 동생이 형수와 살게 되었는데","우리 중에 칠 형제가 있었는데 맏이가 장가 들었다가 죽어 상속자가 없으므로 그 아내를 그 동생에게 물려 주고","우리 중에 칠 형제가 있었는데 맏이 장가 들었다가 죽어 후사가 없으므로 그의 아내를 그 동생에게 끼쳐두고","그런데 우리 이웃에 칠 형제가 살고 있었습니다. 그들 가운데 첫째가 결혼해 살다가 죽었는데 아들이 없었습니다. 그래서 이 형수는 둘째와 결혼하였습니다.","Now there were seven brothers among us. The first married and died and, having no descendants, left his wife to his brother.","Now there were with us seven brethren: and the first, when he had married a wife, deceased, and, having no issue, left his wife unto his brother:","Now there were seven brothers among us. The first one married and died, and since he had no children, he left his wife to his brother.","Erant autem apud nos septem fratres: et primus, uxore ducta, defunctus est et non habens semen reliquit uxorem suam fratri suo;","ואתנו היו שבעה אחים והראשון נשא אשה וימת וזרע אין לו ויעזב את אשתו לאחיו׃"],["47","22","26","둘째도 셋째도 그러하였고 일곱째까지 그러하였습니다.","둘째도, 셋째도 그렇게 하여 일곱째까지 다 그렇게 하였습니다.","그 둘째와 셋째로 일곱째까지 그렇게 하다가","그 둘째와 세째로 일곱째까지 그렇게 하다가","이 둘째도 아들이 없이 죽었고 그 여자는 다음 동생과 결혼을 하여 차례로 일곱째 동생까지 내려갔습니다.","The same happened with the second and the third, through all seven.","Likewise the second also, and the third, unto the seventh.","The same thing happened to the second and third brother, right on down to the seventh.","similiter secundus et tertius usque ad septimum.","וכמו כן גם השני וכן גם השלישי עד השבעה׃"],["47","22","27","맨 나중에는 그 부인도 죽었습니다.","그들이 다 죽은 뒤에 그 여자도 죽었습니다.","최후에 그 여자도 죽었나이다","최후에 그 여자도 죽었나이다","그런 후에 그 여자도 죽었습니다.","Finally the woman died.","And last of all the woman died also.","Finally, the woman died.","Novissime autem omnium mulier defuncta est.","ואחרי כלם מתה גם האשה׃"],["47","22","28","그러면 부활 때에 그 여자는 그 일곱 가운데 누구의 아내가 되겠습니까? 그들이 다 그 여자를 아내로 맞아들였으니 말입니다.”","칠 형제가 모두 그 여자와 살았으니 부활 때에 그 여자는 누구의 아내가 되겠습니까?\"","그런즉 그들이 다 그를 취하였으니 부활 때에 일곱 중의 누구의 아내가 되리이까","그런즉 저희가 다 그를 취하였으니 부활 때에 일곱 중에 뉘 아내가 되리이까","이 여자가 칠 형제를 모두 자기 남편으로 삼았으니 부활 때 이 여자는 칠 형제 중 누구의 아내가 되겠습니까?\"","Now at the resurrection, of the seven, whose wife will she be? For they all had been married to her.”","Therefore in the resurrection whose wife shall she be of the seven? for they all had her.","Now then, at the resurrection, whose wife will she be of the seven, since all of them were married to her?\"","In resurrectione ergo cuius erit de septem uxor? Omnes enim habuerunt eam “.","ועתה בתחית המתים למי מן השבעה תהיה לאשה כי לכלם היתה׃"],["47","22","29","예수님께서 그들에게 대답하셨다. “너희가 성경도 모르고 하느님의 능력도 모르니까 그렇게 잘못 생각하는 것이다.","예수께서 이렇게 대답하셨다. \"너희는 성서도 모르고 하느님의 권능도 모르니까 그런 잘못된 생각을 하는 것이다.","예수께서 대답하여 이르시되 너희가 성경도, 하나님의 능력도 알지 못하는 고로 오해하였도다","예수께서 대답하여 가라사대 너희가 성경도, 하나님의 능력도 알지 못하는고로 오해하였도다","예수께서 대답하셨다. \"너희는 성경도 모르고 하나님의 능력도 모르기 때문에 잘못 생각하고 있구나.","Jesus said to them in reply, “You are misled because you do not know the scriptures or the power of God.","Jesus answered and said unto them, Ye do err, not knowing the scriptures, nor the power of God.","Jesus replied, \"You are in error because you do not know the Scriptures or the power of God.","Respondens autem Iesus ait illis:  “Erratis nescientes Scripturas neque virtutem Dei;","ויען ישוע ויאמר להם טעים אתם באשר אינכם יודעים את הכתובים וגם את גבורת האלהים׃"],["47","22","30","부활 때에는 장가드는 일도 시집가는 일도 없이 하늘에 있는 천사들과 같아진다.","부활한 다음에는 장가드는 일도, 시집가는 일도 없이 하늘에 있는 천사들처럼 된다.","부활 때에는 장가도 아니 가고 시집도 아니 가고 하늘에 있는 천사들과 같으니라","부활 때에는 장가도 아니가고 시집도 아니가고 하늘에 있는 천사들과 같으니라","부활한 다음에는 결혼을 하지 않고 하늘에 있는 천사들처럼 된다.","At the resurrection they neither marry nor are given in marriage but are like the angels in heaven.","For in the resurrection they neither marry, nor are given in marriage, but are as the angels of God in heaven.","At the resurrection people will neither marry nor be given in marriage; they will be like the angels in heaven.","in resurrectione enim neque nubent neque nubentur, sed sunt sicut angeli in caelo.","כי בתחית המתים לא ישאו נשים ולא תנשאנה כי אם כמלאכי אלהים בשמים יהיו׃"],["47","22","31","그리고 죽은 이들의 부활에 관해서는 하느님께서 너희에게 하신 말씀을 읽어 보지 않았느냐?","죽은 사람의 부활에 관하여 하느님께서 너희에게 하신 말씀을 아직 읽어본 일이 없느냐?","죽은 자의 부활을 논할진대 하나님이 너희에게 말씀하신 바","죽은 자의 부활을 의논할찐대 하나님이 너희에게 말씀하신바","죽은 자의 부활에 대한 것을 성경에서 읽어 본 일이 없느냐? 하나님께서 ㄱ) 나는 아브라함의 하나님이요, 이삭의 하나님이요, 야곱의 하나님이다\"라고 말씀하시지 않았느냐? 이 말씀은 하나님이 죽은 자들의 하나님이 아니라 살아 있는 자들의 하나님이라는 뜻이다.\" (ㄱ. 출3:6)","And concerning the resurrection of the dead, have you not read what was said to you by God,","But as touching the resurrection of the dead, have ye not read that which was spoken unto you by God, saying,","But about the resurrection of the dead--have you not read what God said to you,","De resurrectione autem mortuorum non legistis, quod dictum est vobis a Deo dicente:","ועל דבר תחית המתים הלא קראתם את הנאמר לכם מפי האלהים לאמר׃"],["47","22","32","‘나는 아브라함의 하느님, 이사악의 하느님, 야곱의 하느님이다.’ 하고 말씀하셨다. 그분께서는 죽은 이들의 하느님이 아니라 산 이들의 하느님이시다.”","2)나는 아브라함의 하느님이요, 이사악의 하느님이요, 야곱의 하느님이다.' 하시지 않았느냐? 이 말씀은 하느님께서 죽은 이들의 하느님이 아니라 살아 있는 이들의 하느님이라는 뜻이다.\" 출애 3:6.","ㄴ)나는 아브라함의 하나님이요 이삭의 하나님이요 야곱의 하나님이로라 하신 것을 읽어 보지 못하였느냐 하나님은 죽은 자의 하나님이 아니요 살아 있는 자의 하나님이시니라 하시니","ㄴ)나는 아브라함의 하나님이요 이삭의 하나님이요 야곱의 하나님이로라 하신 것을 읽어 보지 못하였느냐 하나님은 죽은 자의 하나님이 아니요 산 자의 하나님이시니라 하시니 출 3:6","(31절에 포함되어 있음)","‘I am the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob’? He is not the God of the dead but of the living.”","I am the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob? God is not the God of the dead, but of the living.","'I am the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob'? He is not the God of the dead but of the living.\"","Ego sum Deus Abraham et Deus Isaac et Deus Iacob? Non est Deus mortuorum sed viventium “.","אנכי אלהי אברהם ואלהי יצחק ואלהי יעקב והוא איננו אלהי המתים כי אם אלהי החיים׃"],["47","22","33","군중은 이 말씀을 듣고 그분의 가르침에 감탄하였다.","이 말씀을 들은 군중은 예수의 가르침에 탄복하여 마지않았다.","무리가 듣고 그의 가르치심에 놀라더라","무리가 듣고 그의 가르치심에 놀라더라","군중은 예수의 이 말씀을 듣고 깊은 감명을 받았다.","When the crowds heard this, they were astonished at his teaching.","And when the multitude heard this, they were astonished at his doctrine.","When the crowds heard this, they were astonished at his teaching.","Et audientes turbae mirabantur in doctrina eius.","וישמע המון העם וישתומממו על תורתו׃"],["47","22","34","예수님께서 사두가이들의 말문을 막아 버리셨다는 소식을 듣고 바리사이들이 한데 모였다.","예수께서 사두가이파 사람들의 말문을 막아버리셨다는 소문을 듣고 바리사이파 사람들이 몰려왔다.","예수께서 사두개인들로 대답할 수 없게 하셨다 함을 바리새인들이 듣고 모였는데","예수께서 사두개인들로 대답할 수 없게 하셨다 함을 바리새인들이 듣고 모였는데","사두개파 사람들이 예수의 대답에 말문이 막혔다는 소문을 듣고 바리새파 사람들이 모였다.","When the Pharisees heard that he had silenced the Sadducees, they gathered together,","But when the Pharisees had heard that he had put the Sadducees to silence, they were gathered together.","Hearing that Jesus had silenced the Sadducees, the Pharisees got together.","Pharisaei autem audientes quod silentium imposuisset sadducaeis, convenerunt in unum.","והפרושים כשמעם כי סכר פי הצדוקים ויועדו יחדו׃"],["47","22","35","그들 가운데 율법 교사 한 사람이 예수님을 시험하려고 물었다.","그들 중 한 율법교사가 예수의 속을 떠보려고","그 중의 한 율법사가 예수를 시험하여 묻되","그 중에 한 율법사가 예수를 시험하여 묻되","그들 가운데 한 율법교사가 예수를 시험하려고 물었다.","and one of them [a scholar of the law] tested him by asking,","Then one of them, which was a lawyer, asked him a question, tempting him, and saying,","One of them, an expert in the law, tested him with this question:","Et interrogavit unus ex eis legis doctor tentans eum:","ואחד מהם מבין בתורה שאל אתו לנסותו לאמר׃"],["47","22","36","“스승님, 율법에서 가장 큰 계명은 무엇입니까?”","\"선생님, 율법서에서 어느 계명이 가장 큰 계명입니까?\" 하고 물었다.","선생님 율법 중에서 어느 계명이 크니이까","선생님이여 율법 중에 어느 계명이 크니이까","\"선생님, 모세의 율법 중에서 어느 것이 가장 큰 계명입니까?\"","“Teacher, which commandment in the law is the greatest?”","Master, which is the great commandment in the law?","\"Teacher, which is the greatest commandment in the Law?\"","Magister, quod est mandatum magnum in Lege?.","רבי אי זו מצוה גדולה היא בתורה׃"],["47","22","37","예수님께서 그에게 말씀하셨다. “‘네 마음을 다하고 네 목숨을 다하고 네 정신을 다하여 주 너의 하느님을 사랑해야 한다.’","예수께서 이렇게 대답하셨다. \"'3)네 마음을 다하고 목숨을 다하고 뜻을 다하여 주님이신 너희 하느님을 사랑하여라.' 신명 6:5.","예수께서 이르시되 ㄷ)네 마음을 다하고 목숨을 다하고 뜻을 다하여 주 너의 하나님을 사랑하라 하셨으니","예수께서 가라사대 ㄷ)네 마음을 다하고 목숨을 다하고 뜻을 다하여 주 너의 하나님을 사랑하라 하셨으니 신 6:5","예수께서 대답하셨다. ㄴ) \"네 마음을 다하고, 목숨을 다하고 생각을 다하여 주 너의 하나님을 사랑하라.\" (ㄴ. 신6:5)","He said to him, “You shall love the Lord, your God, with all your heart, with all your soul, and with all your mind.","Jesus said unto him, Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind.","Jesus replied: \"'Love the Lord your God with all your heart and with all your soul and with all your mind.'","Ait autem illi:  “Diliges Dominum Deum tuum in toto corde tuo et in tota anima tua et in tota mente tua:","ויאמר ישוע אליו ואהבת את יהוה אלהיך בכל לבבך ובכל נפשך ובכל מדעך׃"],["47","22","38","이것이 가장 크고 첫째가는 계명이다.","이것이 가장 크고 첫째 가는 계명이고,","이것이 크고 첫째 되는 계명이요","이것이 크고 첫째 되는 계명이요","이것이 가장 크고 첫째 가는 계명이다.","This is the greatest and the first commandment.","This is the first and great commandment.","This is the first and greatest commandment.","hoc est magnum et primum mandatum.","זאת היא המצוה הגדולה והראשונה׃"],["47","22","39","둘째도 이와 같다. ‘네 이웃을 너 자신처럼 사랑해야 한다.’는 것이다.","4)네 이웃을 네 몸같이 사랑하여라.' 한 둘째 계명도 이에 못지않게 중요하다. 레위 19:18.","둘째도 그와 같으니 ㄹ)네 이웃을 네 자신 같이 사랑하라 하셨으니","둘째는 그와 같으니 ㄹ)네 이웃을 네 몸과 같이 사랑하라 하셨으니 레 19:18","그러나 ㄷ) \"네 이웃을 네 몸과 같이 사랑하라\"는 둘째 가는 계명도 이에 못지않게 중요하다. (ㄷ. 레19:18)","The second is like it: You shall love your neighbor as yourself.","And the second is like unto it, Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself.","And the second is like it: 'Love your neighbor as yourself.'","Secundum autem simile est huic: Diliges proximum tuum sicut teipsum.","והשנית דומה לה ואהבת לרעך כמוך׃"],["47","22","40","온 율법과 예언서의 정신이 이 두 계명에 달려 있다.”","이 두 계명이 모든 율법과 예언서의 골자이다.\"","이 두 계명이 온 율법과 선지자의 강령이니라","이 두 계명이 온 율법과 선지자의 강령이니라","모든 다른 계명과 예언자들의 요구는 이 두 계명으로 요약될 수 있다.","The whole law and the prophets depend on these two commandments.”","On these two commandments hang all the law and the prophets.","All the Law and the Prophets hang on these two commandments.\"","In his duobus mandatis universa Lex pendet et Prophetae “.","בשתי המצות האלה כל התורה תלויה וגם הנביאים׃"],["47","22","41","바리사이들이 모여들자 예수님께서 그들에게 물으셨다.","예수께서 바리사이파 사람들이 모여 있는 것을 보시고","바리새인들이 모였을 때에 예수께서 그들에게 물으시되","바리새인들이 모였을 때에 예수께서 그들에게 물으시되","예수께서 바리새파 사람들이 둘러앉아 있는 자리에서 질문을 던지셨다.","While the Pharisees were gathered together, Jesus questioned them,","While the Pharisees were gathered together, Jesus asked them,","While the Pharisees were gathered together, Jesus asked them,","Congregatis autem pharisaeis, interrogavit eos Iesus","ויהי בהקהל הפרושים וישאלם ישוע לאמר׃"],["47","22","42","“너희는 메시아를 어떻게 생각하느냐? 그는 누구의 자손이냐?” 그들이 “다윗의 자손입니다.” 하고 대답하자,","\"너희는 그리스도를 어떻게 생각하느냐? 그는 누구의 자손이겠느냐?\" 하고 물으셨다. 그들이 \"다윗의 자손입니다.\" 하고 대답하자","너희는 그리스도에 대하여 어떻게 생각하느냐 누구의 자손이냐 대답하되 다윗의 자손이니이다","너희는 그리스도에 대하여 어떻게 생각하느냐 뉘 자손이냐 대답하되 다윗의 자손이니이다","\"그리스도를 어떻게 생각하느냐? 그가 누구의 자손이냐?\"하고 물으셨다. 그들이 \"다윗의 자손입니다\" 하고 대답하자","saying, “What is your opinion about the Messiah? Whose son is he?” They replied, “David’s.”","Saying, What think ye of Christ? whose son is he? They say unto him, The son of David.","\"What do you think about the Christ? Whose son is he?\" \"The son of David,\" they replied.","dicens:  “Quid vobis videtur de Christo? Cuius filius est? “. Dicunt ei:  “David “.","מה דעתכם על המשיח בן מי הוא ויאמרו אליו בן דוד׃"],["47","22","43","예수님께서 그들에게 말씀하셨다. “그러면 다윗이 성령의 도움으로 그를 주님이라고 부른 것은 어찌 된 일이냐?","예수께서 다시 물으셨다. \"그러면 다윗이 성령의 감화를 받아 그를 주님이라고 부른 것은 어떻게 된 일이냐?","이르시되 그러면 다윗이 성령에 감동되어 어찌 그리스도를 주라 칭하여 말하되","가라사대 그러면 다윗이 성령에 감동하여 어찌 그리스도를 주라 칭하여 말하되","예수께서 다시 물으셨다. \"그렇다면 다윗이 성령의 감화로 그리스도를 \"주님\"이라고 부른 것은 어떻게 된 일인가? 다윗은 이렇게 말하였다.","He said to them, “How, then, does David, inspired by the Spirit, call him ‘lord,’ saying:","He saith unto them, How then doth David in spirit call him Lord, saying,","He said to them, \"How is it then that David, speaking by the Spirit, calls him 'Lord'? For he says,","Ait illis:  “Quomodo ergo David in Spiritu vocat eum Dominum dicens:","ויאמר אליהם ואיך קרא לו דוד ברוח אדון באמרו׃"],["47","22","44","‘주님께서 내 주님께 말씀하셨다. ′내 오른쪽에 앉아라, 내가 너의 원수들을 네 발아래 잡아 놓을 때까지.′’","5)주 하느님께서 내 주님께 이르신 말씀, 내가 네 원수를 네 발 아래 굴복시킬 때까지 너는 내 오른편에 앉아 있어라.' 하고 다윗이 읊지 않았느냐? 시편 110:1.","ㅁ)주께서 내 주께 이르시되 내가 네 원수를 네 발 아래에 둘 때까지 내 우편에 앉아 있으라 하셨도다 하였느냐","ㅁ)주께서 내 주께 이르시되 내가 네 원수를 네 발 아래 둘 때까지 내 우편에 앉았으라 하셨도다 하였느냐 시 110:1","ㄹ) \"여호와께서 나의 주 임금에게 이르신 말씀이라. 여기 내 오른쪽에 앉아라. 내가 네 원수들을 네 발 아래에 둘 때까지 앉아 있어라.\" (ㄹ. 시110:1)","‘The Lord said to my lord, “Sit at my right hand until I place your enemies under your feet”’?","The LORD said unto my Lord, Sit thou on my right hand, till I make thine enemies thy footstool?","\"'The Lord said to my Lord: \"Sit at my right hand until I put your enemies under your feet.\"'","Dixit Dominus Domino meo: Sede a dextris meis, donec ponam inimicos tuos sub pedibus tuis?","נאם יהוה לאדני שב לימיני עד אשית איביך הדם לרגליך׃"],["47","22","45","이렇게 다윗이 메시아를 주님이라고 부르는데, 메시아가 어떻게 다윗의 자손이 되느냐?”","다윗이 그리스도를 주님이라고 불렀는데 그리스도가 어떻게 다윗의 자손이 되겠느냐?\"","다윗이 그리스도를 주라 칭하였은즉 어찌 그의 자손이 되겠느냐 하시니","다윗이 그리스도를 주라 칭하였은즉 어찌 그의 자손이 되겠느냐 하시니","다윗이 그리스도를 주님이라고 불렀는데 그리스도가 어찌 그의 자손이 되겠느냐?\"","If David calls him ‘lord,’ how can he be his son?”","If David then call him Lord, how is he his son?","If then David calls him 'Lord,' how can he be his son?\"","Si ergo David vocat eum Dominum, quomodo filius eius est? “.","ועתה אם דוד קרא לו אדון איך הוא בנו׃"],["47","22","46","그들은 한마디도 대답하지 못하였다. 그리고 그날부터 예수님께 감히 묻는 사람도 더 이상 없었다.","그들은 한마디도 대답하지 못하였다. 그리고 그 날부터는 감히 예수께 질문하는 사람이 없었다.","한 마디도 능히 대답하는 자가 없고 그 날부터 감히 그에게 묻는 자도 없더라","한 말도 능히 대답하는 자가 없고 그 날부터 감히 그에게 묻는 자도 없더라","그들은 아무 대답도 못하였다. 그리고 그후부터는 아무도 예수께 더 이상 질문하는 사람이 없었다.","No one was able to answer him a word, nor from that day on did anyone dare to ask him any more questions.","And no man was able to answer him a word, neither durst any man from that day forth ask him any more questions.","No one could say a word in reply, and from that day on no one dared to ask him any more questions.","Et nemo poterat respondere ei verbum, neque ausus fuit quisquam ex illa die eum amplius interrogare.","ולא יכל איש לענות אתו דבר ולא ערב עוד איש את לבו מן היום ההוא לשאל אותו׃"],["47","23","1","그때에 예수님께서 군중과 제자들에게 말씀하셨다.","그 때에 예수께서 군중과 제자들에게 이렇게 말씀하셨다.","이에 예수께서 무리와 제자들에게 말씀하여 이르시되","이에 예수께서 무리와 제자들에게 말씀하여 가라사대","그때에 예수께서 군중과 제자들에게 말씀하셨다.","Then Jesus spoke to the crowds and to his disciples,","Then spake Jesus to the multitude, and to his disciples,","Then Jesus said to the crowds and to his disciples:","Tunc Iesus locutus est ad turbas et ad discipulos suos","אז ידבר ישוע אל המון העם ואל תלמידיו לאמר׃"],["47","23","2","“율법 학자들과 바리사이들은 모세의 자리에 앉아 있다.","\"율법학자들과 바리사이파 사람들은 모세의 자리를 이어 율법을 가르치고 있다.","서기관들과 바리새인들이 모세의 자리에 앉았으니","서기관들과 바리새인들이 모세의 자리에 앉았으니","\"율법학자들과 바리새파 사람들은 모세의 자리에 앉아서 율법을 가르치고 있다.","saying, “The scribes and the Pharisees have taken their seat on the chair of Moses.","Saying The scribes and the Pharisees sit in Moses' seat:","\"The teachers of the law and the Pharisees sit in Moses' seat.","dicens:  “Super cathedram Moysis sederunt scribae et pharisaei.","על כסא משה ישבו הסופרים והפרושים׃"],["47","23","3","그러니 그들이 너희에게 말하는 것은 다 실행하고 지켜라. 그러나 그들의 행실은 따라 하지 마라. 그들은 말만 하고 실행하지는 않는다.","그러니 그들이 말하는 것은 다 실행하고 지켜라. 그러나 그들의 행실은 본받지 마라. 그들은 말만 하고 실행하지는 않는다.","그러므로 무엇이든지 그들이 말하는 바는 행하고 지키되 그들이 하는 행위는 본받지 말라 그들은 말만 하고 행하지 아니하며","그러므로 무엇이든지 저희의 말하는 바는 행하고 지키되 저희의 하는 행위는 본받지 말라 저희는 말만 하고 행치 아니하며","그러니 그들이 말하는 것은 다 지켜라. 그러나 그들의 행실은 본받지 말라. 그들은 말뿐이고 실행은 하지 않는 사람들이다.","Therefore, do and observe all things whatsoever they tell you, but do not follow their example. For they preach but they do not practice.","All therefore whatsoever they bid you observe, that observe and do; but do not ye after their works: for they say, and do not.","So you must obey them and do everything they tell you. But do not do what they do, for they do not practice what they preach.","Omnia ergo, quaecumque dixerint vobis, facite et servate; secundum opera vero eorum nolite facere: dicunt enim et non faciunt.","לכן כל אשר יאמרו לכם תשמרו לעשות אך כמעשיהם לא תעשו כי אמרים הם ואינם עשים׃"],["47","23","4","또 그들은 무겁고 힘겨운 짐을 묶어 다른 사람들 어깨에 올려놓고, 자기들은 그것을 나르는 일에 손가락 하나 까딱하려고 하지 않는다.","그들은 무거운 짐을 꾸려 남의 어깨에 메워주고 자기들은 손가락 하나 까딱하려 하지 않는다.","또 무거운 짐을 묶어 사람의 어깨에 지우되 자기는 이것을 한 손가락으로도 움직이려 하지 아니하며","또 무거운 짐을 묶어 사람의 어깨에 지우되 자기는 이것을 한 손가락으로도 움직이려 하지 아니하며","그들은 자기들도 할 수 없는 어려운 요구를 너희에게 강요하지만 자기들은 그것을 지키려고 하지 않는다.","They tie up heavy burdens [hard to carry] and lay them on people’s shoulders, but they will not lift a finger to move them.","For they bind heavy burdens and grievous to be borne, and lay them on men's shoulders; but they themselves will not move them with one of their fingers.","They tie up heavy loads and put them on men's shoulders, but they themselves are not willing to lift a finger to move them.","Alligant autem onera gravia et importabilia et imponunt in umeros hominum, ipsi autem digito suo nolunt ea movere.","כי אסרים משאת כבדים ועמסים על שכם האנשים ולא יאבו להניעם אף באצבעם׃"],["47","23","5","그들이 하는 일이란 모두 다른 사람들에게 보이기 위한 것이다. 그래서 성구갑을 넓게 만들고 옷자락 술을 길게 늘인다.","그들이 하는 일은 모두 남에게 보이기 위한 것이다. 그래서 이마나 팔에 성구 넣는 갑을 크게 만들어 매달고 다니며 옷단에는 기다란 술을 달고 다닌다.","그들의 모든 행위를 사람에게 보이고자 하나니 곧 그 경문 띠를 넓게 하며 옷술을 길게 하고","저희 모든 행위를 사람에게 보이고자 하여 하나니 곧 그 차는 경문을 넓게 하며 옷술을 크게 하고","그들은 무슨 일이든지 남에게 보이기 위해서 산다. 그들은 기도할 때 이마나 팔에 매다는 성구함을 크게 만들어 달고 옷단에는 기다란 술을 달고 다니며 거룩하게 꾸민다.","All their works are performed to be seen. They widen their phylacteries and lengthen their tassels.","But all their works they do for to be seen of men: they make broad their phylacteries, and enlarge the borders of their garments,","\"Everything they do is done for men to see: They make their phylacteries wide and the tassels on their garments long;","Omnia vero opera sua faciunt, ut videantur ab hominibus: dilatant enim phylacteria sua et magnificant fimbrias,","ועשים את כל מעשיהם להראות בהם לבני אדם כי מרחיבים את תפליהם ומגדילים את ציציותיהם׃"],["47","23","6","잔칫집에서는 윗자리를, 회당에서는 높은 자리를 좋아하고,","그리고 잔치에 가면 맨 윗자리에 앉으려 하고 회당에서는 제일 높은 자리를 찾으며","잔치의 윗자리와 회당의 높은 자리와","잔치의 상석과 회당의 상좌와","그리고 잔치에 가면 윗자리에만 앉으려 하고 회당에서는 높은 자리만을 찾는다.","They love places of honor at banquets, seats of honor in synagogues,","And love the uppermost rooms at feasts, and the chief seats in the synagogues,","they love the place of honor at banquets and the most important seats in the synagogues;","amant autem primum recubitum in cenis et primas cathedras in synagogis","ואהבים את הסבת הראש בסעודות ואת מושבי הראש בבתי הכנסיות׃"],["47","23","7","장터에서 인사받기를, 사람들에게 스승이라고 불리기를 좋아한다.","길에 나서면 인사받기를 좋아하고 사람들이 스승이라 불러주기를 바란다.","시장에서 문안 받는 것과 사람에게 랍비라 칭함을 받는 것을 좋아하느니라","시장에서 문안 받는 것과 사람에게 랍비라 칭함을 받는 것을 좋아하느니라","길에 나서면 거드름을 피우며 인사받기를 좋아하고 사람들이 \"랍비\"라거나 스승이라고 불러 주기를 바란다.","greetings in marketplaces, and the salutation ‘Rabbi.’","And greetings in the markets, and to be called of men, Rabbi, Rabbi.","they love to be greeted in the marketplaces and to have men call them 'Rabbi.'","et salutationes in foro et vocari ab hominibus Rabbi.","ואת שאלות שלומם בשוקים ואת אשר יקראו להם בני האדם רבי רבי׃"],["47","23","8","그러나 너희는 스승이라고 불리지 않도록 하여라. 너희의 스승님은 한 분뿐이시고 너희는 모두 형제다.","그러나 너희는 스승 소리를 듣지 마라. 너희의 스승은 오직 한 분뿐이고 너희는 모두 형제들이다.","그러나 너희는 랍비라 칭함을 받지 말라 너희 선생은 하나요 너희는 다 형제니라","그러나 너희는 랍비라 칭함을 받지 말라 너희 선생은 하나이요 너희는 다 형제니라","그러나 너희는 그렇게 불러 주기를 바라지 말라. 하나님만이 너희의 랍비이시고 너희는 모두가 형제이기 때문이다.","As for you, do not be called ‘Rabbi.’ You have but one teacher, and you are all brothers.","But be not ye called Rabbi: for one is your Master, even Christ; and all ye are brethren.","\"But you are not to be called 'Rabbi,' for you have only one Master and you are all brothers.","Vos autem nolite vocari Rabbi; unus enim est Magister vester, omnes autem vos fratres estis.","אולם אתם אל תקראו רבי כי אחד הוא רבכם המשיח ואתם אחים כלכם׃"],["47","23","9","또 이 세상 누구도 아버지라고 부르지 마라. 너희의 아버지는 오직 한 분, 하늘에 계신 그분뿐이시다.","또 이 세상 누구를 보고도 아버지라 부르지 마라. 너희의 아버지는 하늘에 계신 아버지 한 분뿐이시다.","땅에 있는 자를 아버지라 하지 말라 너희의 아버지는 한 분이시니 곧 하늘에 계신 이시니라","땅에 있는 자를 아비라 하지 말라 너희 아버지는 하나이시니 곧 하늘에 계신 자시니라","또 이 세상에 있는 어느 누구를 보고도 \"아버지\"라고 부르지 말라. 그렇게 불러야 할 분은 오직 하늘에 계신 하나님 한 분뿐이시다.","Call no one on earth your father; you have but one Father in heaven.","And call no man your father upon the earth: for one is your Father, which is in heaven.","And do not call anyone on earth 'father,' for you have one Father, and he is in heaven.","Et Patrem nolite vocare vobis super terram, unus enim est Pater vester, caelestis.","ואל תקראו אב לאיש מכם על האדמה כי אחד הוא אביכם אשר בשמים׃"],["47","23","10","그리고 너희는 선생이라고 불리지 않도록 하여라. 너희의 선생님은 그리스도 한 분뿐이시다.","또 너희는 지도자라는 말도 듣지 마라. 너희의 지도자는 그리스도 한 분뿐이시다.","또한 지도자라 칭함을 받지 말라 너희의 지도자는 한 분이시니 곧 그리스도시니라","또한 지도자라 칭함을 받지 말라 너희 지도자는 하나이니 곧 그리스도니라","또 너희는 \"지도자\"라고 불려서도 안 된다. 너희의 지도자는 그리스도 한 분뿐이시다","Do not be called ‘Master’; you have but one master, the Messiah.","Neither be ye called masters: for one is your Master, even Christ.","Nor are you to be called 'teacher,' for you have one Teacher, the Christ.","Nec vocemini Magistri, quia Magister vester unus est, Christus.","גם אל תקראו מנהיגים כי אחד הוא מנהיגכם המשיח׃"],["47","23","11","너희 가운데에서 가장 높은 사람은 너희를 섬기는 사람이 되어야 한다.","너희 중에 으뜸가는 사람은 너희를 섬기는 사람이 되어야 한다.","너희 중에 큰 자는 너희를 섬기는 자가 되어야 하리라","너희 중에 큰 자는 너희를 섬기는 자가 되어야 하리라","너희 중에 가장 낮아져서 남을 섬기는 사람이 가장 위대한 사람이다.","The greatest among you must be your servant.","But he that is greatest among you shall be your servant.","The greatest among you will be your servant.","Qui maior est vestrum, erit minister vester.","והגדול בכם יהי לכם למשרת׃"],["47","23","12","누구든지 자신을 높이는 이는 낮아지고 자신을 낮추는 이는 높아질 것이다.","누구든지 자기를 높이는 사람은 낮아지고 자기를 낮추는 사람은 높아진다.\"","누구든지 자기를 높이는 자는 낮아지고 누구든지 자기를 낮추는 자는 높아지리라","누구든지 자기를 높이는 자는 낮아지고 누구든지 자기를 낮추는 자는 높아지리라","누구든지 자기를 높이는 사람은 낮아지고, 자기를 낮추는 사람은 높임을 받게 될 것이다.","Whoever exalts himself will be humbled; but whoever humbles himself will be exalted.","And whosoever shall exalt himself shall be abased; and he that shall humble himself shall be exalted.","For whoever exalts himself will be humbled, and whoever humbles himself will be exalted.","Qui autem se exaltaverit, humiliabitur; et, qui se humiliaverit, exaltabitur.","כל המרומם את עצמו ישפל והמשפיל את עצמו ירומם׃"],["47","23","13","불행하여라, 너희 위선자 율법 학자들과 바리사이들아! 너희가 사람들 앞에서 하늘 나라의 문을 잠가 버리기 때문이다. 그러고는 자기들도 들어가지 않을 뿐만 아니라, 들어가려는 이들마저 들어가게 놓아두지 않는다.","\"율법학자들과 바리사이파 사람들아, 너희 같은 위선자들은 화를 입을 것이다. 너희는 하늘 나라의 문을 닫아놓고는 사람들을 가로막아 서서 자기도 들어가지 않으면서 들어가려는 사람마저 못 들어가게 한다.\"1)어떤 사본에는 14절에 다음과 같은 말이 있다. \"율법학자들과 바리사이파 사람들아! 너희 같은 위선자들은 화를 받을 것이다. 너희는 과부들의 가산을 몽땅 삼켜버리는가 하면 남에게 보이려고 기도를 길게 늘어놓는다. 이 때문에 너희는 더 엄한 벌을 받을 것이다.\"","화 있을진저 외식하는 서기관들과 바리새인들이여 너희는 천국 문을 사람들 앞에서 닫고 너희도 들어가지 않고 들어가려 하는 자도 들어가지 못하게 하는도다","화 있을찐저 외식하는 서기관들과 바리새인들이여 너희는 천국 문을 사람들 앞에서 닫고 너희도 들어가지 않고 들어가려 하는 자도 들어가지 못하게 하는도다","화가 있으라. 너희 바리새파 사람들과 종교 지도자들아. 이 위선자들아, 너희는 하늘나라의 문을 가로막고 서서 너희 자신도 들어가지 않고 다른 사람들도 못 들어가게 하고 있다.","“Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, you hypocrites. You lock the kingdom of heaven before human beings. You do not enter yourselves, nor do you allow entrance to those trying to enter.","But woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye shut up the kingdom of heaven against men: for ye neither go in yourselves, neither suffer ye them that are entering to go in.","\"Woe to you, teachers of the law and Pharisees, you hypocrites! You shut the kingdom of heaven in men's faces. You yourselves do not enter, nor will you let those enter who are trying to.","Vae autem vobis, scribae et pharisaei hypocritae, quia clauditis regnum caelorum ante homines! Vos enim non intratis nec introeuntes sinitis intrare.","אך אוי לכם הסופרים והפרושים החנפים כי סגרים אתם לפני האדם את מלכות השמים הן אתם לא תבאו בה ואת הבאים לא תניחו לבוא׃"],["47","23","14","불행하여라, 너희 위선자 율법 학자들과 바리사이들아! 너희가 과부들의 가산을 등쳐 먹으면서 남에게 보이려고 기도는 길게 하기 때문이다. 그러므로 너희는 엄한 단죄를 받을 것이다.",null,"(없음)","1)(없음) 어떤 사본에, 14절에 막 12:40과 눅 20:47과 유사한 구절이 있음","ㄱ) 과부들의 집에 가서 그 가산을 몽땅 삼켜 버리고도 길거리에 나가서는 남에게 거룩하게 보이려고 길게 기도하는 이 위선자들아! (ㄱ. 어떤 사본에는 14절이 없다)","(empty)","Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye devour widows' houses, and for a pretence make long prayer: therefore ye shall receive the greater damnation.","(None)",null,"אוי לכם הסופרים והפרושים החנפים כי בלעים אתם את בתי האלמנות ומאריכים בתפלה למראה עין תחת זאת משפט על יתר תקחו׃"],["47","23","15","불행하여라, 너희 위선자 율법 학자들과 바리사이들아! 너희가 개종자 한 사람을 얻으려고 바다와 뭍을 돌아다니다가 한 사람이 생기면, 너희보다 갑절이나 못된 지옥의 자식으로 만들어 버리기 때문이다.","\"율법학자들과 바리사이파 사람들아, 너희 같은 위선자들은 화를 입을 것이다. 너희는 겨우 한 사람을 개종시키려고 바다와 육지를 두루 다니다가 개종시킨 다음에는 그 사람을 너희보다 갑절이나 더 악한 지옥의 자식으로 만들고 있다.\"","화 있을진저 외식하는 서기관들과 바리새인들이여 너희는 교인 한 사람을 얻기 위하여 바다와 육지를 두루 다니다가 생기면 너희보다 배나 더 지옥 자식이 되게 하는도다","화 있을찐저 외식하는 서기관들과 바리새인들이여 너희는 교인 하나를 얻기 위하여 바다와 육지를 두루 다니다가 생기면 너희보다 배나 더 지옥 자식이 되게 하는도다","그렇다. 너희 같은 위선자들은 화를 받을 것이다. 너희는 겨우 한 사람을 개종시키려고 바다와 육지를 두루 다니다가 개종시킨 다음에는 그 사람을 너희보다 배나 더 악한 지옥의 자식으로 만들고 있다.","“Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, you hypocrites. You traverse sea and land to make one convert, and when that happens you make him a child of Gehenna twice as much as yourselves.","Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye compass sea and land to make one proselyte, and when he is made, ye make him twofold more the child of hell than yourselves.","\"Woe to you, teachers of the law and Pharisees, you hypocrites! You travel over land and sea to win a single convert, and when he becomes one, you make him twice as much a son of hell as you are.","Vae vobis, scribae et pharisaei hypocritae, quia circuitis mare et aridam, ut faciatis unum proselytum, et cum fuerit factus, facitis eum filium gehennae duplo quam vos!","אוי לכם הסופרים והפרושים החנפים כי סובבים אתם בים וביבשה למען גיר גר אחד וכי יתגיר תעשו אותו לבן גיהנם כפלים יותר מכם׃"],["47","23","16","불행하여라, 너희 눈먼 인도자들아! ‘성전을 두고 한 맹세는 아무것도 아니지만, 성전의 금을 두고 한 맹세는 지켜야 한다.’고 너희는 말한다.","\"너희 같은 눈먼 인도자들은 화를 입을 것이다. 너희는 '성전을 두고 한 맹세는 지키지 않아도 무방하지만 성전의 황금을 두고 한 맹세는 꼭 지켜야 한다.' 하니,","화 있을진저 눈 먼 인도자여 너희가 말하되 누구든지 성전으로 맹세하면 아무 일 없거니와 성전의 금으로 맹세하면 지킬지라 하는도다","화 있을찐저 소경된 인도자여 너희가 말하되 누구든지 성전으로 맹세하면 아무 일 없거니와 성전의 금으로 맹세하면 지킬찌라 하는도다","눈먼 안내자들아! 너희는 화를 받을 것이다. 너희가 정해 놓은 규칙에 \"하나님의 성전을 두고 한 맹세는 지키지 않아도 그만이지만 성전의 황금을 두고 한 맹세는 반드시 지켜야 한다\"고 하다니","“Woe to you, blind guides, who say, ‘If one swears by the temple, it means nothing, but if one swears by the gold of the temple, one is obligated.’","Woe unto you, ye blind guides, which say, Whosoever shall swear by the temple, it is nothing; but whosoever shall swear by the gold of the temple, he is a debtor!","\"Woe to you, blind guides! You say, 'If anyone swears by the temple, it means nothing; but if anyone swears by the gold of the temple, he is bound by his oath.'","Vae vobis, duces caeci, qui dicitis:  “Quicumque iuraverit per templum, nihil est; quicumque autem iuraverit in auro templi, debet “.","אוי לכם מנהלים עורים האמרים הנשבע בהיכל אין זאת מאומה והנשבע בזהב ההיכל יאשם׃"],["47","23","17","어리석고 눈먼 자들아! 무엇이 더 중요하냐? 금이냐, 아니면 금을 거룩하게 하는 성전이냐?","이 어리석고 눈먼 자들아, 어느 것이 더 중하냐? 황금이냐? 아니면 그 황금을 거룩하게 만드는 성전이냐?","어리석은 맹인들이여 어느 것이 크냐 그 금이냐 그 금을 거룩하게 하는 성전이냐","우맹이요 소경들이여 어느 것이 크뇨 그 금이냐 금을 거룩하게 하는 성전이냐","이 눈멀고 어리석은 자들아! 어느 것이 더 중하냐? 황금이냐? 그렇지 않으면 황금을 거룩하게 하는 성전이냐?","Blind fools, which is greater, the gold, or the temple that made the gold sacred?","Ye fools and blind: for whether is greater, the gold, or the temple that sanctifieth the gold?","You blind fools! Which is greater: the gold, or the temple that makes the gold sacred?","Stulti et caeci! Quid enim maius est: aurum an templum, quod sanctificat aurum?","אתם הכסילים והעורים כי מה הוא הגדול אם הזהב או ההיכל המקדש את הזהב׃"],["47","23","18","너희는 또 ‘제단을 두고 한 맹세는 아무것도 아니지만, 제단 위에 놓인 예물을 두고 한 맹세는 지켜야 한다.’고 말한다.","또 너희는 '제단을 두고 한 맹세는 지키지 않아도 무방하지만 그 제단 위에 있는 제물을 두고 한 맹세는 꼭 지켜야 한다.' 하니,","너희가 또 이르되 누구든지 제단으로 맹세하면 아무 일 없거니와 그 위에 있는 예물로 맹세하면 지킬지라 하는도다","너희가 또 이르되 누구든지 제단으로 맹세하면 아무 일 없거니와 그 위에 있는 예물로 맹세하면 지킬찌라 하는도다","또 너희는 \"제단을 두고 한 맹세는 지키지 않아도 그만이지만 그 제단 위에 있는 제물을 두고 한 맹세는 반드시 지켜야 한다\"고 하다니","And you say, ‘If one swears by the altar, it means nothing, but if one swears by the gift on the altar, one is obligated.’","And, Whosoever shall swear by the altar, it is nothing; but whosoever sweareth by the gift that is upon it, he is guilty.","You also say, 'If anyone swears by the altar, it means nothing; but if anyone swears by the gift on it, he is bound by his oath.'","Et:  “Quicumque iuraverit in altari, nihil est; quicumque autem iuraverit in dono, quod est super illud, debet “.","ואמרתם הנשבע במזבח אין מאומה והנשבע בקרבן אשר עליו יאשם׃"],["47","23","19","눈먼 자들아! 무엇이 더 중요하냐? 예물이냐, 아니면 예물을 거룩하게 하는 제단이냐?","이 눈먼 자들아, 어느 것이 더 중하냐? 제물이냐? 아니면 그 제물을 거룩하게 만드는 제단이냐?","맹인들이여 어느 것이 크냐 그 예물이냐 그 예물을 거룩하게 하는 제단이냐","소경들이여 어느 것이 크뇨 그 예물이냐 예물을 거룩하게 하는 제단이냐","이 눈먼 자들아! 어느 것이 더 중하냐? 제물이냐, 그렇지 않으면 제물을 거룩하게 하는 제단이냐?","You blind ones, which is greater, the gift, or the altar that makes the gift sacred?","Ye fools and blind: for whether is greater, the gift, or the altar that sanctifieth the gift?","You blind men! Which is greater: the gift, or the altar that makes the gift sacred?","Caeci! Quid enim maius est: donum an altare, quod sanctificat donum?","אתם הכסילים והעורים כי מה הוא הגדול אם הקרבן או המזבח המקדש את הקרבן׃"],["47","23","20","사실 제단을 두고 맹세하는 이는 제단과 그 위에 있는 모든 것을 두고 맹세하는 것이고,","사실 제단을 두고 한 맹세는 제단과 그 위에 있는 모든 것을 두고 한 맹세이고","그러므로 제단으로 맹세하는 자는 제단과 그 위에 있는 모든 것으로 맹세함이요","그러므로 제단으로 맹세하는 자는 제단과 그 위에 있는 모든 것으로 맹세함이요","너희가 \"제단을 두고\" 한 맹세는 제단뿐만 아니라 그 위에 있는 모든 것을 두고 한 맹세이고","One who swears by the altar swears by it and all that is upon it;","Whoso therefore shall swear by the altar, sweareth by it, and by all things thereon.","Therefore, he who swears by the altar swears by it and by everything on it.","Qui ergo iuraverit in altari, iurat in eo et in omnibus, quae super illud sunt;","לכן הנשבע במזבח נשבע בו ובכל אשר עליו׃"],["47","23","21","성전을 두고 맹세하는 이는 성전과 그 안에 사시는 분을 두고 맹세하는 것이며,","성전을 두고 한 맹세는 성전과 그 안에 계신 분을 두고 한 맹세이며","또 성전으로 맹세하는 자는 성전과 그 안에 계신 이로 맹세함이요","또 성전으로 맹세하는 자는 성전과 그 안에 계신 이로 맹세함이요","또 너희가 \"성전을 두고\" 한 맹세는 성전뿐만 아니라 그 안에 계신 분을 두고 한 맹세가 아니냐?","one who swears by the temple swears by it and by him who dwells in it;","And whoso shall swear by the temple, sweareth by it, and by him that dwelleth therein.","And he who swears by the temple swears by it and by the one who dwells in it.","et, qui iuraverit in templo, iurat in illo et in eo, qui inhabitat in ipso;","והנשבע בהיכל נשבע בו ובשוכן בתוכו׃"],["47","23","22","하늘을 두고 맹세하는 이는 하느님의 옥좌와 그 위에 앉아 계신 분을 두고 맹세하는 것이다.","또 하늘을 두고 한 맹세는 하느님의 옥좌와 그 위에 앉으신 분을 두고 한 맹세이다.\"","또 하늘로 맹세하는 자는 하나님의 보좌와 그 위에 앉으신 이로 맹세함이니라","또 하늘로 맹세하는 자는 하나님의 보좌와 그 위에 앉으신 이로 맹세함이니라","그리고 너희가 \"하늘을 두고\" 한 맹세는 하나님의 보좌와 그 위에 앉으신 분을 두고 한 맹세가 아니냐?","one who swears by heaven swears by the throne of God and by him who is seated on it.","And he that shall swear by heaven, sweareth by the throne of God, and by him that sitteth thereon.","And he who swears by heaven swears by God's throne and by the one who sits on it.","et, qui iuraverit in caelo, iurat in throno Dei et in eo, qui sedet super eum.","והנשבע בשמים נשבע בכסא אלהים ובישב עליו׃"],["47","23","23","불행하여라, 너희 위선자 율법 학자들과 바리사이들아! 너희가 박하와 시라와 소회향은 십일조를 내면서, 의로움과 자비와 신의처럼 율법에서 더 중요한 것들은 무시하기 때문이다. 그러한 십일조도 무시해서는 안 되지만, 바로 이러한 것들을 실행해야만 했다.","\"율법학자들과 바리사이파 사람들아, 너희 같은 위선자들은 화를 입을 것이다. 너희는 박하와 회향과 근채에 대해서는 십분의 일을 바치라는 율법을 지키면서 정의와 자비와 신의 같은 아주 중요한 율법은 대수롭지 않게 여긴다. 십분의 일세를 바치는 일도 소홀히 해서는 안 되겠지만 정의와 자비와 신의도 실천해야 하지 않겠느냐?","화 있을진저 외식하는 서기관들과 바리새인들이여 너희가 박하와 회향과 근채의 십일조는 드리되 율법의 더 중한 바 정의와 긍휼과 믿음은 버렸도다 그러나 이것도 행하고 저것도 버리지 말아야 할지니라","화 있을찐저 외식하는 서기관들과 바리새인들이여 너희가 박하와 회향과 근채의 십일조를 드리되 율법의 더 중한바 의와 인과 신은 버렸도다 그러나 이것도 행하고 저것도 버리지 말아야 할찌니라","화가 있으라. 너희 바리새파 사람들과 율법학자들아, 이 위선자들아! 너희는 박하와 회향과 근채의 십일조는 율법에 따라 바치면서 정의와 자비와 믿음과 같은 아주 중요한 율법은 무시하고 있다. 물론 십일조를 바치는 일도 중요하다. 그러나 더 중요한 일을 하지 않고 내버려 두어서는 안 된다.","“Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, you hypocrites. You pay tithes of mint and dill and cummin, and have neglected the weightier things of the law: judgment and mercy and fidelity. [But] these you should have done, without neglecting the others.","Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye pay tithe of mint and anise and cummin, and have omitted the weightier matters of the law, judgment, mercy, and faith: these ought ye to have done, and not to leave the other undone.","\"Woe to you, teachers of the law and Pharisees, you hypocrites! You give a tenth of your spices--mint, dill and cummin. But you have neglected the more important matters of the law--justice, mercy and faithfulness. You should have practiced the latter, without neglecting the former.","Vae vobis, scribae et pharisaei hypocritae, quia decimatis mentam et anethum et cyminum et reliquistis, quae graviora sunt legis: iudicium et misericordiam et fidem! Haec oportuit facere et illa non omittere.","אוי לכם הסופרים והפרושים החנפים כי מעשרים אתם את המנתא ואת השבת ואת הכמן ותניחו את החמורות בתורה את המשפט ואת החסד ואת האמונה והיה לכם לעשות את אלה ולא להניח גם את אלה׃"],["47","23","24","눈먼 인도자들아! 너희는 작은 벌레들은 걸러 내면서 낙타는 그냥 삼키는 자들이다.","이 눈먼 인도자들아, 하루살이는 걸러내면서 낙타는 그대로 삼키는 것이 바로 너희들이다.\"","맹인 된 인도자여 하루살이는 걸러 내고 낙타는 삼키는도다","소경된 인도자여 하루살이는 걸러 내고 약대는 삼키는도다","눈먼 지도자들아! 너희가 하루살이는 걸러내면서 낙타는 통째로 삼키는구나.","Blind guides, who strain out the gnat and swallow the camel!","Ye blind guides, which strain at a gnat, and swallow a camel.","You blind guides! You strain out a gnat but swallow a camel.","Duces caeci, excolantes culicem, camelum autem glutientes.","מנהלים עורים המסננים את היתוש ובלעים את הגמל׃"],["47","23","25","불행하여라, 너희 위선자 율법 학자들과 바리사이들아! 너희가 잔과 접시의 겉은 깨끗이 하지만, 그 안은 탐욕과 방종으로 가득 차 있기 때문이다.","\"율법학자들과 바리사이파 사람들아, 너희 같은 위선자들은 화를 입을 것이다. 너희는 잔과 접시의 겉만은 깨끗이 닦아놓지만 그 속에는 착취와 탐욕이 가득 차 있다.","화 있을진저 외식하는 서기관들과 바리새인들이여 잔과 대접의 겉은 깨끗이 하되 그 안에는 탐욕과 방탕으로 가득하게 하는도다","화 있을찐저 외식하는 서기관들과 바리새인들이여 잔과 대접의 겉은 깨끗이 하되 그 안에는 탐욕과 방탕으로 가득하게 하는도다","화가 있으라. 너희 바리새파 사람들과 율법학자들아, 이 위선자들아, 너희는 잔과 접시의 겉은 깨끗이 닦아 놓지만 그 속은 방탕과 탐욕으로 가득 차 있다.","“Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, you hypocrites. You cleanse the outside of cup and dish, but inside they are full of plunder and self-indulgence.","Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye make clean the outside of the cup and of the platter, but within they are full of extortion and excess.","\"Woe to you, teachers of the law and Pharisees, you hypocrites! You clean the outside of the cup and dish, but inside they are full of greed and self-indulgence.","Vae vobis, scribae et pharisaei hypocritae, quia mundatis, quod de foris est calicis et paropsidis, intus autem pleni sunt rapina et immunditia!","אוי לכם הסופרים והפרושים החנפים כי מטהרים אתם פני הכוס והקערה מחוץ ותוכן מלא גזל ופריצות׃"],["47","23","26","눈먼 바리사이야! 먼저 잔 속을 깨끗이 하여라. 그러면 겉도 깨끗해질 것이다.","이 눈먼 바리사이파 사람들아, 먼저 잔 속을 깨끗이 닦아라. 그래야 겉도 깨끗해질 것이다.\"","눈 먼 바리새인이여 너는 먼저 안을 깨끗이 하라 그리하면 겉도 깨끗하리라","소경된 바리새인아 너는 먼저 안을 깨끗이 하라 그리하면 겉도 깨끗하리라","눈먼 바리새파 사람들아! 먼저 잔 속을 깨끗이 닦으라. 그래야 잔 안팎이 다 깨끗해질 것이다.","Blind Pharisee, cleanse first the inside of the cup, so that the outside also may be clean.","Thou blind Pharisee, cleanse first that which is within the cup and platter, that the outside of them may be clean also.","Blind Pharisee! First clean the inside of the cup and dish, and then the outside also will be clean.","Pharisaee caece, munda prius, quod intus est calicis, ut fiat et id, quod de foris eius est, mundum.","פרוש עור טהר בראשונה את תוך הכוס למען תטהר גם מחוץ׃"],["47","23","27","불행하여라, 너희 위선자 율법 학자들과 바리사이들아! 너희가 겉은 아름답게 보이지만 속은 죽은 이들의 뼈와 온갖 더러운 것으로 가득 차 있는 회칠한 무덤 같기 때문이다.","\"율법학자들과 바리사이파 사람들아, 너희 같은 위선자들은 화를 입을 것이다. 너희는 겉은 그럴싸해 보이지만 그 속에는 죽은 사람의 뼈와 썩은 것이 가득 차 있는 회칠한 무덤 같다.","화 있을진저 외식하는 서기관들과 바리새인들이여 회칠한 무덤 같으니 겉으로는 아름답게 보이나 그 안에는 죽은 사람의 뼈와 모든 더러운 것이 가득하도다","화 있을찐저 외식하는 서기관들과 바리새인들이여 회칠한 무덤 같으니 겉으로는 아름답게 보이나 그 안에는 죽은 사람의 뼈와 모든 더러운 것이 가득하도다","화가 있으라. 너희 바리새파 사람들과 율법학자들아, 이 위선자들아! 너희는 아름답게 장식한 무덤 같아서 겉은 좋아 보이지만 그 속에는 죽은 사람의 뼈와 썩은 것이 가득 차 있다.","“Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, you hypocrites. You are like whitewashed tombs, which appear beautiful on the outside, but inside are full of dead men’s bones and every kind of filth.","Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye are like unto whited sepulchres, which indeed appear beautiful outward, but are within full of dead men's bones, and of all uncleanness.","\"Woe to you, teachers of the law and Pharisees, you hypocrites! You are like whitewashed tombs, which look beautiful on the outside but on the inside are full of dead men's bones and everything unclean.","Vae vobis, scribae et pharisaei hypocritae, quia similes estis sepulcris dealbatis, quae a foris quidem parent speciosa, intus vero plena sunt ossibus mortuorum et omni spurcitia!","אוי לכם הסופרים והפרושים החנפים כי דמים אתם לקברים המסידים הנראים נאים מחוץ ותוכם מלא עצמות מתים וכל טמאה׃"],["47","23","28","이처럼 너희도 겉은 다른 사람들에게 의인으로 보이지만, 속은 위선과 불법으로 가득하다.","이와 같이 너희도 겉으로는 옳은 사람처럼 보이지만 속은 위선과 불법으로 가득 차 있다.\"","이와 같이 너희도 겉으로는 사람에게 옳게 보이되 안으로는 외식과 불법이 가득하도다","이와 같이 너희도 겉으로는 사람에게 옳게 보이되 안으로는 외식과 불법이 가득하도다","이와 같이 너희도 겉으로는 거룩한 사람처럼 보이지만 속에는 온갖 위선과 죄가 가득 차 있다.","Even so, on the outside you appear righteous, but inside you are filled with hypocrisy and evildoing.","Even so ye also outwardly appear righteous unto men, but within ye are full of hypocrisy and iniquity.","In the same way, on the outside you appear to people as righteous but on the inside you are full of hypocrisy and wickedness.","Sic et vos a foris quidem paretis hominibus iusti, intus autem pleni estis hypocrisi et iniquitate.","ככה גם אתם מחוץ נראים כצדיקים אל בני אדם ותוככם מלא חנפה ואון׃"],["47","23","29","불행하여라, 너희 위선자 율법 학자들과 바리사이들아! 너희가 예언자들의 무덤을 만들고 의인들의 묘를 꾸미면서,","\"율법학자들과 바리사이파 사람들아, 너희 같은 위선자들은 화를 입을 것이다. 너희는 예언자들의 무덤을 단장하고 성자들의 기념비를 장식해 놓고는","화 있을진저 외식하는 서기관들과 바리새인들이여 너희는 선지자들의 무덤을 만들고 의인들의 비석을 꾸미며 이르되","화 있을찐저 외식하는 서기관들과 바리새인들이여 너희는 선지자들의 무덤을 쌓고 의인들의 비석을 꾸미며 가로되","화가 있으라. 바리새파 사람들과 율법학자들아, 이 위선자들아! 너희는 너희 조상이 죽인 예언자들의 무덤을 단장하고 성인들의 무덤 앞에 비석을 세워 놓고는","“Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, you hypocrites. You build the tombs of the prophets and adorn the memorials of the righteous,","Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! because ye build the tombs of the prophets, and garnish the sepulchres of the righteous,","\"Woe to you, teachers of the law and Pharisees, you hypocrites! You build tombs for the prophets and decorate the graves of the righteous.","Vae vobis, scribae et pharisaei hypocritae, qui aedificatis sepulcra prophetarum et ornatis monumenta iustorum","אוי לכם הסופרים והפרושים החנפים כי בונים אתם את קברי הנביאים ותיפו את מצבות קברות הצדיקים׃"],["47","23","30","‘우리가 조상들 시대에 살았더라면 예언자들을 죽이는 일에 가담하지 않았을 것이다.’ 하고 말하기 때문이다.","우리가 조상들 시대에 살았더라면 조상들이 예언자들을 죽이는 데 가담하지 않았을 것이다.' 하고 떠들어댄다.","만일 우리가 조상 때에 있었더라면 우리는 그들이 선지자의 피를 흘리는 데 참여하지 아니하였으리라 하니","만일 우리가 조상 때에 있었더면 우리는 저희가 선지자의 피를 흘리는데 참예하지 아니하였으리라 하니","\"우리는 조상들이 저지른 행동을 결코 되풀이하지 않을 것이다\"라고 말한다.","and you say, ‘If we had lived in the days of our ancestors, we would not have joined them in shedding the prophets’ blood.’","And say, If we had been in the days of our fathers, we would not have been partakers with them in the blood of the prophets.","And you say, 'If we had lived in the days of our forefathers, we would not have taken part with them in shedding the blood of the prophets.'","et dicitis:  “Si fuissemus in diebus patrum nostrorum, non essemus socii eorum in sanguine prophetarum “!","ואמרתם אם היינו בימי אבותינו לא היתה ידנו עמהם לשפך דם הנביאים׃"],["47","23","31","그렇게 하여 너희는 예언자들을 살해한 자들의 자손임을 스스로 증언한다.","이것은 너희가 예언자를 죽인 사람들의 후손이라는 것을 스스로 실토하는 것이다.","그러면 너희가 선지자를 죽인 자의 자손임을 스스로 증명함이로다","그러면 너희가 선지자를 죽인 자의 자손 됨을 스스로 증거함이로다","이것은 너희가 예언자들을 죽인 악한 자들의 자손이라는 것을 스스로 증거하고 있는 셈이다.","Thus you bear witness against yourselves that you are the children of those who murdered the prophets;","Wherefore ye be witnesses unto yourselves, that ye are the children of them which killed the prophets.","So you testify against yourselves that you are the descendants of those who murdered the prophets.","Itaque testimonio estis vobismetipsis quia filii estis eorum, qui prophetas occiderunt.","ובכן תעידו על נפשכם כי בנים אתם לרוצחי הנביאים׃"],["47","23","32","그러니 너희 조상들이 시작한 짓을 마저 하여라.","그러니 너희 조상들이 시작한 일을 마저 하여라.","너희가 너희 조상의 분량을 채우라","너희가 너희 조상의 양을 채우라","그리고 너희는 그들이 걸어간 길을 그대로 밟아 가고 그들의 악을 다 채우고 있다.","now fill up what your ancestors measured out!","Fill ye up then the measure of your fathers.","Fill up, then, the measure of the sin of your forefathers!","Et vos implete mensuram patrum vestrorum.","אף אתם מלאו סאת אבותיכם׃"],["47","23","33","너희 뱀들아, 독사의 자식들아! 너희가 지옥형 판결을 어떻게 피하려느냐?","이 뱀 같은 자들아, 독사의 족속들아! 너희가 지옥의 형벌을 어떻게 피하랴?","뱀들아 독사의 새끼들아 너희가 어떻게 지옥의 판결을 피하겠느냐","뱀들아 독사의 새끼들아 너희가 어떻게 지옥의 판결을 피하겠느냐","뱀들아, 독사의 자식들아! 너희가 어떻게 지옥의 형벌을 피하겠느냐?","You serpents, you brood of vipers, how can you flee from the judgment of Gehenna?","Ye serpents, ye generation of vipers, how can ye escape the damnation of hell?","\"You snakes! You brood of vipers! How will you escape being condemned to hell?","Serpentes, genimina viperarum, quomodo fugietis a iudicio gehennae?","נחשים אתם ילדי הצפעונים איכה תמלטו מדין גיהנם׃"],["47","23","34","그러므로 이제 내가 예언자들과 현인들과 율법 학자들을 너희에게 보낸다. 그러면 너희는 그들을 더러는 죽이거나 십자가에 못 박고, 더러는 너희 회당에서 채찍질하고 또 이 고을 저 고을 쫓아다니며 박해할 것이다.","나는 예언자들과 현인들과 학자들을 너희에게 보내겠다. 그러나 너희는 그들을 더러는 죽이고 더러는 십자가에 매달고 또 더러는 회당에서 채찍질하며 이 동네 저 동네로 잡으러 다닐 것이다.","그러므로 내가 너희에게 선지자들과 지혜 있는 자들과 서기관들을 보내매 너희가 그 중에서 더러는 죽이거나 십자가에 못 박고 그 중에서 더러는 너희 회당에서 채찍질하고 이 동네에서 저 동네로 따라다니며 박해하리라","그러므로 내가 너희에게 선지자들과 지혜 있는 자들과 서기관들을 보내매 너희가 그 중에서 더러는 죽이고 십자가에 못 박고 그 중에 더러는 너희 회당에서 채찍질하고 이 동네에서 저 동네로 구박하리라","내가 예언자들과 지혜 있는 교사들과 율법학자들을 너희에게 보내겠다. 그러나 너희는 그들 중 몇은 죽이고 십자가에 못박으며 몇은 회당에서 벗겨 놓고 매질하며, 이 동네 저 동네로 잡으러 다닐 것이다.","Therefore, behold, I send to you prophets and wise men and scribes; some of them you will kill and crucify, some of them you will scourge in your synagogues and pursue from town to town,","Wherefore, behold, I send unto you prophets, and wise men, and scribes: and some of them ye shall kill and crucify; and some of them shall ye scourge in your synagogues, and persecute them from city to city:","Therefore I am sending you prophets and wise men and teachers. Some of them you will kill and crucify; others you will flog in your synagogues and pursue from town to town.","Ideo ecce ego mitto ad vos prophetas et sapientes et scribas; ex illis occidetis et crucifigetis et ex eis flagellabitis in synagogis vestris et persequemini de civitate in civitatem,","לכן הנני שלח לכם נביאים וחכמים וסופרים ומהם תהרגו ותצלבו ומהם תכו בשוטים בבתי כנסיותיכם ותרדפום מעיר לעיר׃"],["47","23","35","그리하여 의인 아벨의 피부터, 너희가 성소와 제단 사이에서 살해한 베레크야의 아들 즈카르야의 피에 이르기까지, 땅에 쏟아진 무죄한 피의 값이 모두 너희에게 돌아갈 것이다.","그래서 마침내 무죄한 아벨의 피로부터 성소와 제단 사이에서 살해된 바라키야의 아들 즈가리야의 피에 이르기까지 땅에서 흘린 모든 무죄한 피 값이 너희에게 돌아갈 것이다.","그러므로 의인 아벨의 피로부터 성전과 제단 사이에서 너희가 죽인 바라갸의 아들 사가랴의 피까지 땅 위에서 흘린 의로운 피가 다 너희에게 돌아가리라","그러므로 의인 아벨의 피로부터 성전과 제단 사이에서 너희가 죽인 바라갸의 아들 사가랴의 피까지 땅 위에서 흘린 의로운 피가 다 너희에게 돌아가리라","그래서 마침내 의로운 사람 아벨의 피부터 성전의 성소와 제단 사이에서 너희가 죽인 바라갸의 아들 사가랴의 피에 이르기까지 땅에서 무참하게 죽임을 당한 신앙인들의 피값이 너희에게로 돌아갈 것이다.","so that there may come upon you all the righteous blood shed upon earth, from the righteous blood of Abel to the blood of Zechariah, the son of Barachiah, whom you murdered between the sanctuary and the altar.","That upon you may come all the righteous blood shed upon the earth, from the blood of righteous Abel unto the blood of Zacharias son of Barachias, whom ye slew between the temple and the altar.","And so upon you will come all the righteous blood that has been shed on earth, from the blood of righteous Abel to the blood of Zechariah son of Berekiah, whom you murdered between the temple and the altar.","ut veniat super vos omnis sanguis iustus, qui effusus est super terram a sanguine Abel iusti usque ad sanguinem Zachariae filii Barachiae, quem occidistis inter templum et altare.","למען יבא עליכם כל דם נקי הנשפך בארץ מדם הבל הצדיק עד דם זכריה בן ברכיה אשר רצחתם אותו בין ההיכל ולמזבח׃"],["47","23","36","내가 진실로 너희에게 말한다. 이 모든 것이 이 세대에 닥칠 것이다.”","분명히 말해 둔다. 이 모든 죄에 대한 형벌이 이 세대에 내리고야 말 것이다.\"","내가 진실로 너희에게 이르노니 이것이 다 이 세대에 돌아가리라","내가 진실로 너희에게 이르노니 이것이 다 이 세대에게 돌아가리라","내가 진정으로 말한다. 지나간 세대의 모든 죄에 대한 심판이 이 세대에 내려질 것이다.","Amen, I say to you, all these things will come upon this generation.","Verily I say unto you, All these things shall come upon this generation.","I tell you the truth, all this will come upon this generation.","Amen dico vobis: Venient haec omnia super generationem istam.","אמן אמר אני לכם בא יבא כל אלה על הדור הזה׃"],["47","23","37","“예루살렘아, 예루살렘아! 예언자들을 죽이고 자기에게 파견된 이들에게 돌을 던져 죽이기까지 하는 너! 암탉이 제 병아리들을 날개 밑으로 모으듯, 내가 몇 번이나 너의 자녀들을 모으려고 하였던가? 그러나 너희는 마다하였다.","\"예루살렘아! 예루살렘아! 너는 예언자들을 죽이고 너에게 보낸 이들을 돌로 치는구나. 암탉이 병아리를 날개 아래 모으듯이 내가 몇 번이나 네 자녀를 모으려 했던가. 그러나 너는 응하지 않았다.","예루살렘아 예루살렘아 선지자들을 죽이고 네게 파송된 자들을 돌로 치는 자여 암탉이 그 새끼를 날개 아래에 모음 같이 내가 네 자녀를 모으려 한 일이 몇 번이더냐 그러나 너희가 원하지 아니하였도다","예루살렘아 예루살렘아 선지자들을 죽이고 네게 파송된 자들을 돌로 치는 자여 암탉이 그 새끼를 날개 아래 모음 같이 내가 네 자녀를 모으려 한 일이 몇번이냐 그러나 너희가 원치 아니하였도다","아! 예루살렘아, 예루살렘아! 예언자들을 죽이고 하나님이 보내신 사람들을 돌로 치는 자여! 암탉이 병아리를 날개아래 모으듯이 내가 몇 번이나 네 자녀를 모으려고 하였던가? 그러나 너는 응하지 않았다.","“Jerusalem, Jerusalem, you who kill the prophets and stone those sent to you, how many times I yearned to gather your children together, as a hen gathers her young under her wings, but you were unwilling!","O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the prophets, and stonest them which are sent unto thee, how often would I have gathered thy children together, even as a hen gathereth her chickens under her wings, and ye would not!","\"O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, you who kill the prophets and stone those sent to you, how often I have longed to gather your children together, as a hen gathers her chicks under her wings, but you were not willing.","Ierusalem, Ierusalem, quae occidis prophetas et lapidas eos, qui ad te missi sunt, quotiens volui congregare filios tuos, quemadmodum gallina congregat pullos suos sub alas, et noluistis!","ירושלים ירושלים ההרגת את הנביאים והסקלת את השלוחים אליה כמה פעמים רציתי לקבץ את בניך כתרנגלת המקבצת את אפרחיה תחת כנפיה ולא אביתם׃"],["47","23","38","보라, 너희 집은 버려져 황폐해질 것이다.","2)너희 성전은 하느님께 버림을 받아 황폐해지리라. 예레 22:5.","보라 너희 집이 황폐하여 버려진 바 되리라","보라 너희 집이 황폐하여 버린바 되리라","너희 집은 버림을 받아 황폐해질 것이다.","Behold, your house will be abandoned, desolate.","Behold, your house is left unto you desolate.","Look, your house is left to you desolate.","Ecce relinquitur vobis domus vestra deserta!","הנה ביתכם יעזב לכם שמם׃"],["47","23","39","내가 너희에게 말한다. 너희가 ‘주님의 이름으로 오시는 분은 복되시어라.’ 하고 말할 때까지, 정녕 나를 다시는 보지 못할 것이다.”","3)주의 이름으로 오시는 이여, 찬미받으소서.' 하고 너희 입으로 찬양할 때까지 너희는 정녕 나를 다시 보지 못하리라.\"시편 118:26.","내가 너희에게 이르노니 이제부터 너희는 찬송하리로다 주의 이름으로 오시는 이여 할 때까지 나를 보지 못하리라 하시니라","내가 너희에게 이르노니 이제부터 너희는 찬송하리로다 주의 이름으로 오시는 이여 할 때까지 나를 보지 못하리라 하시니라","내가 너희에게 말한다. 하나님이 보내신 이를 환영할 준비가 될 때까지 너희가 결코 나를 다시 보지 못할 것이다.\"","I tell you, you will not see me again until you say, ‘Blessed is he who comes in the name of the Lord.’”","For I say unto you, Ye shall not see me henceforth, till ye shall say, Blessed is he that cometh in the name of the Lord.","For I tell you, you will not see me again until you say, 'Blessed is he who comes in the name of the Lord.'\"","Dico enim vobis: Non me videbitis amodo, donec dicatis:  “Benedictus, qui venit in nomine Dominil “ “.","כי אני אמר לכם ראה לא תראוני מעתה עד אשר תאמרו ברוך הבא בשם יהוה׃"],["47","24","1","예수님께서 성전에서 나와 걸어가시는데 제자들이 다가와 성전 건물들을 가리켰다.","예수께서 성전을 나와 얼마쯤 걸어가셨을 때 제자들이 곁으로 다가와서 성전 건물들을 가리키며 보시라고 하였다.","예수께서 성전에서 나와서 가실 때에 제자들이 성전 건물들을 가리켜 보이려고 나아오니","예수께서 성전에서 나와서 가실 때에 제자들이 성전 건물들을 가리켜 보이려고 나아오니","예수께서 성전을 떠나실 때 제자들이 곁에 와서 성전의 여러 건물을 구경하자고 말하였다.","Jesus left the temple area and was going away, when his disciples approached him to point out the temple buildings.","And Jesus went out, and departed from the temple: and his disciples came to him for to shew him the buildings of the temple.","Jesus left the temple and was walking away when his disciples came up to him to call his attention to its buildings.","Et egressus Iesus de templo ibat, et accesserunt discipuli eius, ut ostenderent ei aedificationes templi;","ויצא ישוע מן המקדש ללכת לדרכו ויגשו תלמידיו להראותו את בניני המקדש׃"],["47","24","2","그러자 예수님께서 그들에게 말씀하셨다. “너희는 저 모든 것을 보고 있지 않느냐? 내가 진실로 너희에게 말한다. 여기 돌 하나도 다른 돌 위에 남아 있지 않고 다 허물어지고 말 것이다.”","그러자 예수께서는 \"저 모든 건물을 잘 보아두어라. 나는 분명히 말한다. 저 돌들이 어느 하나도 제자리에 그대로 얹혀 있지 못하고 다 무너지고 말 것이다.\" 하고 말씀하셨다.","대답하여 이르시되 너희가 이 모든 것을 보지 못하느냐 내가 진실로 너희에게 이르노니 돌 하나도 돌 위에 남지 않고 다 무너뜨려지리라","대답하여 가라사대 너희가 이 모든 것을 보지 못하느냐 내가 진실로 너희에게 이르노니 돌 하나도 돌 위에 남지 않고 다 무너뜨리우리라","그러자 예수께서 이렇게 말씀하셨다. \"내가 진정으로 말한다. 이 모든 건물이 다 무너져 돌 하나도 제대로 얹혀 있지 못할 것이다.\"","He said to them in reply, “You see all these things, do you not? Amen, I say to you, there will not be left here a stone upon another stone that will not be thrown down.”","And Jesus said unto them, See ye not all these things? verily I say unto you, There shall not be left here one stone upon another, that shall not be thrown down.","\"Do you see all these things?\" he asked. \"I tell you the truth, not one stone here will be left on another; every one will be thrown down.\"","ipse autem respondens dixit eis:  “Non videtis haec omnia? Amen dico vobis: Non relinquetur hic lapis super lapidem, qui non destruetur “.","ויען ישוע ויאמר אליהם הראיתם את כל אלה אמן אמר אני לכם לא תשאר פה אבן על אבן אשר לא תתפרק׃"],["47","24","3","예수님께서 올리브 산에 앉아 계실 때, 제자들이 따로 예수님께 다가와 여쭈었다. “저희에게 일러 주십시오. 그런 일이 언제 일어나겠습니까? 또 스승님의 재림과 세상 종말의 표징은 어떤 것입니까?”","그리고 예수께서 올리브 산에 올라가 앉으셨을 때에 제자들이 따로 와서 \"그런 일이 언제 일어나겠습니까? 그리고 주님께서 오실 때와 세상이 끝날 때에 어떤 징조가 나타나겠습니까? 저희에게 알려주십시오.\" 하고 말하였다.","예수께서 감람 산 위에 앉으셨을 때에 제자들이 조용히 와서 이르되 우리에게 이르소서 어느 때에 이런 일이 있겠사오며 또 주의 임하심과 세상 끝에는 무슨 징조가 있사오리이까","예수께서 감람산 위에 앉으셨을 때에 제자들이 종용히 와서 가로되 우리에게 이르소서 어느 때에 이런 일이 있겠사오며 또 주의 임하심과 세상 끝에는 무슨 징조가 있사오리이까","예수께서 감람산에 올라가 앉으시자 제자들이 물었다. \"언제 그런 일이 일어나겠습니까? 주님이 다시 오시는 세상 끝 날에는 어떤 징조가 나타나겠습니까?\"","As he was sitting on the Mount of Olives, the disciples approached him privately and said, “Tell us, when will this happen, and what sign will there be of your coming, and of the end of the age?”","And as he sat upon the mount of Olives, the disciples came unto him privately, saying, Tell us, when shall these things be? and what shall be the sign of thy coming, and of the end of the world?","As Jesus was sitting on the Mount of Olives, the disciples came to him privately. \"Tell us,\" they said, \"when will this happen, and what will be the sign of your coming and of the end of the age?\"","Sedente autem eo super montem Oliveti, accesserunt ad eum discipuli secreto dicentes:  “Dic nobis: Quando haec erunt, et quod signum adventus tui et consummationis saeculi? “.","וישב על הר הזיתים ויגשו אליו התלמידים לבדם ויאמרו אמר נא לנו מתי תהיה זאת ומה הוא אות בואך ואות קץ העולם׃"],["47","24","4","예수님께서 그들에게 대답하셨다. “너희는 누구에게도 속는 일이 없도록 조심하여라.","예수께서는 이렇게 대답하셨다. \"아무에게도 속지 않도록 조심하여라.","예수께서 대답하여 이르시되 너희가 사람의 미혹을 받지 않도록 주의하라","예수께서 대답하여 가라사대 너희가 사람의 미혹을 받지 않도록 주의하라","예수께서 말씀하셨다. \"아무에게도 속지 않도록 조심하라.","Jesus said to them in reply, “See that no one deceives you.","And Jesus answered and said unto them, Take heed that no man deceive you.","Jesus answered: \"Watch out that no one deceives you.","Et respondens Iesus dixit eis:  “Videte, ne quis vos seducat.","ויען ישוע ויאמר להם ראו פן יתעה אתכם איש׃"],["47","24","5","많은 사람이 내 이름으로 와서, ‘내가 그리스도다.’ 하면서 많은 이를 속일 것이다.","장차 많은 사람이 내 이름을 내세우며 나타나서 '내가 그리스도다!' 하고 떠들어대면서 수많은 사람들을 속일 것이다.","많은 사람이 내 이름으로 와서 이르되 나는 그리스도라 하여 많은 사람을 미혹하리라","많은 사람이 내 이름으로 와서 이르되 나는 그리스도라 하여 많은 사람을 미혹케 하리라","많은 사람이 자기가 그리스도라고 주장하고 나서며 사람들을 그릇된 길로 끌어들일 것이다.","For many will come in my name, saying, ‘I am the Messiah,’ and they will deceive many.","For many shall come in my name, saying, I am Christ; and shall deceive many.","For many will come in my name, claiming, 'I am the Christ,' and will deceive many.","Multi enim venient in nomine meo dicentes:  “Ego sum Christus “, et multos seducent.","כי רבים יבאו בשמי לאמר אני הוא המשיח והתעו רבים׃"],["47","24","6","그리고 너희는 여기저기에서 전쟁이 났다는 소식과 전쟁이 일어난다는 소문을 듣더라도 불안해하지 않도록 주의하여라. 그러한 일이 반드시 벌어지겠지만 그것이 아직 끝은 아니다.","또 여러 번 난리가 일어나고 전쟁 소문도 듣게 될 것이다. 그러나 정신을 차리고 당황하지 마라. 그런 일이 꼭 일어나고야 말 터이지만 그것으로 그치는 것은 아니다.","난리와 난리 소문을 듣겠으나 너희는 삼가 두려워하지 말라 이런 일이 있어야 하되 아직 끝은 아니니라","난리와 난리 소문을 듣겠으나 너희는 삼가 두려워 말라 이런 일이 있어야 하되 끝은 아직 아니니라","전쟁이 일어났다는 소문을 듣겠으나 두려워하지 말라. 그런 일이 반드시 있을 것이지만 그것으로 끝이 온 것은 아니다.","You will hear of wars and reports of wars; see that you are not alarmed, for these things must happen, but it will not yet be the end.","And ye shall hear of wars and rumours of wars: see that ye be not troubled: for all these things must come to pass, but the end is not yet.","You will hear of wars and rumors of wars, but see to it that you are not alarmed. Such things must happen, but the end is still to come.","Audituri enim estis proelia et opiniones proeliorum. Videte, ne turbemini; oportet enim fieri, sed nondum est finis.","ואתם עתידים לשמע מלחמות ושמעות מלחמה ראו פן תבהלו כי היו תהיה כל זאת אך עדן אין הקץ׃"],["47","24","7","민족과 민족이 맞서 일어나고 나라와 나라가 맞서 일어나며, 곳곳에 기근과 지진이 발생할 것이다.","한 민족이 일어나 딴 민족을 치고, 한 나라가 일어나 딴 나라를 칠 것이며, 또 곳곳에서 기근과 지진이 일어날 터인데","민족이 민족을, 나라가 나라를 대적하여 일어나겠고 곳곳에 기근과 지진이 있으리니","민족이 민족을, 나라가 나라를 대적하여 일어나겠고 처처에 기근과 지진이 있으리니","민족과 나라들이 들고 일어나 서로 칠 것이며, 여러 곳에서 기근과 지진이 일어날 것이다.","Nation will rise against nation, and kingdom against kingdom; there will be famines and earthquakes from place to place.","For nation shall rise against nation, and kingdom against kingdom: and there shall be famines, and pestilences, and earthquakes, in divers places.","Nation will rise against nation, and kingdom against kingdom. There will be famines and earthquakes in various places.","Consurget enim gens in gentem, et regnum in regnum, et erunt fames et terrae motus per loca;","כי יקום גוי על גוי וממלכה על ממלכה והיה רעב ודבר ורעש הנה והנה׃"],["47","24","8","그러나 이 모든 것은 진통의 시작일 따름이다.","이런 일들은 다만 고통의 시작일 뿐이다.\"","이 모든 것은 재난의 시작이니라","이 모든 것이 재난의 시작이니라","그러나 이 모든 일은 다만 닥쳐 올 재난의 시작일 뿐이다.","All these are the beginning of the labor pains.","All these are the beginning of sorrows.","All these are the beginning of birth pains.","haec autem omnia initia sunt dolorum.","וכל אלה רק ראשית החבלים׃"],["47","24","9","그때에 사람들이 너희를 환난 속에 몰아넣고 죽일 것이다. 너희는 내 이름 때문에 모든 민족들에게 미움을 받을 것이다.","\"그 때에는 사람들이 너희를 잡아 법정에 넘겨 갖은 고통을 겪게 하고 마침내는 사형에 처하게 할 것이다. 또 너희는 나 때문에 온 세상 사람들에게 미움을 받을 것이다.","그 때에 사람들이 너희를 환난에 넘겨 주겠으며 너희를 죽이리니 너희가 내 이름 때문에 모든 민족에게 미움을 받으리라","그 때에 사람들이 너희를 환난에 넘겨주겠으며 너희를 죽이리니 너희가 내 이름을 위하여 모든 민족에게 미움을 받으리라","그때 너희는 내 사람이라는 이유로 고통과 죽임을 당할 것이며 온 세상이 너희를 미워할 것이다.","Then they will hand you over to persecution, and they will kill you. You will be hated by all nations because of my name.","Then shall they deliver you up to be afflicted, and shall kill you: and ye shall be hated of all nations for my name's sake.","\"Then you will be handed over to be persecuted and put to death, and you will be hated by all nations because of me.","Tunc tradent vos in tribulationem et occident vos, et eritis odio omnibus gentibus propter nomen meum.","אז ימסרו אתכם לעני והמיתו אתכם והייתם שנואים לכל הגוים למען שמי׃"],["47","24","10","그러면 많은 사람이 떨어져 나가 서로 팔아넘기고 서로 미워하며,","그리고 많은 사람이 떨어져 나가 서로 배반하고 서로 미워할 것이며","그 때에 많은 사람이 실족하게 되어 서로 잡아 주고 서로 미워하겠으며","그 때에 많은 사람이 시험에 빠져 서로 잡아 주고 서로 미워하겠으며","그리고 너희 가운데 많은 사람이 죄 가운데 다시 빠져 들어가 서로 배반하고 미워할 것이다.","And then many will be led into sin; they will betray and hate one another.","And then shall many be offended, and shall betray one another, and shall hate one another.","At that time many will turn away from the faith and will betray and hate each other,","Et tunc scandalizabuntur multi et invicem tradent et odio habebunt invicem;","ואז יכשלו רבים ומסרו איש את רעהו ושנאו איש את אחיו׃"],["47","24","11","거짓 예언자들이 많이 나타나 많은 이를 속일 것이다.","거짓 예언자가 여기 저기 나타나서 많은 사람들을 속일 것이다.","거짓 선지자가 많이 일어나 많은 사람을 미혹하겠으며","거짓 선지자가 많이 일어나 많은 사람을 미혹하게 하겠으며","또한 거짓 예언자가 곳곳에서 나타나 많은 사람을 미혹하고","Many false prophets will arise and deceive many;","And many false prophets shall rise, and shall deceive many.","and many false prophets will appear and deceive many people.","et multi pseudoprophetae surgent et seducent multos.","ונביאי שקר רבים יקומו והתעו רבים׃"],["47","24","12","또 불법이 성하여 많은 이의 사랑이 식어 갈 것이다.","또 세상은 무법 천지가 되어 사람들의 마음속에서 따뜻한 사랑을 찾아볼 수 없게 될 것이다.","불법이 성하므로 많은 사람의 사랑이 식어지리라","불법이 성하므로 많은 사람의 사랑이 식어지리라","세상은 무법천지가 되며 사랑이 식어질 것이다.","and because of the increase of evildoing, the love of many will grow cold.","And because iniquity shall abound, the love of many shall wax cold.","Because of the increase of wickedness, the love of most will grow cold,","Et, quoniam abundavit iniquitas, refrigescet caritas multorum;","ומפני אשר ירבה הרשע תפוג אהבת רבים׃"],["47","24","13","그러나 끝까지 견디어 내는 이는 구원을 받을 것이다.","그러나 끝까지 참는 사람은 구원을 받을 것이다.","그러나 끝까지 견디는 자는 구원을 얻으리라","그러나 끝까지 견디는 자는 구원을 얻으리라","그러나 끝까지 참는 사람은 구원을 받을 것이다.","But the one who perseveres to the end will be saved.","But he that shall endure unto the end, the same shall be saved.","but he who stands firm to the end will be saved.","qui autem permanserit usque in finem, hic salvus erit.","והמחכה עד עת קץ הוא יושע׃"],["47","24","14","이 하늘 나라의 복음이 온 세상에 선포되어 모든 민족들이 그것을 듣게 될 터인데, 그때에야 끝이 올 것이다.”","이 하늘 나라의 복음이 온 세상에 전파되어 모든 백성에게 밝히 알려질 것이다. 그리고 나서야 끝이 올 것이다.\"","이 천국 복음이 모든 민족에게 증언되기 위하여 온 세상에 전파되리니 그제야 끝이 오리라","이 천국 복음이 모든 민족에게 증거되기 위하여 온 세상에 전파되리니 그제야 끝이 오리라","하나님 나라의 기쁜 소식이 온 세상에 전파되어 모든 민족이 그것을 듣게 될 것이다. 그러고 나서야 끝이 올 것이다.","And this gospel of the kingdom will be preached throughout the world as a witness to all nations, and then the end will come.","And this gospel of the kingdom shall be preached in all the world for a witness unto all nations; and then shall the end come.","And this gospel of the kingdom will be preached in the whole world as a testimony to all nations, and then the end will come.","Et praedicabitur hoc evangelium regni in universo orbe in testimonium omnibus gentibus; et tunc veniet consummatio.","ותקרא בשורת המלכות הזאת בתבל כלה לעדות לכל הגוים ואחר יבוא הקץ׃"],["47","24","15","“그러므로 다니엘 예언자를 통하여 말씀하신 대로, 황폐를 부르는 혐오스러운 것이 거룩한 곳에 서 있는 것을 보거든 ─ 읽는 이는 알아들으라. ─","\"그러므로 너희는 예언자 다니엘이 말한 대로 1)황폐의 상징인 흉측한 우상이 거룩한 곳에 선 것을 보게 될 것이다. (독자는 알아들어라.)다니 9:27, 11:31, 12:11.","그러므로 너희가 선지자 다니엘이 말한 바 ㄱ)멸망의 가증한 것이 거룩한 곳에 선 것을 보거든 (읽는 자는 깨달을진저)","그러므로 너희가 선지자 다니엘의 말한바 ㄱ)멸망의 가증한 것이 거룩한 곳에 선 것을 보거든 (읽는 자는 깨달을찐저) 단 9:27, 11:31, 12:11","그러므로 예언자 다니엘이 말한 대로 ㄱ) 흉측한 물건이 거룩한 곳에 선 것을 보거든 (읽는 자들은 이 말이 무슨 뜻인지 새겨 들으라.) (ㄱ. 단11:31)","“When you see the desolating abomination spoken of through Daniel the prophet standing in the holy place (let the reader understand),","When ye therefore shall see the abomination of desolation, spoken of by Daniel the prophet, stand in the holy place, (whoso readeth, let him understand:)","\"So when you see standing in the holy place 'the abomination that causes desolation,' spoken of through the prophet Daniel--let the reader understand--","Cum ergo videritis abominationem desolationis, quae dicta est a Daniele propheta, stantem in loco sancto, qui legit, intellegat:","לכן כאשר תראו שקוץ משמם האמור על ידי דניאל הנביא עומד במקום קדש הקרא יבין׃"],["47","24","16","그때에 유다에 있는 이들은 산으로 달아나라.","그 때에는 유다에 있는 사람들은 산으로 도망가라.","그 때에 유대에 있는 자들은 산으로 도망할지어다","그 때에 유대에 있는 자들은 산으로 도망할찌어다","유대에 있는 사람들은 산으로 도망하라.","then those in Judea must flee to the mountains,","Then let them which be in Judaea flee into the mountains:","then let those who are in Judea flee to the mountains.","tunc qui in Iudaea sunt, fugiant ad montes;","אז נוס ינוסו אנשי יהודה אל ההרים׃"],["47","24","17","옥상에 있는 이는 물건을 꺼내러 집 안으로 내려가지 말고,","지붕에 있는 사람은 집 안에 있는 세간을 꺼내러 내려오지 말며","지붕 위에 있는 자는 집 안에 있는 물건을 가지러 내려 가지 말며","지붕 위에 있는 자는 집안에 있는 물건을 가질러 내려 가지 말며","지붕 위에 있는 사람은 집안에 있는 물건을 꺼내려고 내려오지 말고","a person on the housetop must not go down to get things out of his house,","Let him which is on the housetop not come down to take any thing out of his house:","Let no one on the roof of his house go down to take anything out of the house.","qui in tecto, non descendat tollere aliquid de domo sua;","ואשר על הגג אל ירד לשאת דבר מביתו׃"],["47","24","18","들에 있는 이는 겉옷을 가지러 가려고 뒤로 돌아서지 마라.","밭에 있는 사람은 겉옷을 가지러 집으로 돌아가지 마라.","밭에 있는 자는 겉옷을 가지러 뒤로 돌이키지 말지어다","밭에 있는 자는 겉옷을 가질러 뒤로 돌이키지 말찌어다","밭에 있는 사람은 겉옷을 가지러 집으로 돌아가지 말라.","a person in the field must not return to get his cloak.","Neither let him which is in the field return back to take his clothes.","Let no one in the field go back to get his cloak.","et, qui in agro, non revertatur tollere pallium suum.","ואשר בשדה אל ישב הביתה לשאת את מלבושו׃"],["47","24","19","불행하여라, 그 무렵에 임신한 여자들과 젖먹이가 딸린 여자들!","이런 때에 임신한 여자들과 젖먹이가 딸린 여자들은 불행하다.","그 날에는 아이 밴 자들과 젖 먹이는 자들에게 화가 있으리로다","그 날에는 아이 밴 자들과 젖먹이는 자들에게 화가 있으리로다","이런 때에 임신한 여자들과 갓난아기가 딸린 여자들은 불행하다.","Woe to pregnant women and nursing mothers in those days.","And woe unto them that are with child, and to them that give suck in those days!","How dreadful it will be in those days for pregnant women and nursing mothers!","Vae autem praegnantibus et nutrientibus in illis diebus!","ואוי להרות ולמיניקות בימים ההם׃"],["47","24","20","너희가 달아나는 일이 겨울이나 안식일에 일어나지 않도록 기도하여라.","겨울이나 안식일에 피난 가는 일이 없도록 기도하여라.","너희가 도망하는 일이 겨울에나 안식일에 되지 않도록 기도하라","너희의 도망하는 일이 겨울에나 안식일에 되지 않도록 기도하라","겨울이나 안식일에 피난 가는 일이 없도록 기도하여라.","Pray that your flight not be in winter or on the sabbath,","But pray ye that your flight be not in the winter, neither on the sabbath day:","Pray that your flight will not take place in winter or on the Sabbath.","Orate autem, ut non fiat fuga vestra hieme vel sabbato:","אך התפללו אשר מנוסתכם לא תהיה בחרף ולא בשבת׃"],["47","24","21","그때에 큰 환난이 닥칠 터인데, 그러한 환난은 세상 시초부터 지금까지 없었고 앞으로도 결코 없을 것이다.","그 때가 오면 무서운 재난을 겪을 터인데, 이런 재난은 세상 처음부터 지금까지 없었고 앞으로도 다시 없을 것이다.","이는 그 때에 큰 환난이 있겠음이라 창세로부터 지금까지 이런 환난이 없었고 후에도 없으리라","이는 그 때에 큰 환난이 있겠음이라 창세로부터 지금까지 이런 환난이 없었고 후에도 없으리라","세상 처음부터 지금까지 없었고 앞으로도 다시 없을 고통을 겪게 될 것이기 때문이다.","for at that time there will be great tribulation, such as has not been since the beginning of the world until now, nor ever will be.","For then shall be great tribulation, such as was not since the beginning of the world to this time, no, nor ever shall be.","For then there will be great distress, unequaled from the beginning of the world until now--and never to be equaled again.","erit enim tunc tribulatio magna, qualis non fuit ab initio mundi usque modo neque fiet.","כי אז תהיה צרה גדולה אשר כמוה לא נהיתה מראשית העולם עד עתה וכמוה לא תהיה עוד׃"],["47","24","22","그 날수를 줄여 주지 않으시면 어떠한 사람도 살아남지 못할 것이다. 그러나 선택된 이들을 위하여 그 날수를 줄여 주실 것이다.","하느님께서 그 고생의 기간을 줄여주시지 않는다면 살아 남을 사람은 하나도 없다. 그러나 뽑힌 사람들을 위하여 그 기간을 줄여주실 것이다.\"","그 날들을 감하지 아니하면 모든 육체가 구원을 얻지 못할 것이나 그러나 택하신 자들을 위하여 그 날들을 감하시리라","그 날들을 감하지 아니할 것이면 모든 육체가 구원을 얻지 못할 것이나 그러나 택하신 자들을 위하여 그 날들을 감하시리라","그 기간이 단축되지 않는다면 아무도 구원받지 못할 것이다. 그러나 하나님께서 택하신 사람들을 위해 그 기간을 단축해 주실 것이다.","And if those days had not been shortened, no one would be saved; but for the sake of the elect they will be shortened.","And except those days should be shortened, there should no flesh be saved: but for the elect's sake those days shall be shortened.","If those days had not been cut short, no one would survive, but for the sake of the elect those days will be shortened.","Et nisi breviati fuissent dies illi, non fieret salva omnis caro; sed propter electos breviabuntur dies illi.","ולולא נקצרו הימים ההם לא יושע כל בשר אך למען הבחירים יקצרו הימים ההם׃"],["47","24","23","그때에 누가 너희에게 ‘보라, 그리스도께서 여기 계시다!’, 또는 ‘아니, 여기 계시다!’ 하더라도 믿지 마라.","\"그 때에 어떤 사람이 '자 보아라, 그리스도가 여기 있다, 저기 있다.' 하더라도 그 말을 믿지 마라.","그 때에 사람이 너희에게 말하되 보라 그리스도가 여기 있다 혹은 저기 있다 하여도 믿지 말라","그 때에 사람이 너희에게 말하되 보라 그리스도가 여기 있다 혹 저기 있다 하여도 믿지 말라","그때 만일 어떤 사람이 너희에게 \"이분이 그리스도다\" 또는 \"저분이 그리스도다\" 하고 말하더라도 그 말을 믿지 말라.","If anyone says to you then, ‘Look, here is the Messiah!’ or, ‘There he is!’ do not believe it.","Then if any man shall say unto you, Lo, here is Christ, or there; believe it not.","At that time if anyone says to you, 'Look, here is the Christ!' or, 'There he is!' do not believe it.","Tunc si quis vobis dixerit:  “Ecce hic Christus “ aut:  “Hic “, nolite credere.","וכי יאמר אליכם איש בעת ההיא הנה פה המשיח או הנו שם אל תאמינו׃"],["47","24","24","거짓 그리스도들과 거짓 예언자들이 나타나, 할 수만 있으면 선택된 이들까지 속이려고 큰 표징과 이적들을 일으킬 것이다.","거짓 그리스도와 거짓 예언자들이 나타나서 어떻게 해서라도 뽑힌 사람들마저 속이려고 큰 기적과 이상한 일들을 보여줄 것이다.","거짓 그리스도들과 거짓 선지자들이 일어나 큰 표적과 기사를 보여 할 수만 있으면 택하신 자들도 미혹하리라","거짓 그리스도들과 거짓 선지자들이 일어나 큰 1)표적과 기사를 보이어 할 수만 있으면 택하신 자들도 미혹하게 하리라 혹 이적","거짓 그리스도들과 거짓 예언자들이 나타나서 놀라운 이적들을 행하여 하나님께서 택하신 사람들까지도 속일 수만 있다면 속이려 할 것이다.","False messiahs and false prophets will arise, and they will perform signs and wonders so great as to deceive, if that were possible, even the elect.","For there shall arise false Christs, and false prophets, and shall shew great signs and wonders; insomuch that, if it were possible, they shall deceive the very elect.","For false Christs and false prophets will appear and perform great signs and miracles to deceive even the elect--if that were possible.","Surgent enim pseudochristi et pseudoprophetae et dabunt signa magna et prodigia, ita ut in errorem inducantur, si fieri potest, etiam electi.","כי יקומו משיחי שקר ונביאי שקר ויתנו אתות גדלות ומופתים למען התעות אף את הבחירים אם יוכלו׃"],["47","24","25","보라, 내가 너희에게 미리 말해 둔다.","이것은 내가 미리 말해 두는 것이다.","보라 내가 너희에게 미리 말하였노라","보라 내가 너희에게 미리 말하였노라","내가 경고해 둔다.","Behold, I have told it to you beforehand.","Behold, I have told you before.","See, I have told you ahead of time.","Ecce praedixi vobis.","הנה מראש הגדתי לכם׃"],["47","24","26","그러므로 사람들이 너희에게 ‘보라, 광야에 계시다.’ 하더라도 나가지 마라. ‘보라, 골방에 계시다.’ 하더라도 믿지 마라.","그러므로 사람들이 '그리스도가 광야에 나타났다.' 해도 나가지 말고 '그리스도가 골방에 있다.' 해도 믿지 마라.","그러면 사람들이 너희에게 말하되 보라 그리스도가 광야에 있다 하여도 나가지 말고 보라 골방에 있다 하여도 믿지 말라","그러면 사람들이 너희에게 말하되 보라 그리스도가 광야에 있다 하여도 나가지 말고 보라 골방에 있다 하여도 믿지 말라","그러므로 만일 어떤 사람이 너희에게 \"그리스도가 광야에 계시다\" 또는 그가 \"이리저러한 곳에 숨어 계신다\"하고 하더라도 그 말을 믿지 말라.","So if they say to you, ‘He is in the desert,’ do not go out there; if they say, ‘He is in the inner rooms,’ do not believe it.","Wherefore if they shall say unto you, Behold, he is in the desert; go not forth: behold, he is in the secret chambers; believe it not.","\"So if anyone tells you, 'There he is, out in the desert,' do not go out; or, 'Here he is, in the inner rooms,' do not believe it.","Si ergo dixerint vobis:  “Ecce in deserto est “, nolite exire;  “Ecce in penetralibus “, nolite credere;","לכן כי יאמרו אליכם הנו במדבר אל תצאו הנו בחדרים אל תאמינו׃"],["47","24","27","동쪽에서 친 번개가 서쪽까지 비추듯 사람의 아들의 재림도 그러할 것이다.",null,"번개가 동편에서 나서 서편까지 번쩍임 같이 인자의 임함도 그러하리라","번개가 동편에서 나서 서편까지 번쩍임 같이 인자의 임함도 그러하리라","번개가 동쪽에서 치면 서쪽까지 번쩍이듯이 인자도 그렇게 올 것이다.","For just as lightning comes from the east and is seen as far as the west, so will the coming of the Son of Man be.","For as the lightning cometh out of the east, and shineth even unto the west; so shall also the coming of the Son of man be.","For as lightning that comes from the east is visible even in the west, so will be the coming of the Son of Man.","sicut enim fulgur exit ab oriente et paret usque in occidentem, ita erit adventus Filii hominis.","כי כברק היוצא ממזרח ומאיר עד מערב כן יהיה גם בואו של בן האדם׃"],["47","24","28","주검이 있는 곳에 독수리들이 모여든다.”","시체가 있는 곳에는 독수리가 모여드는 법이다.\"","주검이 있는 곳에는 독수리들이 모일 것이니라","주검이 있는 곳에는 독수리들이 모일찌니라","시체가 있는 곳에는 독수리가 모여들기 마련이다.","Wherever the corpse is, there the vultures will gather.","For wheresoever the carcase is, there will the eagles be gathered together.","Wherever there is a carcass, there the vultures will gather.","Ubicumque fuerit corpus, illuc congregabuntur aquilae.","כי באשר החלל שם יקבצו הנשרים׃"],["47","24","29","“그 무렵 환난이 지난 뒤 곧바로 해는 어두워지고 달은 빛을 내지 않으며 별들은 하늘에서 떨어지고 하늘의 세력들은 흔들릴 것이다.","\"그런 재난의 기간이 지나면 곧 해가 어두워지고 달은 빛을 잃을 것이며 별들은 하늘에서 떨어지고 모든 천체가 흔들릴 것이다.","그 날 환난 후에 즉시 해가 어두워지며 달이 빛을 내지 아니하며 별들이 하늘에서 떨어지며 하늘의 권능들이 흔들리리라","그 날 환난 후에 즉시 해가 어두워지며 달이 빛을 내지 아니하며 별들이 하늘에서 떨어지며 하늘의 권능들이 흔들리리라","이런 고통의 기간이 지나면 곧 태양은 어두워지고 달은 빛을 내지 못하며 별들은 하늘에서 떨어지고 하늘의 천체마저도 흔들릴 것이다.","“Immediately after the tribulation of those days, the sun will be darkened, and the moon will not give its light, and the stars will fall from the sky, and the powers of the heavens will be shaken.","Immediately after the tribulation of those days shall the sun be darkened, and the moon shall not give her light, and the stars shall fall from heaven, and the powers of the heavens shall be shaken:","\"Immediately after the distress of those days \"'the sun will be darkened, and the moon will not give its light; the stars will fall from the sky, and the heavenly bodies will be shaken.'","Statim autem post tribulationem dierum illorum, sol obscurabitur, et luna non dabit lumen suum, et stellae cadent de caelo, et virtutes caelorum commovebuntur.","ומיד אחרי צרת הימים ההם תחשך השמש והירח לא יגיה אורו והכוכבים יפלו מן השמים וכחות השמים יתמוטטו׃"],["47","24","30","그때 하늘에 사람의 아들의 표징이 나타날 것이다. 그러면 세상 모든 민족들이 가슴을 치면서, ‘사람의 아들이’ 큰 권능과 영광을 떨치며 ‘하늘의 구름을 타고 오는 것을’ 볼 것이다.","그러면 하늘에는 사람의 아들의 표징이 나타날 것이고 땅에서는 모든 민족이 가슴을 치며 울부짖을 것이다. 그 때에 사람들은 2)사람의 아들이 하늘에서 구름을 타고 권능을 떨치며 영광에 싸여 오는 것을 보게 될 것이다. 칠십인역 다니 7:13-14.","그 때에 인자의 징조가 하늘에서 보이겠고 그 때에 땅의 모든 족속들이 통곡하며 그들이 인자가 구름을 타고 능력과 큰 영광으로 오는 것을 보리라","그 때에 인자의 징조가 하늘에서 보이겠고 그 때에 땅의 모든 족속들이 통곡하며 그들이 인자가 구름을 타고 능력과 큰 영광으로 오는 것을 보리라","그러면 드디어 ㄱ) 인자가 온다는 징조가 하늘에 나타날 것이고 땅에서는 사방에서 사람들이 가슴을 치며 통곡할 것이다. 그때 이 세상의 모든 민족은 인자가 하늘에서 구름을 타고 권능과 큰 영광으로 오는 것을 보게 될 것이다. (ㄱ. 70인역 단7:13)","And then the sign of the Son of Man will appear in heaven, and all the tribes of the earth will mourn, and they will see the Son of Man coming upon the clouds of heaven with power and great glory.","And then shall appear the sign of the Son of man in heaven: and then shall all the tribes of the earth mourn, and they shall see the Son of man coming in the clouds of heaven with power and great glory.","\"At that time the sign of the Son of Man will appear in the sky, and all the nations of the earth will mourn. They will see the Son of Man coming on the clouds of the sky, with power and great glory.","Et tunc parebit signum Filii hominis in caelo, et tunc plangent omnes tribus terrae et videbunt Filium hominis venientem in nubibus caeli cum virtute et gloria multa;","אז אות בן האדם יראה בשמים וספדו כל משפחות הארץ וראו את בן האדם בא עם ענני השמים בגבורה וכבוד רב׃"],["47","24","31","그리고 그는 큰 나팔 소리와 함께 자기 천사들을 보낼 터인데, 그들은 그가 선택한 이들을 하늘 이 끝에서 저 끝까지 사방에서 모을 것이다.”","그리고 사람의 아들은 울려 퍼지는 나팔 소리와 함께 천사들을 보내어 그가 뽑은 사람들을 하늘 이 끝에서 저 끝까지 사방에서 불러모을 것이다.\"","그가 큰 나팔소리와 함께 천사들을 보내리니 그들이 그의 택하신 자들을 하늘 이 끝에서 저 끝까지 사방에서 모으리라","저가 큰 나팔소리와 함께 천사들을 보내리니 저희가 그 택하신 자들을 하늘 이 끝에서 저 끝까지 사방에서 모으리라","그리고 나팔 소리가 크게 울려 퍼지는 가운데 인자가 보낸 천사들이 하늘 이 끝에서부터 저 끝까지 사방에서 그가 택한 사람들을 모을 것이다.","And he will send out his angels with a trumpet blast, and they will gather his elect from the four winds, from one end of the heavens to the other.","And he shall send his angels with a great sound of a trumpet, and they shall gather together his elect from the four winds, from one end of heaven to the other.","And he will send his angels with a loud trumpet call, and they will gather his elect from the four winds, from one end of the heavens to the other.","et mittet angelos suos cum tuba magna, et congregabunt electos eius a quattuor ventis, a summis caelorum usque ad terminos eorum.","וישלח את מלאכיו בקול שופר גדול ויקבצו את בחיריו מארבע הרוחות למקצה השמים ועד קצה השמים׃"],["47","24","32","“너희는 무화과나무를 보고 그 비유를 깨달아라. 어느덧 가지가 부드러워지고 잎이 돋으면 여름이 가까이 온 줄 알게 된다.","\"무화과나무를 보고 배워라. 가지가 연해지고 잎이 돋으면 여름이 가까워진 것을 알게 된다.","무화과나무의 비유를 배우라 그 가지가 연하여지고 잎사귀를 내면 여름이 가까운 줄을 아나니","무화과나무의 비유를 배우라 그 가지가 연하여지고 잎사귀를 내면 여름이 가까운 줄을 아나니","무화과나무의 교훈을 배우라. 가지가 연해지고 잎이 돋으면 너희는 여름이 가까운 것을 안다.","“Learn a lesson from the fig tree. When its branch becomes tender and sprouts leaves, you know that summer is near.","Now learn a parable of the fig tree; When his branch is yet tender, and putteth forth leaves, ye know that summer is nigh:","\"Now learn this lesson from the fig tree: As soon as its twigs get tender and its leaves come out, you know that summer is near.","Ab arbore autem fici discite parabolam: cum iam ramus eius tener fuerit, et folia nata, scitis quia prope est aestas.","למדו נא את משל התאנה כאשר ירטב ענפה ופרחו עליה ידעתם כי קרוב הקיץ׃"],["47","24","33","이와 같이 너희도 이 모든 일을 보거든, 사람의 아들이 문 가까이 온 줄 알아라.","이와 같이 너희도 이런 일들이 일어나는 것을 보거든 사람의 아들이 문 앞에 다가온 줄을 알아라.","이와 같이 너희도 이 모든 일을 보거든 인자가 가까이 곧 문 앞에 이른 줄 알라","이와 같이 너희도 이 모든 일을 보거든 2)인자가 가까이 곧 문앞에 이른줄 알라 혹 때가","이와 같이 너희도 이런 일이 시작되는 기미를 보거든 내가 문 앞에 가까이 온 것을 알라.","In the same way, when you see all these things, know that he is near, at the gates.","So likewise ye, when ye shall see all these things, know that it is near, even at the doors.","Even so, when you see all these things, you know that it is near, right at the door.","Ita et vos, cum videritis haec omnia, scitote quia prope est in ianuis.","כן גם אתם בראותכם את כל אלה דעו כי קרוב הוא לפתח׃"],["47","24","34","내가 진실로 너희에게 말한다. 이 세대가 지나기 전에 이 모든 일이 일어날 것이다.","나는 분명히 말한다. 이 세대가 지나가기 전에 이 모든 일들이 일어나고야 말 것이다.","내가 진실로 너희에게 말하노니 이 세대가 지나가기 전에 이 일이 다 일어나리라","내가 진실로 너희에게 말하노니 이 세대가 지나가기 전에 이 일이 다 이루리라","내가 분명히 말한다. 이 세대가 다 지나가기 전에 끝이 올 것이다.","Amen, I say to you, this generation will not pass away until all these things have taken place.","Verily I say unto you, This generation shall not pass, till all these things be fulfilled.","I tell you the truth, this generation will certainly not pass away until all these things have happened.","Amen dico vobis: Non praeteribit haec generatio, donec omnia haec fiant.","אמן אמר אני לכם כי לא יעבר הדור הזה עד אשר יהיו כל אלה׃"],["47","24","35","하늘과 땅은 사라질지라도 내 말은 결코 사라지지 않는다.”","하늘과 땅은 사라질지라도 내 말은 결코 사라지지 않을 것이다.\"","천지는 없어질지언정 내 말은 없어지지 아니하리라","천지는 없어지겠으나 내 말은 없어지지 아니하리라","하늘과 땅은 사라질지라도 내 말은 결코 사라지지 않을 것이다.","Heaven and earth will pass away, but my words will not pass away.","Heaven and earth shall pass away, but my words shall not pass away.","Heaven and earth will pass away, but my words will never pass away.","Caelum et terra transibunt, verba vero mea non praeteribunt.","השמים והארץ יעברו ודברי לא יעברון׃"],["47","24","36","그러나 그 날과 그 시간은 아무도 모른다. 하늘의 천사들도 아들도 모르고 오로지 아버지만 아신다.","\"그러나 그 날과 그 시간은 아무도 모른다. 하늘의 천사들도 모르고 아들도 모르고 오직 아버지만이 아신다.","그러나 그 날과 그 때는 아무도 모르나니 하늘의 천사들도, 아들도 모르고 오직 아버지만 아시느니라","그러나 그 날과 그 때는 아무도 모르나니 하늘의 천사들도, 아들도 모르고 오직 아버지만 아시느니라","그러나 그날과 그 시간은 아무도 모른다. 하늘의 천사도 모르고 아들도 모른다. 다만 아버지만 아신다.","“But of that day and hour no one knows, neither the angels of heaven, nor the Son, but the Father alone.","But of that day and hour knoweth no man, no, not the angels of heaven, but my Father only.","\"No one knows about that day or hour, not even the angels in heaven, nor the Son, but only the Father.","De die autem illa et hora nemo scit, neque angeli caelorum neque Filius, nisi Pater solus.","אך היום ההוא והשעה ההיא אין איש יודע אתה גם לא מלאכי השמים בלתי אבי לבדו׃"],["47","24","37","노아 때처럼 사람의 아들의 재림도 그러할 것이다.","노아 때의 일을 생각해 보아라. 사람의 아들이 올 때에도 바로 그럴 것이다.","노아의 때와 같이 인자의 임함도 그러하리라","노아의 때와 같이 인자의 임함도 그러하리라","인자가 올 때도 노아 때와 같이 될 것이다.","For as it was in the days of Noah, so it will be at the coming of the Son of Man.","But as the days of Noe were, so shall also the coming of the Son of man be.","As it was in the days of Noah, so it will be at the coming of the Son of Man.","Sicut enim dies Noe, ita erit adventus Filii hominis.","וכימי נח כן יהיה גם בואו של בן האדם׃"],["47","24","38","홍수 이전 시대에 사람들은 노아가 방주에 들어가는 날까지 먹고 마시고 장가들고 시집가고 하면서,","홍수 이전의 사람들은 노아가 방주에 들어가던 날까지도 먹고 마시고 장가들고 시집가고 하다가","홍수 전에 노아가 방주에 들어가던 날까지 사람들이 먹고 마시고 장가 들고 시집 가고 있으면서","홍수 전에 노아가 방주에 들어가던 날까지 사람들이 먹고 마시고 장가 들고 시집 가고 있으면서","노아 때에 사람들은 노아가 방주 안에 들어갈 때까지 흥겨운 잔치를 벌이며 장가 가고 시집 가고 하였다.","In [those] days before the flood, they were eating and drinking, marrying and giving in marriage, up to the day that Noah entered the ark.","For as in the days that were before the flood they were eating and drinking, marrying and giving in marriage, until the day that Noe entered into the ark,","For in the days before the flood, people were eating and drinking, marrying and giving in marriage, up to the day Noah entered the ark;","Sicut enim erant in diebus ante diluvium comedentes et bibentes, nubentes et nuptum tradentes, usque ad eum diem, quo introivit in arcam Noe,","כי כאשר בימי המבול היו אכלים ושתים נשאים נשים ונתנים אתן לאנשים עד היום אשר בא נח אל התבה׃"],["47","24","39","홍수가 닥쳐 모두 휩쓸어 갈 때까지 아무것도 모르고 있었다. 사람의 아들의 재림도 그러할 것이다.","홍수를 만나 모두 휩쓸려 갔다. 그들은 이렇게 아무것도 모르고 있다가 홍수를 만났는데, 사람의 아들이 올 때에도 그러할 것이다.","홍수가 나서 그들을 다 멸하기까지 깨닫지 못하였으니 인자의 임함도 이와 같으리라","홍수가 나서 저희를 다 멸하기까지 깨닫지 못하였으니 인자의 임함도 이와 같으리라","사람들은 홍수가 나서 휩쓸려 갈 때까지도 무슨 일이 일어나고 있는지 아무 것도 모르고 있었다. 내가 올 때도 그럴 것이다.","They did not know until the flood came and carried them all away. So will it be [also] at the coming of the Son of Man.","And knew not until the flood came, and took them all away; so shall also the coming of the Son of man be.","and they knew nothing about what would happen until the flood came and took them all away. That is how it will be at the coming of the Son of Man.","et non cognoverunt, donec venit diluvium et tulit omnes, ita erit et adventus Filii hominis.","ולא ידעו עד בוא המבול וישחת את כלם כן יהיה גם בואו של בן האדם׃"],["47","24","40","그때에 두 사람이 들에 있으면, 하나는 데려가고 하나는 버려둘 것이다.","그 때에 두 사람이 밭에 있다면 하나는 데려가고 하나는 버려둘 것이다.","그 때에 두 사람이 밭에 있으매 한 사람은 데려가고 한 사람은 버려둠을 당할 것이요","그때에 두 사람이 밭에 있으매 하나는 데려감을 당하고 하나는 버려둠을 당할 것이요","그때 두 사람이 밭에서 일을 하고 있어도 한 사람은 데려가고 한 사람은 버려 둘 것이다.","Two men will be out in the field; one will be taken, and one will be left.","Then shall two be in the field; the one shall be taken, and the other left.","Two men will be in the field; one will be taken and the other left.","Tunc duo erunt in agro: unus assumitur, et unus relinquitur;","אז יהיו שנים בשדה אחד יאסף ואחד יעזב׃"],["47","24","41","두 여자가 맷돌질을 하고 있으면, 하나는 데려가고 하나는 버려둘 것이다.","또 두 여자가 맷돌을 갈고 있다면 하나는 데려가고 하나는 버려둘 것이다.","두 여자가 맷돌질을 하고 있으매 한 사람은 데려가고 한 사람은 버려둠을 당할 것이니라","두 여자가 매를 갈고 있으매 하나는 데려감을 당하고 하나는 버려둠을 당할 것이니라","두 여자가 함께 맷돌을 갈고 있어도 한 사람은 데려가고 한 사람은 버려 둘 것이다.","Two women will be grinding at the mill; one will be taken, and one will be left.","Two women shall be grinding at the mill; the one shall be taken, and the other left.","Two women will be grinding with a hand mill; one will be taken and the other left.","duae molentes in mola: una assumitur, et una relinquitur.","שתים טוחנות ברחים אחת תאסף ואחת תעזב׃"],["47","24","42","그러니 깨어 있어라. 너희의 주인이 어느 날에 올지 너희가 모르기 때문이다.","이렇게 너희의 주인이 언제 올지 모르니 깨어 있어라.","그러므로 깨어 있으라 어느 날에 너희 주가 임할는지 너희가 알지 못함이니라","그러므로 깨어 있으라 어느 날에 너희 주가 임할는지","그러니 준비하고 있으라. 너희 주인이 언제 올지 너희가 알지 못하리라.","Therefore, stay awake! For you do not know on which day your Lord will come.","Watch therefore: for ye know not what hour your Lord doth come.","\"Therefore keep watch, because you do not know on what day your Lord will come.","Vigilate ergo, quia nescitis qua die Dominus vester venturus sit.","לכן שקדו כי אינכם יודעים באי זו שעה יבא אדניכם׃"],["47","24","43","이것을 명심하여라. 도둑이 밤 몇 시에 올지 집주인이 알면, 깨어 있으면서 도둑이 자기 집을 뚫고 들어오도록 내버려 두지 않을 것이다.","만일 도둑이 밤 몇 시에 올는지 집 주인이 알고 있다면 그는 깨어 있으면서 도둑이 뚫고 들어오지 못하게 할 것이다.","너희도 아는 바니 만일 집 주인이 도둑이 어느 시각에 올 줄을 알았더라면 깨어 있어 그 집을 뚫지 못하게 하였으리라","너희가 알지 못함이니라 너희도 아는바니 만일 집 주인이 도적이 어느 경점에 올 줄을 알았더면 깨어 있어 그 집을 뚫지 못하게 하였으리라","만일 집주인이 밤에 도둑이 드는 시간을 알았다면 깨어 있으면서 도둑을 지킬 것이다.","Be sure of this: if the master of the house had known the hour of night when the thief was coming, he would have stayed awake and not let his house be broken into.","But know this, that if the goodman of the house had known in what watch the thief would come, he would have watched, and would not have suffered his house to be broken up.","But understand this: If the owner of the house had known at what time of night the thief was coming, he would have kept watch and would not have let his house be broken into.","Illud autem scitote quoniam si sciret pater familias qua hora fur venturus esset, vigilaret utique et non sineret perfodi domum suam.","ואת זאת הבינו אשר לו ידע בעל הבית באי זו אשמורה יבא הגנב כי עתה שקד ולא הניח לחתר את ביתו׃"],["47","24","44","그러니 너희도 준비하고 있어라. 너희가 생각하지도 않은 때에 사람의 아들이 올 것이기 때문이다.”","사람의 아들도 너희가 생각지도 않은 때에 올 것이다. 그러니 너희는 늘 준비하고 있어라.\"","이러므로 너희도 준비하고 있으라 생각하지 않은 때에 인자가 오리라","이러므로 너희도 예비하고 있으라 생각지 않은 때에 인자가 오리라","그러니 언제나 준비하고 있으라. 인자는 너희가 생각지도 않은 때에 예고도 없이 올 것이다.","So too, you also must be prepared, for at an hour you do not expect, the Son of Man will come.","Therefore be ye also ready: for in such an hour as ye think not the Son of man cometh.","So you also must be ready, because the Son of Man will come at an hour when you do not expect him.","Ideo et vos estote parati, quia, qua nescitis hora, Filius hominis venturus est.","לכן היו נכונים גם אתם כי בשעה אשר לא תדמו יבוא בן האדם׃"],["47","24","45","“주인이 종에게 자기 집안 식솔들을 맡겨 그들에게 제때에 양식을 내주게 하였으면, 어떻게 하는 종이 충실하고 슬기로운 종이겠느냐?","\"어떤 주인이 한 종에게 다른 종들을 다스리며 제때에 양식을 공급할 책임을 맡기고 떠났다면 어떻게 하여야 그 종이 과연 충성스럽고 슬기로운 종이겠느냐?","충성되고 지혜 있는 종이 되어 주인에게 그 집 사람들을 맡아 때를 따라 양식을 나눠 줄 자가 누구냐","충성되고 지혜 있는 종이 되어 주인에게 그 집 사람들을 맡아 때를 따라 양식을 나눠 줄 자가 누구뇨","슬기롭고 충성스러운 종은 과연 어떤 사람이겠느냐? 주인이 맡긴 집을 잘 관리하고 주인의 자녀들에게 때맞춰 양식을 나누어 주는 사람이 아니겠느냐?","“Who, then, is the faithful and prudent servant, whom the master has put in charge of his household to distribute to them their food at the proper time?","Who then is a faithful and wise servant, whom his lord hath made ruler over his household, to give them meat in due season?","\"Who then is the faithful and wise servant, whom the master has put in charge of the servants in his household to give them their food at the proper time?","Quis putas est fidelis servus et prudens, quem constituit dominus supra familiam suam, ut det illis cibum in tempore?","מי הוא אפוא העבד הנאמן והנבון אשר הפקידו אדניו על בני ביתו לתת להם את אכלם בעתו׃"],["47","24","46","행복하여라, 주인이 돌아와서 볼 때에 그렇게 일하고 있는 종!","주인이 돌아올 때에 자기 책임을 다하고 있다가 주인을 맞이하는 종이 아니겠느냐? 그런 종은 행복하다.","주인이 올 때에 그 종이 이렇게 하는 것을 보면 그 종이 복이 있으리로다","주인이 올 때에 그 종의 이렇게 하는 것을 보면 그 종이 복이 있으리로다","그 주인이 돌아왔을 때 종이 맡은 일을 충실하게 하고 있는 것을 보게 된다면 그 종은 칭찬을 받을 것이다.","Blessed is that servant whom his master on his arrival finds doing so.","Blessed is that servant, whom his lord when he cometh shall find so doing.","It will be good for that servant whose master finds him doing so when he returns.","Beatus ille servus, quem cum venerit dominus eius, invenerit sic facientem.","אשרי העבד אשר אדניו בבואו ימצאהו עשה כן׃"],["47","24","47","내가 진실로 너희에게 말한다. 주인은 자기의 모든 재산을 그에게 맡길 것이다.","나는 분명히 말한다. 주인은 모든 재산을 그에게 맡길 것이다.","내가 진실로 너희에게 이르노니 주인이 그의 모든 소유를 그에게 맡기리라","내가 진실로 너희에게 이르노니 주인이 그 모든 소유를 저에게 맡기리라","내가 진정으로 말한다. 주인은 이런 충성스러운 사람에게 그가 가진 모든 것을 맡길 것이다.","Amen, I say to you, he will put him in charge of all his property.","Verily I say unto you, That he shall make him ruler over all his goods.","I tell you the truth, he will put him in charge of all his possessions.","Amen dico vobis quoniam super omnia bona sua constituet eum.","אמן אמר אני לכם כי יפקידהו על כל אשר לו׃"],["47","24","48","그러나 만일 그가 못된 종이어서 마음속으로 ‘주인이 늦어지는구나.’ 하고 생각하며,","그러나 그가 만일 악한 종이어서 속으로 주인이 더디 오려니 생각하고","만일 그 악한 종이 마음에 생각하기를 주인이 더디 오리라 하여","만일 그 악한 종이 마음에 생각하기를 주인이 더디 오리라 하여","그러나 만일 그 종이 악해서 자기 스스로 \"내 주인은 곧 오시지 않을거야\"하면서","But if that wicked servant says to himself, ‘My master is long delayed,’","But and if that evil servant shall say in his heart, My lord delayeth his coming;","But suppose that servant is wicked and says to himself, 'My master is staying away a long time,'","Si autem dixerit malus servus ille in corde suo:  “Moram facit dominus meus venire “,","ואם העבד הרע יאמר בלבו בשש אדני לבוא׃"],["47","24","49","동료들을 때리기 시작하고 또 술꾼들과 어울려 먹고 마시면,","다른 종들을 때리고 술친구들과 함께 먹고 마시기만 한다면","동료들을 때리며 술친구들과 더불어 먹고 마시게 되면","동무들을 때리며 술친구들로 더불어 먹고 마시게 되면","동료 종들을 억압하고 술친구들과 흥청망청 놀고 술에 취해 있다면","and begins to beat his fellow servants, and eat and drink with drunkards,","And shall begin to smite his fellowservants, and to eat and drink with the drunken;","and he then begins to beat his fellow servants and to eat and drink with drunkards.","et coeperit percutere conservos suos, manducet autem et bibat cum ebriis,","ויחל להכות את חבריו ואכל ושתה עם הסובאים׃"],["47","24","50","예상하지 못한 날, 짐작하지 못한 시간에 그 종의 주인이 와서,","생각지도 않은 날, 짐작도 못한 시간에 주인이 돌아와서 그 꼴을 보게 될 것이다.","생각하지 않은 날 알지 못하는 시각에 그 종의 주인이 이르러","생각지 않은 날 알지 못하는 시간에 그 종의 주인이 이르러","생각지도 않은 시간에 예고도 없이 집주인이 돌아 올 것이다.","the servant’s master will come on an unexpected day and at an unknown hour","The lord of that servant shall come in a day when he looketh not for him, and in an hour that he is not aware of,","The master of that servant will come on a day when he does not expect him and at an hour he is not aware of.","veniet dominus servi illius in die, qua non sperat, et in hora, qua ignorat,","בוא יבוא אדני העבד ההוא ביום לא יצפה ובשעה לא ידע׃"],["47","24","51","그를 처단하여 위선자들과 같은 운명을 겪게 할 것이다. 거기에서 그는 울며 이를 갈 것이다.”","주인은 그 종을 자르고 위선자들이 벌받는 곳으로 보낼 것이다. 거기에서 그는 가슴을 치며 통곡할 것이다.\"","엄히 때리고 외식하는 자가 받는 벌에 처하리니 거기서 슬피 울며 이를 갈리라","3)엄히 때리고 외식 하는 자의 받는 율에 처하리니 거기서 슬피 울며 이를 갊이 있으리라헬, 쪼개어 내고","그러고는 그 종을 모진 매로 때리고 위선자들이 받는 심판을 받게 할 것이다. 그러면 그는 거기서 가슴을 치며 통곡할 것이다.","and will punish him severely and assign him a place with the hypocrites, where there will be wailing and grinding of teeth.","And shall cut him asunder, and appoint him his portion with the hypocrites: there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.","He will cut him to pieces and assign him a place with the hypocrites, where there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth.","et dividet eum partemque eius ponet cum hypocritis; illic erit fletus et stridor dentium.","וישסף אתו וישים את חלקו עם החנפים שם תהיה היללה וחרק השנים׃"],["47","25","1","“그때에 하늘 나라는 저마다 등을 들고 신랑을 맞으러 나간 열 처녀에 비길 수 있을 것이다.","\"하늘 나라는 열 처녀가 저마다 등불을 가지고 신랑을 맞으러 나간 것에 비길 수 있다.","그 때에 천국은 마치 등을 들고 신랑을 맞으러 나간 열 처녀와 같다 하리니","그 때에 천국은 마치 등을 들고 신랑을 맞으러 나간 열 처녀와 같다 하리니","하늘나라는 열 처녀가 저마다 등불을 들고 신랑을 맞으러 나간 것에 비유할 수 있다.","“Then the kingdom of heaven will be like ten virgins who took their lamps and went out to meet the bridegroom.","Then shall the kingdom of heaven be likened unto ten virgins, which took their lamps, and went forth to meet the bridegroom.","\"At that time the kingdom of heaven will be like ten virgins who took their lamps and went out to meet the bridegroom.","Tunc simile erit regnum cae lorum decem virginibus, quae accipientes lampades suas exierunt obviam sponso.","אז תדמה מלכות השמים לעשר עלמות אשר לקחו את נרותיהן ותצאנה לקראת החתן׃"],["47","25","2","그 가운데 다섯은 어리석고 다섯은 슬기로웠다.","그 가운데 다섯은 미련하고 다섯은 슬기로웠다.","그 중의 다섯은 미련하고 다섯은 슬기 있는 자라","그 중에 다섯은 미련하고 다섯은 슬기 있는지라","그 가운데 다섯은 미련하고 다섯은 슬기로웠다.","Five of them were foolish and five were wise.","And five of them were wise, and five were foolish.","Five of them were foolish and five were wise.","Quinque autem ex eis erant fatuae, et quinque prudentes.","חמש מהן היו חכמות וחמש כסילות׃"],["47","25","3","어리석은 처녀들은 등은 가지고 있었지만 기름은 가지고 있지 않았다.","미련한 처녀들은 등잔은 가지고 있었으나 기름은 준비하지 않았다.","미련한 자들은 등을 가지되 기름을 가지지 아니하고","미련한 자들은 등을 가지되 기름을 가지지 아니하고","미련한 처녀들은 등잔은 가지고 있었으나 기름을 채우는 것을 잊어버렸고","The foolish ones, when taking their lamps, brought no oil with them,","They that were foolish took their lamps, and took no oil with them:","The foolish ones took their lamps but did not take any oil with them.","Fatuae enim, acceptis lampadibus suis, non sumpserunt oleum secum;","הכסילות לקחו את הנרות ולא לקחו עמהן שמן׃"],["47","25","4","그러나 슬기로운 처녀들은 등과 함께 기름도 그릇에 담아 가지고 있었다.","한편 슬기로운 처녀들은 등잔과 함께 기름도 그릇에 담아 가지고 있었다.","슬기 있는 자들은 그릇에 기름을 담아 등과 함께 가져갔더니","슬기 있는 자들은 그릇에 기름을 담아 등과 함께 가져갔더니","슬기로운 처녀들은 등잔에 기름을 가득히 채워 가지고 있었다.","but the wise brought flasks of oil with their lamps.","But the wise took oil in their vessels with their lamps.","The wise, however, took oil in jars along with their lamps.","prudentes vero acceperunt oleum in vasis cum lampadibus suis.","והחכמות לקחו שמן בכליהן ואת נרותיהן׃"],["47","25","5","신랑이 늦어지자 처녀들은 모두 졸다가 잠이 들었다.","신랑이 늦도록 오지 않아 처녀들은 모두 졸다가 잠이 들었다.","신랑이 더디 오므로 다 졸며 잘새","신랑이 더디 오므로 다 졸며 잘쌔","처녀들은 밤이 늦도록 신랑이 오지 않자 모두 졸다가 잠이 들었다.","Since the bridegroom was long delayed, they all became drowsy and fell asleep.","While the bridegroom tarried, they all slumbered and slept.","The bridegroom was a long time in coming, and they all became drowsy and fell asleep.","Moram autem faciente sponso, dormitaverunt omnes et dormierunt.","וכאשר בשש החתן לבוא ותנמנה כלן ותרדמנה׃"],["47","25","6","그런데 한밤중에 외치는 소리가 났다. ‘신랑이 온다. 신랑을 맞으러 나가라.’","그런데 한밤중에 '저기 신랑이 온다. 어서들 마중 나가라!' 하는 소리가 크게 들렸다.","밤중에 소리가 나되 보라 신랑이로다 맞으러 나오라 하매","밤중에 소리가 나되 보라 신랑이로다 맞으러 나오라 하매","그런데 한밤중쯤 되어 \"신랑이 온다. 나와서 맞아들여라\" 하고 외치는 소리가 들려왔다.","At midnight, there was a cry, ‘Behold, the bridegroom! Come out to meet him!’","And at midnight there was a cry made, Behold, the bridegroom cometh; go ye out to meet him.","\"At midnight the cry rang out: 'Here's the bridegroom! Come out to meet him!'","Media autem nocte clamor factus est:  “Ecce sponsus! Exite obviam ei “.","ויהי בחצות הלילה ותהי צוחה הנה החתן צאינה לקראתו׃"],["47","25","7","그러자 처녀들이 모두 일어나 저마다 등을 챙기는데,","이 소리에 처녀들은 모두 일어나 제각기 등불을 챙기었다.","이에 그 처녀들이 다 일어나 등을 준비할새","이에 그 처녀들이 다 일어나 등을 준비할쌔","처녀들은 모두 일어나 제각기 등불을 손질하였다.","Then all those virgins got up and trimmed their lamps.","Then all those virgins arose, and trimmed their lamps.","\"Then all the virgins woke up and trimmed their lamps.","Tunc surrexerunt omnes virgines illae et ornaverunt lampades suas.","אז התעוררו כל העלמות ההן ותיטבנה את נרותיהן׃"],["47","25","8","어리석은 처녀들이 슬기로운 처녀들에게 ‘우리 등이 꺼져 가니 너희 기름을 나누어 다오.’ 하고 청하였다.","미련한 처녀들은 그제야 슬기로운 처녀들에게 '우리 등불이 꺼져가니 기름을 좀 나누어다오.' 하고 청하였다.","미련한 자들이 슬기 있는 자들에게 이르되 우리 등불이 꺼져가니 너희 기름을 좀 나눠 달라 하거늘","미련한 자들이 슬기 있는 자들에게 이르되 우리 등불이 꺼져가니 너희 기름을 좀 나눠 달라 하거늘","기름을 채워 놓지 않은 다섯 처녀들이 다른 처녀들에게 기름을 좀 나누어 달라고 청하였다. 그들의 등잔불이 꺼져가기 때문이었다.","The foolish ones said to the wise, ‘Give us some of your oil, for our lamps are going out.’","And the foolish said unto the wise, Give us of your oil; for our lamps are gone out.","The foolish ones said to the wise, 'Give us some of your oil; our lamps are going out.'","Fatuae autem sapientibus dixerunt:  “Date nobis de oleo vestro, quia lampades nostrae exstinguuntur “.","ותאמרנה הכסילות אל החכמות תנה לנו משמנכן כי יכבו נרותינו׃"],["47","25","9","그러나 슬기로운 처녀들은 ‘안 된다. 우리도 너희도 모자랄 터이니 차라리 상인들에게 가서 사라.’ 하고 대답하였다.","그러나 슬기로운 처녀들은 '우리 것을 나누어주면 우리에게도, 너희에게도 다 모자랄 터이니 너희 쓸 것은 차라리 가게에 가서 사다 쓰는 것이 좋겠다.' 하였다.","슬기 있는 자들이 대답하여 이르되 우리와 너희가 쓰기에 다 부족할까 하노니 차라리 파는 자들에게 가서 너희 쓸 것을 사라 하니","슬기 있는 자들이 대답하여 가로되 우리와 너희의 쓰기에 다 부족할까 하노니 차라리 파는 자들에게 가서 너희 쓸 것을 사라 하니","그러자 다섯 처녀들이 대답하였다. \"우리 것을 나누어 주면 우리마저 모자라게 돼. 그러니 가게에 가서 너희가 쓸 것을 사오는 것이 좋겠어.\"","But the wise ones replied, ‘No, for there may not be enough for us and you. Go instead to the merchants and buy some for yourselves.’","But the wise answered, saying, Not so; lest there be not enough for us and you: but go ye rather to them that sell, and buy for yourselves.","\"'No,' they replied, 'there may not be enough for both us and you. Instead, go to those who sell oil and buy some for yourselves.'","Responderunt prudentes dicentes:  “Ne forte non sufficiat nobis et vobis, ite potius ad vendentes et emite vobis “.","ותענינה החכמות לאמר לא כן פן יחסר לנו ולכן כי אם לכנה אל המוכרים וקנינה לכן׃"],["47","25","10","그들이 기름을 사러 간 사이에 신랑이 왔다. 준비하고 있던 처녀들은 신랑과 함께 혼인 잔치에 들어가고, 문은 닫혔다.","미련한 처녀들이 기름을 사러 간 사이에 신랑이 왔다. 준비하고 기다리고 있던 처녀들은 신랑과 함께 혼인 잔치에 들어갔고 문은 잠겼다.","그들이 사러 간 사이에 신랑이 오므로 준비하였던 자들은 함께 혼인 잔치에 들어가고 문은 닫힌지라","저희가 사러 간 동안에 신랑이 오므로 예비하였던 자들은 함께 혼인 잔치에 들어가고 문은 닫힌지라","미련한 처녀들이 기름을 사러 간 사이에 신랑이 왔다. 준비하고 기다리고 있던 처녀들은 신랑과 함께 결혼 잔치를 하러 들어갔고 문은 잠겼다.","While they went off to buy it, the bridegroom came and those who were ready went into the wedding feast with him. Then the door was locked.","And while they went to buy, the bridegroom came; and they that were ready went in with him to the marriage: and the door was shut.","\"But while they were on their way to buy the oil, the bridegroom arrived. The virgins who were ready went in with him to the wedding banquet. And the door was shut.","Dum autem irent emere, venit sponsus, et quae paratae erant, intraverunt cum eo ad nuptias; et clausa est ianua.","ויהי בעת לכתן לקנות ויבוא החתן והנכנות ללכת באו אתו אל החתנה ותסגר הדלת׃"],["47","25","11","나중에 나머지 처녀들이 와서 ‘주인님, 주인님, 문을 열어 주십시오.’ 하고 청하였지만,","그 뒤에 미련한 처녀들이 와서 '주님, 주님, 문 좀 열어주세요.' 하고 간청하였으나","그 후에 남은 처녀들이 와서 이르되 주여 주여 우리에게 열어 주소서","그 후에 남은 처녀들이 와서 가로되 주여 주여 우리에게 열어 주소서","그런 뒤에 미련한 다섯 처녀들이 돌아와 문밖에 서서 소리쳤다. \"주님, 문 좀 열어 주세요.\"","Afterwards the other virgins came and said, ‘Lord, Lord, open the door for us!’","Afterward came also the other virgins, saying, Lord, Lord, open to us.","\"Later the others also came. 'Sir! Sir!' they said. 'Open the door for us!'","Novissime autem veniunt et reliquae virgines dicentes:  “Domine, domine, aperi nobis “.","ואחרי כן באו גם שאר העלמות ותאמרנה אדנינו אדנינו פתח לנו׃"],["47","25","12","그는 ‘내가 진실로 너희에게 말한다. 나는 너희를 알지 못한다.’ 하고 대답하였다.","신랑은 '분명히 들으시오. 나는 당신들이 누구인지 모릅니다.' 하며 외면하였다.","대답하여 이르되 진실로 너희에게 이르노니 내가 너희를 알지 못하노라 하였느니라","대답하여 가로되 진실로 너희에게 이르노니 내가 너희를 알지 못하노라 하였느니라","그러나 신랑이 안에서 말하였다. \"내가 진정으로 말한다. 나는 너희를 알지 못한다.\"","But he said in reply, ‘Amen, I say to you, I do not know you.’","But he answered and said, Verily I say unto you, I know you not.","\"But he replied, 'I tell you the truth, I don't know you.'","At ille respondens ait:  “Amen dico vobis: Nescio vos “.","ויען ויאמר אמן אמר אני לכן לא ידעתי אתכן׃"],["47","25","13","그러니 깨어 있어라. 너희가 그 날과 그 시간을 모르기 때문이다.","그 날과 그 시간은 아무도 모른다. 그러니 항상 깨어 있어라.\"","그런즉 깨어 있으라 너희는 그 날과 그 때를 알지 못하느니라","그런즉 깨어 있으라 너희는 그 날과 그 시를 알지 못하느니라","그러므로 항상 깨어 준비하고 있으라. 그날과 그 시간을 너희는 모르지 않느냐?","Therefore, stay awake, for you know neither the day nor the hour.","Watch therefore, for ye know neither the day nor the hour wherein the Son of man cometh.","\"Therefore keep watch, because you do not know the day or the hour.","Vigilate itaque, quia nescitis diem neque horam.","לכן שקדו כי אינכם יודעים את היום ואת השעה אשר יבא בה בן האדם׃"],["47","25","14","“하늘 나라는 어떤 사람이 여행을 떠나면서 종들을 불러 재산을 맡기는 것과 같다.","\"하늘 나라는 또 이렇게 비유할 수 있다. 어떤 사람이 먼 길을 떠나면서 자기 종들을 불러 재산을 맡기었다.","또 어떤 사람이 타국에 갈 때 그 종들을 불러 자기 소유를 맡김과 같으니","또 어떤 사람이 타국에 갈제 그 종들을 불러 자기 소유를 맡김과 같으니","하늘나라는 마치 어떤 사람이 먼 나라로 길을 떠나면서 자기 종들을 불러 돈을 맡긴 것에 비유할 수 있다.","“It will be as when a man who was going on a journey called in his servants and entrusted his possessions to them.","For the kingdom of heaven is as a man travelling into a far country, who called his own servants, and delivered unto them his goods.","\"Again, it will be like a man going on a journey, who called his servants and entrusted his property to them.","Sicut enim homo peregre proficiscens vocavit servos suos et tradidit illis bona sua.","כי כמו איש נסע למרחוק אשר קרא אל עבדיו וימסר להם את רכושו׃"],["47","25","15","그는 각자의 능력에 따라 한 사람에게는 다섯 탈렌트, 다른 사람에게는 두 탈렌트, 또 다른 사람에게는 한 탈렌트를 주고 여행을 떠났다.","그는 각자의 능력에 따라 한 사람에게는 돈 다섯 달란트를 주고 한 사람에게는 두 달란트를 주고 또 한 사람에게는 한 달란트를 주고 떠났다.","각각 그 재능대로 한 사람에게는 금 다섯 달란트를, 한 사람에게는 두 달란트를, 한 사람에게는 한 달란트를 주고 떠났더니","각각 그 재능대로 하나에게는 금 다섯 1)달란트를, 하나에게는 두 1)달란트를, 하나에게는 한 1)달란트를 주고 떠났더니 금은의 수량금은의 수량금은의 수량","그는 각자의 능력에 따라 한 사람에게는 다섯 달란트를, 한 사람에게는 두 달란트를, 또 한 사람에게는 한 달란트를 주고 여행을 떠났다.","To one he gave five talents; to another, two; to a third, one—to each according to his ability. Then he went away. Immediately","And unto one he gave five talents, to another two, and to another one; to every man according to his several ability; and straightway took his journey.","To one he gave five talents of money, to another two talents, and to another one talent, each according to his ability. Then he went on his journey.","Et uni dedit quinque talenta, alii autem duo, alii vero unum, unicuique secundum propriam virtutem, et profectus est. Statim","ויתן לזה חמש ככרים ולזה שתים ולזה אחת לכל איש ואיש כפי ערכו וימהר ויסע משם׃"],["47","25","16","다섯 탈렌트를 받은 이는 곧 가서 그 돈을 활용하여 다섯 탈렌트를 더 벌었다.","다섯 달란트를 받은 사람은 곧 가서 그 돈을 활용하여 다섯 달란트를 더 벌었다.","다섯 달란트 받은 자는 바로 가서 그것으로 장사하여 또 다섯 달란트를 남기고","다섯 1)달란트 받은 자는 바로 가서 그것으로 장사하여 또 다섯 1)달란트를 남기고 금은의 수량금은의 수량","다섯 달란트를 받은 사람은 곧 그 돈으로 장사를 하여 다섯 달란트를 더 벌였다.","the one who received five talents went and traded with them, and made another five.","Then he that had received the five talents went and traded with the same, and made them other five talents.","The man who had received the five talents went at once and put his money to work and gained five more.","abiit, qui quinque talenta acceperat, et operatus est in eis et lucratus est alia quinque;","וילך האיש הלקח חמש ככרים ויסחר בהן ויעש לו חמש ככרים אחרות׃"],["47","25","17","두 탈렌트를 받은 이도 그렇게 하여 두 탈렌트를 더 벌었다.","두 달란트를 받은 사람도 그와 같이 하여 두 달란트를 더 벌었다.","두 달란트 받은 자도 그같이 하여 또 두 달란트를 남겼으되","두 1)달란트 받은 자도 그같이 하여 또 두 1)달란트를 남겼으되 금은의 수량금은의 수량","두 달란트를 받은 사람도 그렇게 하여 두 달란트를 더 벌었다.","Likewise, the one who received two made another two.","And likewise he that had received two, he also gained other two.","So also, the one with the two talents gained two more.","similiter qui duo acceperat, lucratus est alia duo.","וכן הלקח שתים גם הוא הרויח שתים אחרות׃"],["47","25","18","그러나 한 탈렌트를 받은 이는 물러가서 땅을 파고 주인의 그 돈을 숨겼다.","그러나 한 달란트를 받은 사람은 가서 그 돈을 땅에 묻어두었다.","한 달란트 받은 자는 가서 땅을 파고 그 주인의 돈을 감추어 두었더니","한 1)달란트 받은 자는 가서 땅을 파고 그 주인의 돈을 감추어 두었더니 금은의 수량","그러나 한 달란트를 받은 사람은 땅을 파고 그 돈을 안전하게 묻어 두었다.","But the man who received one went off and dug a hole in the ground and buried his master’s money.","But he that had received one went and digged in the earth, and hid his lord's money.","But the man who had received the one talent went off, dug a hole in the ground and hid his master's money.","Qui autem unum acceperat, abiens fodit in terra et abscondit pecuniam domini sui.","אך לקח האחת הלך ויחפר באדמה ויטמן את כסף אדניו׃"],["47","25","19","오랜 뒤에 종들의 주인이 와서 그들과 셈을 하게 되었다.","얼마 뒤에 주인이 와서 그 종들과 셈을 하게 되었다.","오랜 후에 그 종들의 주인이 돌아와 그들과 결산할새","오랜 후에 그 종들의 주인이 돌아와 저희와 회계할쌔","얼마 뒤에 주인이 여행에서 돌아와 자기 돈을 셈하려고 그들을 불렀다.","After a long time the master of those servants came back and settled accounts with them.","After a long time the lord of those servants cometh, and reckoneth with them.","\"After a long time the master of those servants returned and settled accounts with them.","Post multum vero temporis venit dominus servorum illorum et ponit rationem cum eis.","ואחרי ימים רבים בא אדוני העבדים ההם ויעש חשבון עמהם׃"],["47","25","20","다섯 탈렌트를 받은 이가 나아가서 다섯 탈렌트를 더 바치며, ‘주인님, 저에게 다섯 탈렌트를 맡기셨는데, 보십시오, 다섯 탈렌트를 더 벌었습니다.’ 하고 말하였다.","다섯 달란트를 받은 사람은 다섯 달란트를 더 가지고 와서 '주인님, 주인께서 저에게 다섯 달란트를 맡기셨는데 보십시오, 다섯 달란트를 더 벌었습니다.' 하고 말하였다.","다섯 달란트 받았던 자는 다섯 달란트를 더 가지고 와서 이르되 주인이여 내게 다섯 달란트를 주셨는데 보소서 내가 또 다섯 달란트를 남겼나이다","다섯 1)달란트 받았던 자는 다섯 1)달란트를 더 가지고 와서 가로되 주여 내게 다섯 1)달란트를 주셨는데 보소서 내가 또 다섯 1)달란트를 남겼나이다 금은의 수량금은의 수량금은의 수량금은의 수량","다섯 달란트를 받은 사람이 열 달란트를 주인에게 가지고 왔다.","The one who had received five talents came forward bringing the additional five. He said, ‘Master, you gave me five talents. See, I have made five more.’","And so he that had received five talents came and brought other five talents, saying, Lord, thou deliveredst unto me five talents: behold, I have gained beside them five talents more.","The man who had received the five talents brought the other five. 'Master,' he said, 'you entrusted me with five talents. See, I have gained five more.'","Et accedens, qui quinque talenta acceperat, obtulit alia quinque talenta dicens:  “Domine, quinque talenta tradidisti mihi; ecce alia quinque superlucratus sum “.","ויגש הלקח חמש הככרים ויבא חמש ככרים אחרות לאמר אדני חמש ככרים מסרת לי הנה חמש ככרים אחרות הרוחתי בהן׃"],["47","25","21","그러자 주인이 그에게 일렀다. ‘잘하였다, 착하고 성실한 종아! 네가 작은 일에 성실하였으니 이제 내가 너에게 많은 일을 맡기겠다. 와서 네 주인과 함께 기쁨을 나누어라.’","그러자 주인이 그에게 '잘하였다. 너는 과연 착하고 충성스러운 종이다. 네가 작은 일에 충성을 다하였으니 이제 내가 큰 일을 너에게 맡기겠다. 자, 와서 네 주인과 함께 기쁨을 나누어라.' 하고 말하였다.","그 주인이 이르되 잘하였도다 착하고 충성된 종아 네가 적은 일에 충성하였으매 내가 많은 것을 네게 맡기리니 네 주인의 즐거움에 참여할지어다 하고","그 주인이 이르되 잘 하였도다 착하고 충성된 종아 네가 작은 일에 충성하였으매 내가 많은 것으로 네게 맡기리니 네 주인의 즐거움에 참예할찌어다 하고","주인은 그가 일을 썩 잘해 낸 것을 보고 이렇게 말하였다. \"네가 이 작은 일에 충성을 다하였으니 이제 내가 더 큰일을 너에게 맡기겠다. 자, 어서 와서 나와 함께 기쁨을 나누자.\"","His master said to him, ‘Well done, my good and faithful servant. Since you were faithful in small matters, I will give you great responsibilities. Come, share your master’s joy.’","His lord said unto him, Well done, thou good and faithful servant: thou hast been faithful over a few things, I will make thee ruler over many things: enter thou into the joy of thy lord.","\"His master replied, 'Well done, good and faithful servant! You have been faithful with a few things; I will put you in charge of many things. Come and share your master's happiness!'","Ait illi dominus eius:  “Euge, serve bone et fidelis. Super pauca fuisti fidelis; supra multa te constituam: intra in gaudium domini tui “.","ויאמר אליו אדניו כן העבד הטוב והנאמן כי במעט נאמן היית ועל הרבה אפקידך בוא אל שמחת אדניך׃"],["47","25","22","두 탈렌트를 받은 이도 나아가서, ‘주인님, 저에게 두 탈렌트를 맡기셨는데, 보십시오, 두 탈렌트를 더 벌었습니다.’ 하고 말하였다.","그 다음 두 달란트를 받은 사람도 와서 '주인님, 두 달란트를 저에게 맡기셨는데 보십시오, 두 달란트를 더 벌었습니다.' 하고 말하였다.","두 달란트 받았던 자도 와서 이르되 주인이여 내게 두 달란트를 주셨는데 보소서 내가 또 두 달란트를 남겼나이다","두 1)달란트 받았던 자도 와서 가로되 주여 내게 두 1)달란트를 주셨는데 보소서 내가 또 두 1)달란트를 남겼나이다 금은의 수량금은의 수량금은의 수량","다음에는 두 달란트를 받은 사람이 와서 보고하였다. \"주인님이 주신 두 달란트를 제가 배로 남겼습니다.","[Then] the one who had received two talents also came forward and said, ‘Master, you gave me two talents. See, I have made two more.’","He also that had received two talents came and said, Lord, thou deliveredst unto me two talents: behold, I have gained two other talents beside them.","\"The man with the two talents also came. 'Master,' he said, 'you entrusted me with two talents; see, I have gained two more.'","Accessit autem et qui duo talenta acceperat, et ait:  “Domine, duo talenta tradidisti mihi; ecce alia duo lucratus sum “.","ויגש גם לקח הככרים ויאמר אדני ככרים מסרת לי הנה ככרים הרוחתי בהן׃"],["47","25","23","그러자 주인이 그에게 일렀다. ‘잘하였다, 착하고 성실한 종아! 네가 작은 일에 성실하였으니 이제 내가 너에게 많은 일을 맡기겠다. 와서 네 주인과 함께 기쁨을 나누어라.’","그래서 주인은 그에게도 '잘하였다. 너는 과연 착하고 충성스러운 종이다. 네가 작은 일에 충성을 다하였으니 이제 내가 큰 일을 너에게 맡기겠다. 자, 와서 네 주인과 함께 기쁨을 나누어라.' 하고 말하였다.","그 주인이 이르되 잘하였도다 착하고 충성된 종아 네가 적은 일에 충성하였으매 내가 많은 것을 네게 맡기리니 네 주인의 즐거움에 참여할지어다 하고","그 주인이 이르되 잘 하였도다 착하고 충성된 종아 네가 작은 일에 충성하였으매 내가 많은 것으로 네게 맡기리니 네 주인의 즐거움에 참예할찌어다 하고","주인은 그에게도 \"잘하였다. 너는 착하고 충성스러운 종이다. 네가 이 작은 일에 충성을 다하였으니 이제 내가 더 큰일을 너에게 맡기겠다. 자, 어서 와서 나와 함께 기쁨을 나누자\" 하고 말하였다.","His master said to him, ‘Well done, my good and faithful servant. Since you were faithful in small matters, I will give you great responsibilities. Come, share your master’s joy.’","His lord said unto him, Well done, good and faithful servant; thou hast been faithful over a few things, I will make thee ruler over many things: enter thou into the joy of thy lord.","\"His master replied, 'Well done, good and faithful servant! You have been faithful with a few things; I will put you in charge of many things. Come and share your master's happiness!'","Ait illi dominus eius:  “Euge, serve bone et fidelis. Super pauca fuisti fidelis; supra multa te constituam: intra in gaudium domini tui “.","ויאמר אליו אדניו היטבת העבד הטוב והנאמן במזער נאמן היית ועל הרבה אפקידך בוא אל שמחת אדניך׃"],["47","25","24","그런데 한 탈렌트를 받은 이는 나아가서 이렇게 말하였다. ‘주인님, 저는 주인님께서 모진 분이시어서, 심지 않은 데에서 거두시고 뿌리지 않은 데에서 모으신다는 것을 알고 있었습니다.","그런데 한 달란트를 받은 사람은 와서 '주인님, 저는 주인께서 심지 않은 데서 거두시고 뿌리지 않은 데서 모으시는 무서운 분이신 줄을 알고 있었습니다.","한 달란트 받았던 자는 와서 이르되 주인이여 당신은 굳은 사람이라 심지 않은 데서 거두고 헤치지 않은 데서 모으는 줄을 내가 알았으므로","한 1)달란트 받았던 자도 와서 가로되 주여 당신은 굳은 사람이라 심지 않은데서 거두고 헤치지 않은데서 모으는 줄을 내가 알았으므로 금은의 수량","이번에는 한 달란트를 받은 사람이 와서 말하였다. \"주인님, 저는 주인님이 씨를 뿌리지도 않은 곳에서 거두어들이고 심지도 않은 데서 모아 들이는 인색하고 매정한 분이신 줄을 잘 알고 있지요. 그래서 제가 이익을 남기더라도 빼앗아 갈 것이므로 돈을 다만 땅속에 감추어 두었다가 그냥 가지고 왔습니다!\"","Then the one who had received the one talent came forward and said, ‘Master, I knew you were a demanding person, harvesting where you did not plant and gathering where you did not scatter;","Then he which had received the one talent came and said, Lord, I knew thee that thou art an hard man, reaping where thou hast not sown, and gathering where thou hast not strawed:","\"Then the man who had received the one talent came. 'Master,' he said, 'I knew that you are a hard man, harvesting where you have not sown and gathering where you have not scattered seed.","Accedens autem et qui unum talentum acceperat, ait:  “Domine, novi te quia homo durus es: metis, ubi non seminasti, et congregas, ubi non sparsisti;","ויגש גם הלקח את הככר האחת ויאמר אדני ידעתיך כי איש קשה אתה קצר באשר לא זרעת וכנס מאשר לא פזרת׃"],["47","25","25","그래서 두려운 나머지 물러가서 주인님의 탈렌트를 땅에 숨겨 두었습니다. 보십시오, 주인님의 것을 도로 받으십시오.’","그래서 두려운 나머지 저는 주인님의 돈을 가지고 가서 땅에 묻어두었습니다. 보십시오, 여기 그 돈이 그대로 있습니다.' 하고 말하였다.","두려워하여 나가서 당신의 달란트를 땅에 감추어 두었었나이다 보소서 당신의 것을 가지셨나이다","두려워하여 나가서 당신의 1)달란트를 땅에 감추어 두었었나이다 보소서 당신의 것을 받으셨나이다 금은의 수량","(24절에 포함되어 있음)","so out of fear I went off and buried your talent in the ground. Here it is back.’","And I was afraid, and went and hid thy talent in the earth: lo, there thou hast that is thine.","So I was afraid and went out and hid your talent in the ground. See, here is what belongs to you.'","et timens abii et abscondi talentum tuum in terra. Ecce habes, quod tuum est “.","ואירא ואלך ואטמן את ככרך באדמה ועתה הא לך את אשר לך׃"],["47","25","26","그러자 주인이 그에게 대답하였다. ‘이 악하고 게으른 종아! 내가 심지 않은 데에서 거두고 뿌리지 않은 데에서 모으는 줄로 알고 있었다는 말이냐?","그러자 주인은 그 종에게 호통을 쳤다. '너야말로 악하고 게으른 종이다. 내가 심지 않은 데서 거두고 뿌리지 않은 데서 모으는 사람인 줄로 알고 있었다면","그 주인이 대답하여 이르되 악하고 게으른 종아 나는 심지 않은 데서 거두고 헤치지 않은 데서 모으는 줄로 네가 알았느냐","그 주인이 대답하여 가로되 악하고 게으른 종아 나는 심지 않은데서 거두고 헤치지 않은데서 모으는 줄로 네가 알았느냐","그러자 주인은 그 종에게 호통을 쳤다. \"이 악하고 게으른 놈아! 네가 나를 그런 매정한 사람으로 알고 있었다면","His master said to him in reply, ‘You wicked, lazy servant! So you knew that I harvest where I did not plant and gather where I did not scatter?","His lord answered and said unto him, Thou wicked and slothful servant, thou knewest that I reap where I sowed not, and gather where I have not strawed:","\"His master replied, 'You wicked, lazy servant! So you knew that I harvest where I have not sown and gather where I have not scattered seed?","Respondens autem dominus eius dixit ei:  “Serve male et piger! Sciebas quia meto, ubi non seminavi, et congrego, ubi non sparsi?","ויען אדניו ויאמר אליו העבד הרע והעצל אתה ידעת כי קצר אנכי באשר לא זרעתי וכנס מאשר לא פזרתי׃"],["47","25","27","그렇다면 내 돈을 대금업자들에게 맡겼어야지. 그리하였으면 내가 돌아왔을 때에 내 돈에 이자를 붙여 돌려받았을 것이다.","내 돈을 돈 쓸 사람에게 꾸어주었다가 내가 돌아올 때에 그 돈에 이자를 붙여서 돌려주어야 할 것이 아니냐?","그러면 네가 마땅히 내 돈을 취리하는 자들에게나 맡겼다가 내가 돌아와서 내 원금과 이자를 받게 하였을 것이니라 하고","그러면 네가 마땅히 내 돈을 취리하는 자들에게나 두었다가 나로 돌아 와서 내 본전과 변리를 받게 할 것이니라 하고","너는 적어도 내 돈을 이자놀이하는 사람에게 맡겨 두어 내가 이자라도 받을 수 있도록 해주었어야 할 것이 아니냐?","Should you not then have put my money in the bank so that I could have got it back with interest on my return?","Thou oughtest therefore to have put my money to the exchangers, and then at my coming I should have received mine own with usury.","Well then, you should have put my money on deposit with the bankers, so that when I returned I would have received it back with interest.","Oportuit ergo te mittere pecuniam meam nummulariis, et veniens ego recepissem, quod meum est cum usura.","לכן היה עליך לתת את כספי לשלחנים ואני בבואי הייתי לקח את אשר לי בתרבית׃"],["47","25","28","저자에게서 그 한 탈렌트를 빼앗아 열 탈렌트를 가진 이에게 주어라.","여봐라, 저자에게서 한 달란트마저 빼앗아 열 달란트 가진 사람에게 주어라.","그에게서 그 한 달란트를 빼앗아 열 달란트 가진 자에게 주라","그에게서 그 한 1)달란트를 빼앗아 열 1)달란트 가진 자에게 주어라 금은의 수량금은의 수량","여봐라, 이자가 가진 돈을 빼앗아 열 달란트를 가진 사람에게 주어라.","Now then! Take the talent from him and give it to the one with ten.","Take therefore the talent from him, and give it unto him which hath ten talents.","\"'Take the talent from him and give it to the one who has the ten talents.","Tollite itaque ab eo talentum et date ei, qui habet decem talenta:","על כן שאו ממנו את הככר ותנו אל האיש אשר לו עשר הככרים׃"],["47","25","29","누구든지 가진 자는 더 받아 넉넉해지고, 가진 것이 없는 자는 가진 것마저 빼앗길 것이다.","누구든지 있는 사람은 더 받아 넉넉해지고 없는 사람은 있는 것마저 빼앗길 것이다.","무릇 있는 자는 받아 풍족하게 되고 없는 자는 그 있는 것까지 빼앗기리라","무릇 있는 자는 받아 풍족하게 되고 없는 자는 그 있는 것까지 빼앗기리라","자기에게 주어진 것을 잘 활용하는 사람은 더 많이 받아서 풍족하게 될 것이고 책임을 다하지 못하는 사람은 가지고 있는 것마저도 빼앗길 것이다.","For to everyone who has, more will be given and he will grow rich; but from the one who has not, even what he has will be taken away.","For unto every one that hath shall be given, and he shall have abundance: but from him that hath not shall be taken away even that which he hath.","For everyone who has will be given more, and he will have an abundance. Whoever does not have, even what he has will be taken from him.","omni enim habenti dabitur, et abundabit; ei autem, qui non habet, et quod habet, auferetur ab eo.","כי כל איש אשר יש לו ינתן לו ויעדיף והאיש אשר אין לו גם את אשר לו יקח ממנו׃"],["47","25","30","그리고 저 쓸모없는 종은 바깥 어둠 속으로 내던져 버려라. 거기에서 그는 울며 이를 갈 것이다.’”","이 쓸모없는 종을 바깥 어두운 곳에 내쫓아라. 거기에서 가슴을 치며 통곡할 것이다.'\"","이 무익한 종을 바깥 어두운 데로 내쫓으라 거기서 슬피 울며 이를 갈리라 하니라","이 무익한 종을 바깥 어두운데로 내어쫓으라 거기서 슬피 울며 이를 갊이 있으리라 하니라","이 쓸모없는 인간을 바깥 어두운 곳에 내쫓아라. 거기서 가슴을 치며 통곡할 것이다.\"","And throw this useless servant into the darkness outside, where there will be wailing and grinding of teeth.’","And cast ye the unprofitable servant into outer darkness: there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.","And throw that worthless servant outside, into the darkness, where there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth.'","Et inutilem servum eicite in tenebras exteriores: illic erit fletus et stridor dentium “.","ואת עבד הבליעל השליכו אל החשך החיצון שם תהיה היללה וחרק השנים׃"],["47","25","31","“사람의 아들이 영광에 싸여 모든 천사와 함께 오면, 자기의 영광스러운 옥좌에 앉을 것이다.","\"사람의 아들이 영광을 떨치며 모든 천사들을 거느리고 와서 영광스러운 왕좌에 앉게 되면","인자가 자기 영광으로 모든 천사와 함께 올 때에 자기 영광의 보좌에 앉으리니","인자가 자기 영광으로 모든 천사와 함께 올때에 자기 영광의 보좌에 앉으리니","인자가 영광에 싸여 모든 천사를 거느리고 와서 영광스러운 보좌에 앉을 때에","“When the Son of Man comes in his glory, and all the angels with him, he will sit upon his glorious throne,","When the Son of man shall come in his glory, and all the holy angels with him, then shall he sit upon the throne of his glory:","\"When the Son of Man comes in his glory, and all the angels with him, he will sit on his throne in heavenly glory.","Cum autem venerit Filius hominis in gloria sua, et omnes angeli cum eo, tunc sedebit super thronum gloriae suae.","והיה כי יבוא בן האדם בכבודו וכל המלאכים הקדשים עמו וישב על כסא כבודו׃"],["47","25","32","그리고 모든 민족들이 사람의 아들 앞으로 모일 터인데, 그는 목자가 양과 염소를 가르듯이 그들을 가를 것이다.","모든 민족들을 앞에 불러놓고 마치 목자가 양과 염소를 갈라놓듯이 그들을 갈라","모든 민족을 그 앞에 모으고 각각 구분하기를 목자가 양과 염소를 구분하는 것 같이 하여","모든 민족을 그 앞에 모으고 각각 분별하기를 목자가 양과 염소를 분별하는것 같이 하여","모든 민족이 불려 나와 인자 앞에 모일 것이다. 그때 내가 마치 목자가 양과 염소를 갈라 놓듯이 사람들을 갈라서","and all the nations will be assembled before him. And he will separate them one from another, as a shepherd separates the sheep from the goats.","And before him shall be gathered all nations: and he shall separate them one from another, as a shepherd divideth his sheep from the goats:","All the nations will be gathered before him, and he will separate the people one from another as a shepherd separates the sheep from the goats.","Et congregabuntur ante eum omnes gentes; et separabit eos ab invicem, sicut pastor segregat oves ab haedis,","ונאספו לפניו כל הגוים והפריד בינותם כאשר יפריד הרעה את הכבשים מן העתודים׃"],["47","25","33","그렇게 하여 양들은 자기 오른쪽에, 염소들은 왼쪽에 세울 것이다.","양은 오른편에, 염소는 왼편에 자리잡게 할 것이다.","양은 그 오른편에 염소는 왼편에 두리라","양은 그 오른편에, 염소는 왼편에 두리라","양은 오른편에, 염소는 왼편에 둘 것이다.","He will place the sheep on his right and the goats on his left.","And he shall set the sheep on his right hand, but the goats on the left.","He will put the sheep on his right and the goats on his left.","et statuet oves quidem a dextris suis, haedos autem a sinistris.","והציב את הכבשים לימינו ואת העתודים לשמאלו׃"],["47","25","34","그때에 임금이 자기 오른쪽에 있는 이들에게 이렇게 말할 것이다. ‘내 아버지께 복을 받은 이들아, 와서, 세상 창조 때부터 너희를 위하여 준비된 나라를 차지하여라.","그 때에 그 임금은 자기 오른편에 있는 사람들에게 이렇게 말할 것이다. '너희는 내 아버지의 복을 받은 사람들이니 와서 세상 창조 때부터 너희를 위하여 준비한 이 나라를 차지하여라.","그 때에 임금이 그 오른편에 있는 자들에게 이르시되 내 아버지께 복 받을 자들이여 나아와 창세로부터 너희를 위하여 예비된 나라를 상속받으라","그 때에 임금이 그 오른편에 있는 자들에게 이르시되 내 아버지께 복 받을 자들이여 나아와 창세로부터 너희를 위하여 예비된 나라를 상속하라","그리고 왕인 나는 내 오른편에 있는 사람들에게 이렇게 말할 것이다. \"내 아버지께 복받을 사람들아, 와서 천지창조 때부터 너희를 위하여 준비한 이 나라에 들어가라.","Then the king will say to those on his right, ‘Come, you who are blessed by my Father. Inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world.","Then shall the King say unto them on his right hand, Come, ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world:","\"Then the King will say to those on his right, 'Come, you who are blessed by my Father; take your inheritance, the kingdom prepared for you since the creation of the world.","Tunc dicet Rex his, qui a dextris eius erunt:  “Venite, benedicti Patris mei; possidete paratum vobis regnum a constitutione mundi.","אז יאמר המלך אל הנצבים לימינו באו ברוכי אבי ורשו את המלכות המוכנה לכם למן הוסד העולם׃"],["47","25","35","너희는 내가 굶주렸을 때에 먹을 것을 주었고, 내가 목말랐을 때에 마실 것을 주었으며, 내가 나그네였을 때에 따뜻이 맞아들였다.","너희는 내가 굶주렸을 때에 먹을 것을 주었고 목말랐을 때에 마실 것을 주었으며 나그네 되었을 때에 따뜻하게 맞이하였다.","내가 주릴 때에 너희가 먹을 것을 주었고 목마를 때에 마시게 하였고 나그네 되었을 때에 영접하였고","내가 주릴 때에 너희가 먹을 것을 주었고 목마를 때에 마시게 하였고 나그네 되었을 때에 영접하였고","너희는 내가 배고플 때에 먹을 것을 주었고, 목말랐을 때에 마실 것을 주었으며, 내가 나그네 되었을 때에 너희 집으로 따뜻하게 맞아들였다.","For I was hungry and you gave me food, I was thirsty and you gave me drink, a stranger and you welcomed me,","For I was an hungred, and ye gave me meat: I was thirsty, and ye gave me drink: I was a stranger, and ye took me in:","For I was hungry and you gave me something to eat, I was thirsty and you gave me something to drink, I was a stranger and you invited me in,","Esurivi enim, et dedistis mihi manducare; sitivi, et dedistis mihi bibere; hospes eram, et collegistis me;","כי רעב הייתי ותאכילני צמא הייתי ותשקוני גר הייתי ותאספוני׃"],["47","25","36","또 내가 헐벗었을 때에 입을 것을 주었고, 내가 병들었을 때에 돌보아 주었으며, 내가 감옥에 있을 때에 찾아 주었다.’","또 헐벗었을 때에 입을 것을 주었으며 병들었을 때에 돌보아 주었고 감옥에 갇혔을 때에 찾아주었다.'","헐벗었을 때에 옷을 입혔고 병들었을 때에 돌보았고 옥에 갇혔을 때에 와서 보았느니라","벗었을 때에 옷을 입혔고 병들었을 때에 돌아보았고 옥에 갇혔을 때에 와서 보았느니라","또 헐벗었을 때에 입을 것을 주었고, 병들었을 때와 감옥에 갇혔을 때에 찾아와 주었다.\"","naked and you clothed me, ill and you cared for me, in prison and you visited me.’","Naked, and ye clothed me: I was sick, and ye visited me: I was in prison, and ye came unto me.","I needed clothes and you clothed me, I was sick and you looked after me, I was in prison and you came to visit me.'","nudus, et operuistis me; infirmus, et visitastis me; in carcere eram, et venistis ad me “.","ערום ותכסוני חולה ותבקרוני במשמר הייתי ותבאו אלי׃"],["47","25","37","그러면 그 의인들이 이렇게 말할 것이다. ‘주님, 저희가 언제 주님께서 굶주리신 것을 보고 먹을 것을 드렸고, 목마르신 것을 보고 마실 것을 드렸습니까?","이 말을 듣고 의인들은 이렇게 말할 것이다. '주님, 저희가 언제 주님께서 주리신 것을 보고 잡수실 것을 드렸으며 목마르신 것을 보고 마실 것을 드렸습니까?","이에 의인들이 대답하여 이르되 주여 우리가 어느 때에 주께서 주리신 것을 보고 음식을 대접하였으며 목마르신 것을 보고 마시게 하였나이까","이에 의인들이 대답하여 가로되 주여 우리가 어느 때에 주의 주리신 것을 보고 공궤하였으며 목마르신 것을 보고 마시게 하였나이까","그때 그 의로운 사람들은 이렇게 대답할 것이다. \"주님, 저희가 언제 주님이 배고프신 것을 보고 잡수실 것을 드렸으며, 목마르신 것을 보고 마실 것을 드렸습니까?","Then the righteous will answer him and say, ‘Lord, when did we see you hungry and feed you, or thirsty and give you drink?","Then shall the righteous answer him, saying, Lord, when saw we thee an hungred, and fed thee? or thirsty, and gave thee drink?","\"Then the righteous will answer him, 'Lord, when did we see you hungry and feed you, or thirsty and give you something to drink?","Tunc respondebunt ei iusti dicentes:  “Domine, quando te vidimus esurientem et pavimus, aut sitientem et dedimus tibi potum?","וענו הצדיקים ואמרו אדנינו מתי ראינוך רעב ונכלכלך או צמא ונשקה אותך׃"],["47","25","38","언제 주님께서 나그네 되신 것을 보고 따뜻이 맞아들였고, 헐벗으신 것을 보고 입을 것을 드렸습니까?","또 언제 주님께서 나그네 되신 것을 보고 따뜻이 맞아들였으며 헐벗으신 것을 보고 입을 것을 드렸으며,","어느 때에 나그네 되신 것을 보고 영접하였으며 헐벗으신 것을 보고 옷 입혔나이까","어느 때에 나그네 되신 것을 보고 영접하였으며 벗으신 것을 보고 옷 입혔나이까","또 언제 주님이 나그네 되신 것을 보고 도와 드렸으며, 헐벗으신 것을 보고 입을 것을 드렸습니까?","When did we see you a stranger and welcome you, or naked and clothe you?","When saw we thee a stranger, and took thee in? or naked, and clothed thee?","When did we see you a stranger and invite you in, or needing clothes and clothe you?","Quando autem te vidimus hospitem et collegimus, aut nudum et cooperuimus?","ומתי ראינוך גר ונאספך או ערם ונכסך׃"],["47","25","39","언제 주님께서 병드시거나 감옥에 계신 것을 보고 찾아가 뵈었습니까?’","언제 주님께서 병드셨거나 감옥에 갇히신 것을 보고 저희가 찾아가 뵈었습니까?'","어느 때에 병드신 것이나 옥에 갇히신 것을 보고 가서 뵈었나이까 하리니","어느 때에 병드신 것이나 옥에 갇히신 것을 보고 가서 뵈었나이까 하리니","언제 주님이 병드셨거나 감옥에 갇히신 것을 보고 찾아가 뵈었습니까?\"","When did we see you ill or in prison, and visit you?’","Or when saw we thee sick, or in prison, and came unto thee?","When did we see you sick or in prison and go to visit you?'","Quando autem te vidimus infirmum aut in carcere et venimus ad te? “.","ומתי ראינוך חולה או במשמר ונבא אליך׃"],["47","25","40","그러면 임금이 대답할 것이다. ‘내가 진실로 너희에게 말한다. 너희가 내 형제들인 이 가장 작은 이들 가운데 한 사람에게 해 준 것이 바로 나에게 해 준 것이다.’","그러면 임금은 '분명히 말한다. 너희가 여기 있는 형제 중에 가장 보잘것없는 사람 하나에게 해준 것이 바로 나에게 해준 것이다.' 하고 말할 것이다.\"","임금이 대답하여 이르시되 내가 진실로 너희에게 이르노니 너희가 여기 내 형제 중에 지극히 작은 자 하나에게 한 것이 곧 내게 한 것이니라 하시고","임금이 대답하여 가라사대 내가 진실로 너희에게 이르노니 너희가 여기 내 형제 중에 지극히 작은 자 하나에게 한 것이 곧 내게 한 것이니라 하시고","그러면 왕은 이렇게 말할 것이다. \"내가 진정으로 말한다. 너희가 여기 있는 내 형제 중에 가장 보잘 것 없는 사람 하나에게 해준 것이 곧 내게 해준 것이다!\"","And the king will say to them in reply, ‘Amen, I say to you, whatever you did for one of these least brothers of mine, you did for me.’","And the King shall answer and say unto them, Verily I say unto you, Inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of the least of these my brethren, ye have done it unto me.","\"The King will reply, 'I tell you the truth, whatever you did for one of the least of these brothers of mine, you did for me.'","Et respondens Rex dicet illis:  “Amen dico vobis: Quamdiu fecistis uni de his fratribus meis minimis, mihi fecistis “.","והמלך יענה ויאמר אליהם אמן אמר אני לכם מה שעשיתם לאחד מאחי הצעירים האלה לי עשיתם׃"],["47","25","41","그때에 임금은 왼쪽에 있는 자들에게도 이렇게 말할 것이다. ‘저주받은 자들아, 나에게서 떠나 악마와 그 부하들을 위하여 준비된 영원한 불 속으로 들어가라.","\"그리고 왼편에 있는 사람들에게는 이렇게 말할 것이다. '이 저주받은 자들아, 나에게서 떠나 악마와 그의 졸도들을 가두려고 준비한 영원한 불 속에 들어가라.","또 왼편에 있는 자들에게 이르시되 저주를 받은 자들아 나를 떠나 마귀와 그 사자들을 위하여 예비된 영원한 불에 들어가라","또 왼편에 있는 자들에게 이르시되 저주를 받은 자들아 나를 떠나 마귀와 그 사자들을 위하여 예비된 영영한 불에 들어가라","그리고 나는 왼편에 있는 사람들을 향해서 이렇게 말할 것이다. \"너희 저주받은 자들아 내게서 물러가 마귀와 그 부하들을 가두려고 준비한 영원한 불속으로 들어가라.","Then he will say to those on his left, ‘Depart from me, you accursed, into the eternal fire prepared for the devil and his angels.","Then shall he say also unto them on the left hand, Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his angels:","\"Then he will say to those on his left, 'Depart from me, you who are cursed, into the eternal fire prepared for the devil and his angels.","Tunc dicet et his, qui a sinistris erunt:  “Discedite a me, maledicti, in ignem aeternum, qui praeparatus est Diabolo et angelis eius.","ואז יאמר גם אל הנצבים לשמאלו לכו מעלי אתם הארורים אל אש עולם המוכנה לשטן ולמלאכיו׃"],["47","25","42","너희는 내가 굶주렸을 때에 먹을 것을 주지 않았고, 내가 목말랐을 때에 마실 것을 주지 않았으며,","너희는 내가 주렸을 때에 먹을 것을 주지 않았고, 목말랐을 때에 마실 것을 주지 않았으며","내가 주릴 때에 너희가 먹을 것을 주지 아니하였고 목마를 때에 마시게 하지 아니하였고","내가 주릴 때에 너희가 먹을 것을 주지 아니하였고 목마를 때에 마시게 하지 아니하였고","너희는 내가 배고플 때에 먹을 것을 주지 않았고, 목마를 때에 마실 것을 주지 않았으며,","For I was hungry and you gave me no food, I was thirsty and you gave me no drink,","For I was an hungred, and ye gave me no meat: I was thirsty, and ye gave me no drink:","For I was hungry and you gave me nothing to eat, I was thirsty and you gave me nothing to drink,","Esurivi enim, et non dedistis mihi manducare; sitivi, et non dedistis mihi potum;","כי רעב הייתי ולא האכלתם אותי צמא הייתי ולא השקיתם אותי׃"],["47","25","43","내가 나그네였을 때에 따뜻이 맞아들이지 않았다. 또 내가 헐벗었을 때에 입을 것을 주지 않았고, 내가 병들었을 때와 감옥에 있을 때에 돌보아 주지 않았다.’","나그네 되었을 때에 따뜻하게 맞이하지 않았고, 헐벗었을 때에 입을 것을 주지 않았으며, 또 병들었을 때나 감옥에 갇혔을 때에 돌보아 주지 않았다.'","나그네 되었을 때에 영접하지 아니하였고 헐벗었을 때에 옷 입히지 아니하였고 병들었을 때와 옥에 갇혔을 때에 돌보지 아니하였느니라 하시니","나그네 되었을 때에 영접하지 아니하였고 벗었을 때에 옷 입히지 아니하였고 병들었을 때와 옥에 갇혔을 때에 돌아보지 아니하였느니라 하시니","나그네 되었을 때에 따뜻하게 맞아들이지 않았다. 또 헐벗었을 때에 입을 것을 주지 않았고 병들었을 때나 감옥에 갇혔을 때에도 찾아와 주지 않았다.\"","a stranger and you gave me no welcome, naked and you gave me no clothing, ill and in prison, and you did not care for me.’","I was a stranger, and ye took me not in: naked, and ye clothed me not: sick, and in prison, and ye visited me not.","I was a stranger and you did not invite me in, I needed clothes and you did not clothe me, I was sick and in prison and you did not look after me.'","hospes eram, et non collegistis me; nudus, et non operuistis me; infirmus et in carcere, et non visitastis me “.","גר הייתי ולא אספתם אותי ערום ולא כסיתם אותי חולה ובמשמר ולא בקרתם אותי׃"],["47","25","44","그러면 그들도 이렇게 말할 것이다. ‘주님, 저희가 언제 주님께서 굶주리시거나 목마르시거나 나그네 되신 것을 보고, 또 헐벗으시거나 병드시거나 감옥에 계신 것을 보고 시중들지 않았다는 말씀입니까?’","이 말을 듣고 그들도 이렇게 대답할 것이다. '주님, 주님께서 언제 굶주리고 목마르셨으며, 언제 나그네 되시고 헐벗으셨으며, 또 언제 병드시고 감옥에 갇히셨기에 저희가 모른 체하고 돌보아 드리지 않았다는 말씀입니까?'","그들도 대답하여 이르되 주여 우리가 어느 때에 주께서 주리신 것이나 목마르신 것이나 나그네 되신 것이나 헐벗으신 것이나 병드신 것이나 옥에 갇히신 것을 보고 공양하지 아니하더이까","저희도 대답하여 가로되 주여 우리가 어느 때에 주의 주리신 것이나 목마르신 것이나 나그네 되신 것이나 벗으신 것이나 병드신 것이나 옥에 갇히신 것을 보고 공양치 아니하더이까","그러면 그들도 대답할 것이다. \"주님, 주님이 언제 배고프고 목마르셨으며, 나그네 되고 헐벗으셨으며, 병들고 감옥에 갇히셨던 일이 있었기에 저희가 보고도 돌보아 드리지 않았다 하십니까?\"","Then they will answer and say, ‘Lord, when did we see you hungry or thirsty or a stranger or naked or ill or in prison, and not minister to your needs?’","Then shall they also answer him, saying, Lord, when saw we thee an hungred, or athirst, or a stranger, or naked, or sick, or in prison, and did not minister unto thee?","\"They also will answer, 'Lord, when did we see you hungry or thirsty or a stranger or needing clothes or sick or in prison, and did not help you?'","Tunc respondebunt et ipsi dicentes:  “Domine, quando te vidimus esurientem aut sitientem aut hospitem aut nudum aut infirmum vel in carcere et non ministravimus tibi? “.","וענו גם הם ואמרו אדנינו מתי ראינוך רעב או צמא או גר או ערום או חולה או במשמר ולא שרתנוך׃"],["47","25","45","그때에 임금이 대답할 것이다. ‘내가 진실로 너희에게 말한다. 너희가 이 가장 작은 이들 가운데 한 사람에게 해 주지 않은 것이 바로 나에게 해 주지 않은 것이다.’","그러면 임금은 '똑똑히 들어라. 여기 있는 형제들 중에 가장 보잘것없는 사람 하나에게 해주지 않은 것이 곧 나에게 해주지 않은 것이다.' 하고 말할 것이다.","이에 임금이 대답하여 이르시되 내가 진실로 너희에게 이르노니 이 지극히 작은 자 하나에게 하지 아니한 것이 곧 내게 하지 아니한 것이니라 하시리니","이에 임금이 대답하여 가라사대 내가 진실로 너희에게 이르노니 이 지극히 작은 자 하나에게 하지 아니한 것이 곧 내게 하지 아니한 것이니라 하시리니","그때 왕이 말할 것이다. \"내가 진정으로 말한다. 여기 있는 내 형제 중에 가장 보잘 것 없는 사람 하나에게 해주지 않은 것이 곧 내게 해주지 않은 것이다.\"","He will answer them, ‘Amen, I say to you, what you did not do for one of these least ones, you did not do for me.’","Then shall he answer them, saying, Verily I say unto you, Inasmuch as ye did it not to one of the least of these, ye did it not to me.","\"He will reply, 'I tell you the truth, whatever you did not do for one of the least of these, you did not do for me.'","Tunc respondebit illis dicens:  “Amen dico vobis: Quamdiu non fecistis uni de minimis his, nec mihi fecistis “.","אז יענה אתם לאמר אמן אמר אני לכם מה שלא עשיתם לאחד מן הצעירים האלה גם לי לא עשיתם׃"],["47","25","46","이렇게 하여 그들은 영원한 벌을 받는 곳으로 가고 의인들은 영원한 생명을 누리는 곳으로 갈 것이다.”","이리하여 그들은 영원히 벌받는 곳으로 쫓겨날 것이며, 의인들은 영원한 생명의 나라로 들어갈 것이다.\"","그들은 영벌에, 의인들은 영생에 들어가리라 하시니라","저희는 영벌에, 의인들은 영생에 들어가리라 하시니라","그리하여 그들은 영원히 벌받을 곳으로 쫓겨날 것이고 바르게 산 사람들은 영원한 생명으로 들어갈 것이다.\"","And these will go off to eternal punishment, but the righteous to eternal life.”","And these shall go away into everlasting punishment: but the righteous into life eternal.","\"Then they will go away to eternal punishment, but the righteous to eternal life.\"","Et ibunt hi in supplicium aeternum, iusti autem in vitam aeternam “.","וילכו אלה למעצבת עולם והצדיקים לחיי עולם׃"],["47","26","1","예수님께서 이 말씀들을 모두 마치시고 제자들에게 이르셨다.","예수께서 이 말씀을 모두 마치시고 제자들에게","예수께서 이 말씀을 다 마치시고 제자들에게 이르시되","예수께서 이 말씀을 다 마치시고 제자들에게 이르시되","예수께서는 말씀을 다 마치시고 제자들에게","When Jesus finished all these words, he said to his disciples,","And it came to pass, when Jesus had finished all these sayings, he said unto his disciples,","When Jesus had finished saying all these things, he said to his disciples,","Et factum est, cum consum masset Iesus sermones hos omnes, dixit discipulis suis:","ויהי ככלות ישוע לדבר את כל הדברים האלה ויאמר אל תלמידיו׃"],["47","26","2","“너희도 알다시피 이틀이 지나면 파스카인데, 그러면 사람의 아들은 사람들에게 넘겨져 십자가에 못 박힐 것이다.”","\"너희가 알다시피 이제 이틀만 있으면 과월절이 되는데 그 때에는 사람의 아들이 잡혀가 십자가형을 받게 될 것이다.\" 하고 말씀하셨다.","너희가 아는 바와 같이 이틀이 지나면 유월절이라 인자가 십자가에 못 박히기 위하여 팔리리라 하시더라","너희의 아는 바와 같이 이틀을 지나면 유월절이라 인자가 십자가에 못 박히기 위하여 팔리우리라 하시더라","\"너희도 알다시피 이제 이틀만 있으면 유월절이 된다. 그날 잔치에서 인자는 배반을 당하여 십자가에 달리게 될 것이다\" 하고 말씀하셨다.","“You know that in two days’ time it will be Passover, and the Son of Man will be handed over to be crucified.”","Ye know that after two days is the feast of the passover, and the Son of man is betrayed to be crucified.","\"As you know, the Passover is two days away--and the Son of Man will be handed over to be crucified.\"","Scitis quia post biduum Pascha fiet, et Filius hominis traditur, ut crucifigatur.","אתם ידעתם כי אחרי יומים יהיה הפסח ובן האדם ימסר להצלב׃"],["47","26","3","그때에 수석 사제들과 백성의 원로들이 카야파라는 대사제의 저택에 모여,","그 무렵 대사제들과 백성의 원로들이 가야파라는 대사제 관저에 모여","그 때에 대제사장들과 백성의 장로들이 가야바라 하는 대제사장의 관정에 모여","그 때에 대제사장들과 백성의 장로들이 가야바라 하는 대제사장의 아문에 모여","바로 그 무렵에 대제사장들과 유대 지도자들은 대제사장 가야바의 관저에 모여","Then the chief priests and the elders of the people assembled in the palace of the high priest, who was called Caiaphas,","Then assembled together the chief priests, and the scribes, and the elders of the people, unto the palace of the high priest, who was called Caiaphas,","Then the chief priests and the elders of the people assembled in the palace of the high priest, whose name was Caiaphas,","Tunc congregati sunt principes sacerdotum et seniores populi in aulam principis sacerdotum, qui dicebatur Caiphas,","ויקהלו הכהנים הגדולים והסופרים וזקני העם אל חצר הכהן הגדול הנקרא קיפא׃"],["47","26","4","속임수를 써서 예수님을 붙잡아 죽이려고 공모하였다.","흉계를 꾸며 예수를 잡아죽이려고 모의하였다.","예수를 흉계로 잡아 죽이려고 의논하되","예수를 궤계로 잡아 죽이려고 의논하되","예수를 아무 탈 없이 잡아서 죽일 흉계를 꾸미고 있었다.","and they consulted together to arrest Jesus by treachery and put him to death.","And consulted that they might take Jesus by subtilty, and kill him.","and they plotted to arrest Jesus in some sly way and kill him.","et consilium fecerunt, ut Iesum dolo tenerent et occiderent;","ויועצו יחדו לתפש את ישוע בערמה ולהמיתו׃"],["47","26","5","그러면서도 “백성 가운데에서 소동이 일어날지 모르니 축제 기간에는 안 된다.” 하고 말하였다.","그러면서도 \"백성이 소동을 일으킬지 모르니 축제 기간만은 피하자.\" 하였다.","말하기를 민란이 날까 하노니 명절에는 하지 말자 하더라","말하기를 민요가 날까 하노니 명절에는 말자 하더라","그러나 그들은 \"백성들이 소동을 일으킬지도 모르니 유월절 잔치 기간에는 피하도록 합시다\" 하고 의견을 모았다.","But they said, “Not during the festival, that there may not be a riot among the people.”","But they said, Not on the feast day, lest there be an uproar among the people.","\"But not during the Feast,\" they said, \"or there may be a riot among the people.\"","dicebant autem:  “Non in die festo, ne tumultus fiat in populo “.","ויאמרו אך לא בחג פן תהיה מהומה בעם׃"],["47","26","6","예수님께서 베타니아에 있는 나병 환자 시몬의 집에 계실 때의 일이다.","그 때 예수께서는 베다니아에 있는 나병환자 시몬의 집에 계셨는데","예수께서 베다니 나병환자 시몬의 집에 계실 때에","예수께서 베다니 문둥이 시몬의 집에 계실 때에","예수께서는 베다니에 있는 나병환자 시몬의 집으로 가셨다.","Now when Jesus was in Bethany in the house of Simon the leper,","Now when Jesus was in Bethany, in the house of Simon the leper,","While Jesus was in Bethany in the home of a man known as Simon the Leper,","Cum autem esset Iesus in Bethania, in domo Simonis leprosi,","ויהי בהיות ישוע בית היני בבית שמעון המצרע׃"],["47","26","7","어떤 여자가 매우 값진 향유가 든 옥합을 가지고 다가와, 식탁에 앉아 계시는 그분 머리에 향유를 부었다.","어떤 여자가 매우 값진 향유가 든 옥합을 가지고 와서 식탁에 앉으신 예수의 머리에 부었다.","한 여자가 매우 귀한 향유 한 옥합을 가지고 나아와서 식사하시는 예수의 머리에 부으니","한 여자가 매우 귀한 향유 한 옥합을 가지고 나아와서 1)식사하시는 예수의 머리에 부으니 헬, 기대어 누우려니와 (유대인의 음식 먹을 때에 가지는 자세)","거기서 식사하실 때에 한 여자가 매우 값진 향유 한 옥합을 가지고 와서 예수의 머리에 부었다.","a woman came up to him with an alabaster jar of costly perfumed oil, and poured it on his head while he was reclining at table.","There came unto him a woman having an alabaster box of very precious ointment, and poured it on his head, as he sat at meat.","a woman came to him with an alabaster jar of very expensive perfume, which she poured on his head as he was reclining at the table.","accessit ad eum mulier habens alabastrum unguenti pretiosi et effudit super caput ipsius recumbentis.","ותקרב אליו אשה ובידה פך שמן יקר מאד ותצק על ראשו בהסבו על השלחן׃"],["47","26","8","제자들이 그것을 보고 불쾌해하며 말하였다. “왜 저렇게 허투루 쓰는가?","이것을 본 제자들은 분개하여 \"이렇게 낭비를 하다니!","제자들이 보고 분개하여 이르되 무슨 의도로 이것을 허비하느냐","제자들이 보고 분하여 가로되 무슨 의사로 이것을 허비하느뇨","그러자 제자들이 화를 내며 말하였다. \"왜 그 비싼 것을 낭비하오?","When the disciples saw this, they were indignant and said, “Why this waste?","But when his disciples saw it, they had indignation, saying, To what purpose is this waste?","When the disciples saw this, they were indignant. \"Why this waste?\" they asked.","Videntes autem discipuli, indignati sunt dicentes:  “Ut quid perditio haec?","ויראו התלמידים ויתרעמו לאמר על מה האבוד הזה׃"],["47","26","9","저것을 비싸게 팔아 가난한 이들에게 나누어 줄 수도 있을 터인데.”","이것을 팔면 많은 돈을 받아 가난한 사람들에게 줄 수 있을텐데.\" 하고 말했다.","이것을 비싼 값에 팔아 가난한 자들에게 줄 수 있었겠도다 하거늘","이것을 많은 값에 팔아 가난한 자들에게 줄 수 있었겠도다 하거늘","그것을 팔아 큰돈을 만들었더라면 가난한 사람들을 도울 수 있지 않소?\"","It could have been sold for much, and the money given to the poor.”","For this ointment might have been sold for much, and given to the poor.","\"This perfume could have been sold at a high price and the money given to the poor.\"","Potuit enim istud venumdari multo et dari pauperibus “.","כי השמן הזה היה ראוי להמכר במחיר רב ולתתו לעניים׃"],["47","26","10","예수님께서 그것을 아시고 그들에게 이르셨다. “왜 이 여자를 괴롭히느냐? 이 여자는 나에게 좋은 일을 하였다.","예수께서는 그것을 아시고 \"이 여자는 나에게 갸륵한 일을 했는데 왜 괴롭히느냐?","예수께서 아시고 그들에게 이르시되 너희가 어찌하여 이 여자를 괴롭게 하느냐 그가 내게 좋은 일을 하였느니라","예수께서 아시고 저희에게 이르시되 너희가 어찌하여 이 여자를 괴롭게 하느냐 저가 내게 좋은 일을 하였느니라","예수께서 그것을 아시고 말씀하셨다. \"왜 그 여자를 힐난하느냐? 그 여자는 내게 아름다운 일을 해주었다.","Since Jesus knew this, he said to them, “Why do you make trouble for the woman? She has done a good thing for me.","When Jesus understood it, he said unto them, Why trouble ye the woman? for she hath wrought a good work upon me.","Aware of this, Jesus said to them, \"Why are you bothering this woman? She has done a beautiful thing to me.","Sciens autem Iesus ait illis:  “Quid molesti estis mulieri? Opus enim bonum operata est in me;","וידע ישוע ויאמר אליהם למה תוגו את האשה הלא מעשה טוב עשתה עמדי׃"],["47","26","11","사실 가난한 이들은 늘 너희 곁에 있지만, 나는 늘 너희 곁에 있지는 않을 것이다.","가난한 사람들은 언제나 너희 곁에 있겠지만 나는 너희와 언제까지나 함께 있지는 않을 것이다.","가난한 자들은 항상 너희와 함께 있거니와 나는 항상 함께 있지 아니하리라","가난한 자들은 항상 너희와 함께 있거니와 나는 항상 함께 있지 아니하리라","가난한 사람들은 언제나 너희 주변에 있지만 나는 언제나 너희와 같이 있지 않을 것이다.","The poor you will always have with you; but you will not always have me.","For ye have the poor always with you; but me ye have not always.","The poor you will always have with you, but you will not always have me.","nam semper pauperes habetis vobiscum, me autem non semper habetis.","כי עניים תמיד עמכם ואנכי אינני אתכם תמיד׃"],["47","26","12","이 여자가 내 몸에 이 향유를 부은 것은 내 장례를 준비하려고 한 것이다.","이 여자가 내 몸에 향유를 부은 것은 나의 장례를 위하여 한 것이다.","이 여자가 내 몸에 이 향유를 부은 것은 내 장례를 위하여 함이니라","이 여자가 내 몸에 이 향유를 부은 것은 내 장사를 위하여 함이니라","그 여자가 내 몸에 향유를 부은 것은 내 장례를 미리 준비하기 위한 것이다.","In pouring this perfumed oil upon my body, she did it to prepare me for burial.","For in that she hath poured this ointment on my body, she did it for my burial.","When she poured this perfume on my body, she did it to prepare me for burial.","Mittens enim haec unguentum hoc supra corpus meum, ad sepeliendum me fecit.","כי אשר שפכה את השמן הזה על גופי לחנט אותי עשתה זאת׃"],["47","26","13","내가 진실로 너희에게 말한다. 온 세상 어디든지 이 복음이 선포되는 곳마다, 이 여자가 한 일도 전해져서 이 여자를 기억하게 될 것이다.”","나는 분명히 말한다. 온 세상 어디든지 이 복음이 전해지는 곳마다 이 여자가 한 일도 알려져서 사람들이 기억하게 될 것이다.\" 하고 말씀하셨다.","내가 진실로 너희에게 이르노니 온 천하에 어디서든지 이 복음이 전파되는 곳에서는 이 여자가 행한 일도 말하여 그를 기억하리라 하시니라","내가 진실로 너희에게 이르노니 온 천하에 어디서든지 이 복음이 전파되는 곳에는 이 여자의 행한 일도 말하여 저를 기념하리라 하시니라","내가 진정으로 말한다. 세상 어디든지 이 복음이 전파되는 곳마다 이 여자가 한 일도 전해져서 사람들은 이 여자를 영원히 기억할 것이다.\"","Amen, I say to you, wherever this gospel is proclaimed in the whole world, what she has done will be spoken of, in memory of her.”","Verily I say unto you, Wheresoever this gospel shall be preached in the whole world, there shall also this, that this woman hath done, be told for a memorial of her.","I tell you the truth, wherever this gospel is preached throughout the world, what she has done will also be told, in memory of her.\"","Amen dico vobis: Ubicumque praedicatum fuerit hoc evangelium in toto mundo, dicetur et quod haec fecit in memoriam eius “.","אמן אמר אני לכם באשר תקרא הבשורה הזאת בכל העולם גם את אשר היא עשתה יספר לזכרון לה׃"],["47","26","14","그때에 열두 제자 가운데 하나로 유다 이스카리옷이라는 자가 수석 사제들에게 가서,","그 때에 열두 제자의 하나인 가리옷 사람 유다가 대사제들에게 가서","그 때에 열둘 중의 하나인 가룟 유다라 하는 자가 대제사장들에게 가서 말하되","그 때에 열 둘 중에 하나인 가룟 유다라 하는 자가 대제사장들에게 가서 말하되","그 무렵 열두 제자 가운데 하나인 가룟 유다가 대제사장들에게 가서","Then one of the Twelve, who was called Judas Iscariot, went to the chief priests","Then one of the twelve, called Judas Iscariot, went unto the chief priests,","Then one of the Twelve--the one called Judas Iscariot--went to the chief priests","Tunc abiit unus de Duodecim, qui dicebatur Iudas Iscariotes, ad principes sacerdotum","וילך אחד משנים העשר הנקרא יהודה איש קריות אל ראשי הכהנים׃"],["47","26","15","“내가 그분을 여러분에게 넘겨주면 나에게 무엇을 주실 작정입니까?” 하고 물었다. 그들은 은돈 서른 닢을 내주었다.","\"내가 당신들에게 예수를 넘겨주면 그 값으로 얼마를 주겠소?\" 하자 그들은 1)은전 서른 닢을 내주었다. 즈가 11:12.","내가 예수를 너희에게 넘겨 주리니 얼마나 주려느냐 하니 그들이 은 삼십을 달아 주거늘","내가 예수를 너희에게 넘겨주리니 얼마나 주려느냐 하니 그들이 은 삼십을 달아 주거늘","\"내가 당신들에게 예수를 넘겨 주면 얼마를 주겠소?\" 하고 물었다. 그러자 그들은 ㄱ) 은전 서른 닢을 그에게 주었다. (ㄱ. 슥11:12)","and said, “What are you willing to give me if I hand him over to you?” They paid him thirty pieces of silver,","And said unto them, What will ye give me, and I will deliver him unto you? And they covenanted with him for thirty pieces of silver.","and asked, \"What are you willing to give me if I hand him over to you?\" So they counted out for him thirty silver coins.","et ait:  “Quid vultis mihi dare, et ego vobis eum tradam? “. At illi constituerunt ei triginta argenteos.","ויאמר מה תתנו לי ואמסרנו בידכם וישקלו לו שלשים כסף׃"],["47","26","16","그때부터 유다는 예수님을 넘길 적당한 기회를 노렸다.","그 때부터 유다는 예수를 넘겨줄 기회만 엿보고 있었다.","그가 그 때부터 예수를 넘겨 줄 기회를 찾더라","저가 그 때부터 예수를 넘겨줄 기회를 찾더라","그때부터 유다는 예수를 그들에게 넘겨 줄 기회를 엿보기 시작하였다.","and from that time on he looked for an opportunity to hand him over.","And from that time he sought opportunity to betray him.","From then on Judas watched for an opportunity to hand him over.","Et exinde quaerebat opportunitatem, ut eum traderet.","ומן העת ההיא בקש תאנה למסר אותו׃"],["47","26","17","무교절 첫날에 제자들이 예수님께 다가와, “스승님께서 잡수실 파스카 음식을 어디에 차리면 좋겠습니까?” 하고 물었다.","무교절 첫날에 제자들이 예수께 와서 \"선생님께서 드실 과월절 음식을 어디에다 차렸으면 좋겠습니까?\" 하고 물었다.","무교절의 첫날에 제자들이 예수께 나아와서 이르되 유월절 음식 잡수실 것을 우리가 어디서 준비하기를 원하시나이까","무교절의 첫날에 제자들이 예수께 나아와서 가로되 유월절 잡수실 것을 우리가 어디서 예비하기를 원하시나이까","유월절, 누룩 없는 떡을 먹는 날에 제자들이 예수께 와서 물었다. \"저희가 유월절 음식을 어디다 차리면 좋겠습니까?\"","On the first day of the Feast of Unleavened Bread, the disciples approached Jesus and said, “Where do you want us to prepare for you to eat the Passover?”","Now the first day of the feast of unleavened bread the disciples came to Jesus, saying unto him, Where wilt thou that we prepare for thee to eat the passover?","On the first day of the Feast of Unleavened Bread, the disciples came to Jesus and asked, \"Where do you want us to make preparations for you to eat the Passover?\"","Prima autem Azymorum accesserunt discipuli ad Iesum dicentes:  “Ubi vis paremus tibi comedere Pascha? “.","ויהי בראשון לחג המצות ויגשו התלמידים אל ישוע לאמר באי זה מקום תחפץ כי נכין לך לאכל את הפסח׃"],["47","26","18","그러자 예수님께서 이르셨다. “도성 안으로 아무개를 찾아가, ‘선생님께서 ′나의 때가 가까웠으니 내가 너의 집에서 제자들과 함께 파스카 축제를 지내겠다.′ 하십니다.’ 하여라.”","예수께서는 이렇게 일러주셨다. \"성안에 들어가면 이러이러한 사람이 있을 터이니 그 사람더러 '우리 선생님께서 자기 때가 가까이 왔다고 하시며 제자들과 함께 댁에서 과월절을 지내시겠다고 하십니다.' 하고 말하여라.\"","이르시되 성안 아무에게 가서 이르되 선생님 말씀이 내 때가 가까이 왔으니 내 제자들과 함께 유월절을 네 집에서 지키겠다 하시더라 하라 하시니","가라사대 성안 아무에게 가서 이르되 선생님 말씀이 내 때가 가까왔으니 내 제자들과 함께 유월절을 네 집에서 지키겠다 하시더라 하라 하신대","예수께서 대답하셨다. \"성안에 들어가 이러저러한 사람을 찾아가서 \"우리 선생님께서 자신의 때가 왔다고 하시면서 제자들과 함께 댁에서 유월절 음식을 잡수시겠다고 하십니다\"라고 전하라.\"","He said, “Go into the city to a certain man and tell him, ‘The teacher says, “My appointed time draws near; in your house I shall celebrate the Passover with my disciples.”’”","And he said, Go into the city to such a man, and say unto him, The Master saith, My time is at hand; I will keep the passover at thy house with my disciples.","He replied, \"Go into the city to a certain man and tell him, 'The Teacher says: My appointed time is near. I am going to celebrate the Passover with my disciples at your house.'\"","Ille autem dixit:  “Ite in civitatem ad quendam et dicite ei:  “Magister dicit: Tempus meum prope est; apud te facio Pascha cum discipulis meis “ “.","ויאמר לכו העירה אל פלני אלמני ואמרתם אליו כה אמר הרב עתי קרובה היא ובביתך אעשה את הפסח עם תלמידי׃"],["47","26","19","제자들은 예수님께서 분부하신 대로 파스카 음식을 차렸다.","제자들은 예수께서 시키신 대로 과월절 준비를 하였다.","제자들이 예수께서 시키신 대로 하여 유월절을 준비하였더라","제자들이 예수의 시키신대로 하여 유월절을 예비하였더라","제자들은 예수께서 일러주신 대로 만찬 준비를 하였다.","The disciples then did as Jesus had ordered, and prepared the Passover.","And the disciples did as Jesus had appointed them; and they made ready the passover.","So the disciples did as Jesus had directed them and prepared the Passover.","Et fecerunt discipuli, sicut constituit illis Iesus, et paraverunt Pascha.","ויעשו התלמידים כאשר צום ישוע ויכינו את הפסח׃"],["47","26","20","저녁때가 되자 예수님께서 열두 제자와 함께 식탁에 앉으셨다.","날이 저물었을 때에 예수께서 열두 제자와 함께 식탁에 앉아","저물 때에 예수께서 열두 제자와 함께 앉으셨더니","저물 때에 예수께서 열 두 제자와 함께 1)앉으셨더니 헬, 기대어 누우려니와 (유대인의 음식 먹을 때에 가지는 자세)","그날 저녁 열두 제자와 함께 식탁에 앉으신 예수께서는","When it was evening, he reclined at table with the Twelve.","Now when the even was come, he sat down with the twelve.","When evening came, Jesus was reclining at the table with the Twelve.","Vespere autem facto, discumbebat cum Duodecim.","ויהי בערב ויסב עם שנים העשר׃"],["47","26","21","그들이 음식을 먹고 있을 때에 예수님께서 말씀하셨다. “내가 진실로 너희에게 말한다. 너희 가운데 한 사람이 나를 팔아넘길 것이다.”","같이 음식을 나누시면서 \"나는 분명히 말한다. 너희 가운데 한 사람이 나를 배반할 것이다.\" 하고 말씀하셨다.","그들이 먹을 때에 이르시되 내가 진실로 너희에게 이르노니 너희 중의 한 사람이 나를 팔리라 하시니","저희가 먹을 때에 이르시되 내가 진실로 너희에게 이르노니 너희 중에 한 사람이 나를 팔리라 하시니","이렇게 말씀하셨다. \"내가 진정으로 말한다. 너희 가운데 한 사람이 나를 배신할 것이다.\"","And while they were eating, he said, “Amen, I say to you, one of you will betray me.”","And as they did eat, he said, Verily I say unto you, that one of you shall betray me.","And while they were eating, he said, \"I tell you the truth, one of you will betray me.\"","Et edentibus illis, dixit:  “Amen dico vobis: Unus vestrum me traditurus est “.","ובאכלם ויאמר אמן אמר אני לכם כי אחד מכם ימסרני׃"],["47","26","22","그러자 그들은 몹시 근심하며 저마다 “주님, 저는 아니겠지요?” 하고 묻기 시작하였다.","이 말씀에 제자들은 몹시 걱정이 되어 저마다 \"주님, 저는 아니겠지요?\" 하고 물었다.","그들이 몹시 근심하여 각각 여짜오되 주여 나는 아니지요","저희가 심히 근심하여 각각 여짜오되 주여 내니이까","제자들은 무척 걱정이 되어 저마다 \"제가 그 사람입니까?\" 하고 물었다.","Deeply distressed at this, they began to say to him one after another, “Surely it is not I, Lord?”","And they were exceeding sorrowful, and began every one of them to say unto him, Lord, is it I?","They were very sad and began to say to him one after the other, \"Surely not I, Lord?\"","Et contristati valde, coeperunt singuli dicere ei:  “Numquid ego sum, Domine? “.","ויתעצבו מאד ויחלו איש ואיש לאמר לו האנכי הוא אדני׃"],["47","26","23","예수님께서 그들에게 대답하셨다. “나와 함께 대접에 손을 넣어 빵을 적시는 자, 그자가 나를 팔아넘길 것이다.","예수께서 대답하셨다. \"지금 나와 함께 그릇에 손을 넣은 사람이 바로 나를 배반할 것이다.","대답하여 이르시되 나와 함께 그릇에 손을 넣는 그가 나를 팔리라","대답하여 가라사대 나와 함께 그릇에 손을 넣는 그가 나를 팔리라","예수께서 대답하셨다. \"지금 나와 함께 그릇에 손을 넣고 있는 사람이 바로 그 사람이다.","He said in reply, “He who has dipped his hand into the dish with me is the one who will betray me.","And he answered and said, He that dippeth his hand with me in the dish, the same shall betray me.","Jesus replied, \"The one who has dipped his hand into the bowl with me will betray me.","At ipse respondens ait:  “Qui intingit mecum manum in paropside, hic me tradet.","ויען ויאמר האיש אשר טבל עמי את ידו בקערה הוא ימסרני׃"],["47","26","24","사람의 아들은 자기에 관하여 성경에 기록된 대로 떠나간다. 그러나 불행하여라, 사람의 아들을 팔아넘기는 그 사람! 그 사람은 차라리 태어나지 않았더라면 자신에게 더 좋았을 것이다.”","사람의 아들은 성서에 기록된 대로 죽음의 길로 가겠지만 사람의 아들을 배반한 그 사람은 화를 입을 것이다. 그는 차라리 세상에 태어나지 않았더라면 더 좋을 뻔했다.\"","인자는 자기에 대하여 기록된 대로 가거니와 인자를 파는 그 사람에게는 화가 있으리로다 그 사람은 차라리 태어나지 아니하였더라면 제게 좋을 뻔하였느니라","인자는 자기에게 대하여 기록된대로 가거니와 인자를 파는 그 사람에게는 화가 있으리로다 그 사람은 차라리 나지 아니 하였더면 제게 좋을뻔 하였느니라","나는 예언의 말씀대로 죽어야 하지만 나를 배신한 그에게는 화가 내릴 것이다. 그는 차라리 세상에 태어나지 않았더라면 더 좋았을 것이다.\"","The Son of Man indeed goes, as it is written of him, but woe to that man by whom the Son of Man is betrayed. It would be better for that man if he had never been born.”","The Son of man goeth as it is written of him: but woe unto that man by whom the Son of man is betrayed! it had been good for that man if he had not been born.","The Son of Man will go just as it is written about him. But woe to that man who betrays the Son of Man! It would be better for him if he had not been born.\"","Filius quidem hominis vadit, sicut scriptum est de illo; vae autem homini illi, per quem Filius hominis traditur! Bonum erat ei, si natus non fuisset homo ille “.","הן בן האדם הלוך ילך לו ככתוב עליו אבל אוי לאיש ההוא אשר על ידו ימסר בן האדם טוב לאיש ההוא אם לא נולד׃"],["47","26","25","예수님을 팔아넘길 유다가 “스승님, 저는 아니겠지요?” 하고 묻자, 예수님께서 그에게 “네가 그렇게 말하였다.” 하고 대답하셨다.","그 때에 예수를 배반한 유다도 나서서 \"선생님, 저는 아니지요?\" 하고 묻자, 예수께서 \"그것은 네 말이다.\" 하고 대답하셨다.","예수를 파는 유다가 대답하여 이르되 랍비여 나는 아니지요 대답하시되 네가 말하였도다 하시니라","예수를 파는 유다가 대답하여 가로되 랍비여 내니이까 대답하시되 네가 말하였도다 하시니라","그때 예수를 배반할 유다가 \"선생님, 제가 그 사람입니까?\" 하고 묻자 예수께서는 \"그렇다\" 하고 대답하셨다.","Then Judas, his betrayer, said in reply, “Surely it is not I, Rabbi?” He answered, “You have said so.”","Then Judas, which betrayed him, answered and said, Master, is it I? He said unto him, Thou hast said.","Then Judas, the one who would betray him, said, \"Surely not I, Rabbi?\" Jesus answered, \"Yes, it is you.\"","Respondens autem Iudas, qui tradidit eum, dixit:  “Numquid ego sum, Rabbi? “. Ait illi:  “Tu dixisti “.","ויען יהודה המסר אותו ויאמר רבי האני הוא ויאמר אליו אתה אמרת׃"],["47","26","26","그들이 음식을 먹고 있을 때에 예수님께서 빵을 들고 찬미를 드리신 다음, 그것을 떼어 제자들에게 주시며 말씀하셨다. “받아 먹어라. 이는 내 몸이다.”","그들이 음식을 먹을 때에 예수께서 빵을 들어 축복하시고 제자들에게 나누어주시며 \"받아 먹어라. 이것은 내 몸이다.\" 하시고","그들이 먹을 때에 예수께서 떡을 가지사 축복하시고 떼어 제자들에게 주시며 이르시되 받아서 먹으라 이것은 내 몸이니라 하시고","저희가 먹을 때에 예수께서 떡을 가지사 축복하시고 떼어 제자들을 주시며 가라사대 받아 먹으라 이것이 내 몸이니라 하시고","그들이 음식을 먹을 때에 예수께서 떡을 들어 축복하시고 제자들에게 나누어 주시며 \"이것을 받아 먹으라. 이것은 내 몸이다\" 하고 말씀하셨다.","While they were eating, Jesus took bread, said the blessing, broke it, and giving it to his disciples said, “Take and eat; this is my body.”","And as they were eating, Jesus took bread, and blessed it, and brake it, and gave it to the disciples, and said, Take, eat; this is my body.","While they were eating, Jesus took bread, gave thanks and broke it, and gave it to his disciples, saying, \"Take and eat; this is my body.\"","Cenantibus autem eis, accepit Iesus panem et benedixit ac fregit deditque discipulis et ait:  “Accipite, comedite: hoc est corpus meum “.","ובאכלם ויקח ישוע את הלחם ויברך ויבצע ויתן לתלמידים ויאמר קחו ואכלו זה הוא גופי׃"],["47","26","27","또 잔을 들어 감사를 드리신 다음 제자들에게 주시며 말씀하셨다. “모두 이 잔을 마셔라.","또 잔을 들어 감사의 기도를 올리시고 그들에게 돌리시며 \"너희는 모두 이 잔을 받아 마셔라.","또 잔을 가지사 감사 기도 하시고 그들에게 주시며 이르시되 너희가 다 이것을 마시라","또 잔을 가지사 사례하시고 저희에게 주시며 가라사대 너희가 다 이것을 마시라","또 잔을 들어 감사의 기도를 드리시고 그들에게 주시며 말씀하셨다. \"너희는 모두 이 잔을 받아 마시라.","Then he took a cup, gave thanks, and gave it to them, saying, “Drink from it, all of you,","And he took the cup, and gave thanks, and gave it to them, saying, Drink ye all of it;","Then he took the cup, gave thanks and offered it to them, saying, \"Drink from it, all of you.","Et accipiens calicem, gratias egit et dedit illis dicens:  “Bibite ex hoc omnes:","ויקח את הכוס ויברך ויתן להם לאמר שתו ממנה כלכם׃"],["47","26","28","이는 죄를 용서해 주려고 많은 사람을 위하여 흘리는 내 계약의 피다.","이것은 나의 피다. 죄를 용서해 주려고 많은 사람을 위하여 내가 흘리는 계약의 피다.","이것은 죄 사함을 얻게 하려고 많은 사람을 위하여 흘리는 바 나의 피 곧 언약의 피니라","이것은 죄 사함을 얻게 하려고 많은 사람을 위하여 흘리는바 나의 피 곧 언약의 피니라","이것은 새 계약을 표시하는 나의 피다. 많은 사람의 죄를 용서하기 위하여 흘리는 나의 피다.","for this is my blood of the covenant, which will be shed on behalf of many for the forgiveness of sins.","For this is my blood of the new testament, which is shed for many for the remission of sins.","This is my blood of the covenant, which is poured out for many for the forgiveness of sins.","hic est enim sanguis meus novi testamenti, qui pro multis effunditur in remissionem peccatorum.","כי זה הוא דמי דם הברית החדשה הנשפך בעד רבים לסליחת חטאים׃"],["47","26","29","내가 너희에게 말한다. 내 아버지의 나라에서 너희와 함께 새 포도주를 마실 그날까지, 이제부터 포도나무 열매로 빚은 것을 다시는 마시지 않겠다.”","잘 들어두어라. 이제부터 나는 아버지의 나라에서 너희와 함께 새 포도주를 마실 그 날까지 결코 포도로 빚은 것을 마시지 않겠다.\" 하고 말씀하셨다.","그러나 너희에게 이르노니 내가 포도나무에서 난 것을 이제부터 내 아버지의 나라에서 새것으로 너희와 함께 마시는 날까지 마시지 아니하리라 하시니라","그러나 너희에게 이르노니 내가 포도나무에서 난 것을 이제부터 내 아버지의 나라에서 새것으로 너희와 함께 마시는 날까지 마시지 아니하리라 하시니라","내 말을 잘 기억하여 두라. 이제부터 나는 내 아버지의 나라에서 너희와 함께 새 포도주를 마실 그날까지 결코 포도주를 마시지 않을 것이다.\"","I tell you, from now on I shall not drink this fruit of the vine until the day when I drink it with you new in the kingdom of my Father.”","But I say unto you, I will not drink henceforth of this fruit of the vine, until that day when I drink it new with you in my Father's kingdom.","I tell you, I will not drink of this fruit of the vine from now on until that day when I drink it anew with you in my Father's kingdom.\"","Dico autem vobis: Non bibam amodo de hoc genimine vitis usque in diem illum, cum illud bibam vobiscum novum in regno Patris mei “.","ואני אמר לכם כי מעתה שתה לא אשתה מתנובת הגפן הזאת עד היום ההוא אשר אשתה אתה עמכם חדשה במלכות אבי׃"],["47","26","30","그들은 찬미가를 부르고 나서 올리브 산으로 갔다.","그들은 찬미의 노래를 부르고 올리브 산으로 올라갔다.","이에 그들이 찬미하고 감람 산으로 나아가니라","이에 저희가 찬미하고 감람산으로 나아가니라","그들은 찬미의 노래를 부르며 감람산으로 올라갔다.","Then, after singing a hymn, they went out to the Mount of Olives.","And when they had sung an hymn, they went out into the mount of Olives.","When they had sung a hymn, they went out to the Mount of Olives.","Et hymno dicto, exierunt in montem Oliveti.","ויהי אחרי גמרם את ההלל ויצאו אל הר הזיתים׃"],["47","26","31","그때에 예수님께서 제자들에게 말씀하셨다. “오늘 밤에 너희는 모두 나에게서 떨어져 나갈 것이다. 성경에 ‘내가 목자를 치리니 양 떼가 흩어지리라.’고 기록되어 있기 때문이다.","그 때에 예수께서 제자들에게 \"'2)내가 칼을 들어 목자를 치리니 양떼가 흩어지리라'고 기록되어 있는 대로 오늘 밤 너희는 다 나를 버릴 것이다.즈가 13:7.","그 때에 예수께서 제자들에게 이르시되 오늘 밤에 너희가 다 나를 버리리라 기록된 바 ㄱ)내가 목자를 치리니 양의 떼가 흩어지리라 하였느니라","때에 예수께서 제자들에게 이르시되 오늘 밤에 너희가 다 나를 2)버리리라 기록된바 ㄱ)내가 목자를 치리니 양의 떼가 흩어지리라 하였느니라 혹 나를 인하여 실족하리라슥 13:7","그때에 예수께서 제자들에게 말씀하셨다. \"오늘 밤 너희가 다 나를 버릴 것이다. 성경에 ㄱ) \"칼아, 일어나 내 목자를 찔러 죽여라! 내 곁에서 나와 똑같이 일하는 바로 그 사람을 찔러라! 양 떼가 뿔뿔이 흩어지도록 그 목자를 쳐죽여라\"라고 기록된 대로 될 것이다. (ㄱ. 슥13:7)","Then Jesus said to them, “This night all of you will have your faith in me shaken, for it is written: ‘I will strike the shepherd, and the sheep of the flock will be dispersed’;","Then saith Jesus unto them, All ye shall be offended because of me this night: for it is written, I will smite the shepherd, and the sheep of the flock shall be scattered abroad.","Then Jesus told them, \"This very night you will all fall away on account of me, for it is written: \"'I will strike the shepherd, and the sheep of the flock will be scattered.'","Tunc dicit illis Iesus:  “Omnes vos scandalum patiemini in me in ista nocte. Scriptum est enim:  “Percutiam pastorem, et dispergentur oves gregis “.","אז אמר אליהם ישוע אתם כלכם תכשלו בי בלילה הזה כי כתוב אכה את הרעה ותפוצין הצאן׃"],["47","26","32","그러나 나는 되살아나서 너희보다 먼저 갈릴래아로 갈 것이다.”","그러나 나는 다시 살아난 후 너희보다 먼저 갈릴래아로 갈 것이다.\" 하고 말씀하셨다.","그러나 내가 살아난 후에 너희보다 먼저 갈릴리로 가리라","그러나 내가 살아난 후에 너희보다 먼저 갈릴리로 가리라","그러나 내가 다시 살아난 뒤에는 너희보다 먼저 갈릴리로 갈 것이다.\"","but after I have been raised up, I shall go before you to Galilee.”","But after I am risen again, I will go before you into Galilee.","But after I have risen, I will go ahead of you into Galilee.\"","Postquam autem resurrexero, praecedam vos in Galilaeam “.","ואחרי קומי אלך לפניכם הגלילה׃"],["47","26","33","그러자 베드로가 예수님께 말하였다. “모두 스승님에게서 떨어져 나갈지라도, 저는 결코 떨어져 나가지 않을 것입니다.”","그 때 베드로가 나서서 \"비록 모든 사람이 주님을 버릴지라도 저는 결코 주님을 버리지 않겠습니다.\" 하였다.","베드로가 대답하여 이르되 모두 주를 버릴지라도 나는 결코 버리지 않겠나이다","베드로가 대답하여 가로되 다 주를 3)버릴찌라도 나는 언제든지 4)버리지 않겠나이다 헬, 주를 인하여 실족할찌라도 헬, 실족지 않겠나이다","베드로가 나서서 장담하였다. \"비록 모든 사람이 다 주님을 버린다 해도 저는 버리지 않겠습니다.\"","Peter said to him in reply, “Though all may have their faith in you shaken, mine will never be.”","Peter answered and said unto him, Though all men shall be offended because of thee, yet will I never be offended.","Peter replied, \"Even if all fall away on account of you, I never will.\"","Respondens autem Petrus ait illi:  “Et si omnes scandalizati fuerint in te, ego numquam scandalizabor “.","ויען פטרוס ויאמר לו גם כי יכשלו בך כלם אני לעולם לא אכשל׃"],["47","26","34","예수님께서 그에게 말씀하셨다. “내가 진실로 너에게 말한다. 오늘 밤 닭이 울기 전에 너는 세 번이나 나를 모른다고 할 것이다.”","그러자 예수께서 베드로에게 \"내 말을 잘 들어라. 오늘 밤 닭이 울기 전에 너는 세 번이나 나를 모른다고 할 것이다.\" 하고 말씀하셨다.","예수께서 이르시되 내가 진실로 네게 이르노니 오늘 밤 닭 울기 전에 네가 세 번 나를 부인하리라","예수께서 가라사대 내가 진실로 네게 이르노니 오늘밤 닭 울기 전에 네가 세번 나를 부인하리라","그러자 예수께서 그에게 말씀하셨다. \"내가 진정으로 말한다. 오늘 밤 닭이 울기 전에 너는 세 번이나 나를 모른다고 할 것이다!\"","Jesus said to him, “Amen, I say to you, this very night before the cock crows, you will deny me three times.”","Jesus said unto him, Verily I say unto thee, That this night, before the cock crow, thou shalt deny me thrice.","\"I tell you the truth,\" Jesus answered, \"this very night, before the rooster crows, you will disown me three times.\"","Ait illi Iesus:  “Amen dico tibi: In hac nocte, antequam gallus cantet, ter me negabis “.","ויאמר אליו ישוע אמן אמר אני לך כי בלילה הזה בטרם יקרא התרנגול תכחש בי שלש פעמים׃"],["47","26","35","베드로가 다시 예수님께 말하였다. “스승님과 함께 죽는 한이 있더라도, 저는 스승님을 모른다고 하지 않겠습니다.” 다른 제자들도 모두 그렇게 말하였다.","베드로가 다시 \"저는 주님과 함께 죽는 한이 있더라도 결코 주님을 모른다고는 하지 않겠습니다.\" 하고 장담하였다. 다른 제자들도 모두 그렇게 말하였다.","베드로가 이르되 내가 주와 함께 죽을지언정 주를 부인하지 않겠나이다 하고 모든 제자도 그와 같이 말하니라","베드로가 가로되 내가 주와 함께 죽을찌언정 주를 부인하지 않겠나이다 하고 모든 제자도 이와 같이 말하니라","\"저는 주님과 함께 죽는 한이 있더라도 결코 주님을 모른다고는 하지 않겠습니다.\" 베드로가 거듭 말하자 다른 제자들도 모두 다 그렇게 말하였다.","Peter said to him, “Even though I should have to die with you, I will not deny you.” And all the disciples spoke likewise.","Peter said unto him, Though I should die with thee, yet will I not deny thee. Likewise also said all the disciples.","But Peter declared, \"Even if I have to die with you, I will never disown you.\" And all the other disciples said the same.","Ait illi Petrus:  “Etiam si oportuerit me mori tecum, non te negabo “. Similiter et omnes discipuli dixerunt.","ויאמר אליו פטרוס גם כי יהיה עלי למות אתך כחש לא אכחש בך וכן אמרו גם כל התלמידים׃"],["47","26","36","그때에 예수님께서 제자들과 함께 겟세마니라는 곳으로 가셨다. 그리고 제자들에게, “내가 저기 가서 기도하는 동안 여기에 앉아 있어라.” 하고 말씀하신 다음,","예수께서 제자들과 함께 게쎄마니라는 곳에 가셨다. 거기에서 제자들에게 \"내가 저기 가서 기도하는 동안 너희는 여기 앉아 있어라.\" 하시고","이에 예수께서 제자들과 함께 겟세마네라 하는 곳에 이르러 제자들에게 이르시되 내가 저기 가서 기도할 동안에 너희는 여기 앉아 있으라 하시고","이에 예수께서 제자들과 함께 겟세마네라 하는 곳에 이르러 제자들에게 이르시되 내가 저기 가서 기도할 동안에 너희는 여기 앉아 있으라 하시고","예수께서는 제자들을 데리고 겟세마네라는 동산으로 가셨다. 거기서 제자들에게 \"내가 저기 가서 기도하고 돌아올 때까지 여기 있으라\" 하고 이르신 뒤","Then Jesus came with them to a place called Gethsemane, and he said to his disciples, “Sit here while I go over there and pray.”","Then cometh Jesus with them unto a place called Gethsemane, and saith unto the disciples, Sit ye here, while I go and pray yonder.","Then Jesus went with his disciples to a place called Gethsemane, and he said to them, \"Sit here while I go over there and pray.\"","Tunc venit Iesus cum illis in praedium, quod dicitur Gethsemani. Et dicit discipulis:  “Sedete hic, donec vadam illuc et orem “.","אחרי כן בא אתם ישוע אל חצר הנקרא גת שמני ויאמר אל התלמידים שבו לכם פה עד אשר אלך שמה והתפללתי׃"],["47","26","37","베드로와 제베대오의 두 아들을 데리고 가셨다. 그분께서는 근심과 번민에 휩싸이기 시작하셨다.","베드로와 제베대오의 두 아들만을 따로 데리고 가셨다.","베드로와 세베대의 두 아들을 데리고 가실새 고민하고 슬퍼하사","베드로와 세베대의 두 아들을 데리고 가실쌔 고민하고 슬퍼하사","베드로와 세베대의 두 아들 야고보와 요한을 데리고 가셨다. 예수께서는 근심과 번민에 싸인 얼굴로","He took along Peter and the two sons of Zebedee, and began to feel sorrow and distress.","And he took with him Peter and the two sons of Zebedee, and began to be sorrowful and very heavy.","He took Peter and the two sons of Zebedee along with him, and he began to be sorrowful and troubled.","Et assumpto Petro et duobus filiis Zebedaei, coepit contristari et maestus esse.","ויקח אתו את פטרוס ואת שני בני זבדי ויחל להעצב ולמוג׃"],["47","26","38","그때에 그들에게 “내 마음이 너무 괴로워 죽을 지경이다. 너희는 여기에 남아서 나와 함께 깨어 있어라.” 하고 말씀하셨다.","예수께서 근심과 번민에 싸여 그들에게 \"지금 내 마음이 괴로워 죽을 지경이니 너희는 여기 남아서 나와 같이 깨어 있어라.\" 하시고는","이에 말씀하시되 내 마음이 매우 고민하여 죽게 되었으니 너희는 여기 머물러 나와 함께 깨어 있으라 하시고","이에 말씀하시되 내 마음이 심히 고민하여 죽게 되었으니 너희는 여기 머물러 나와 함께 깨어 있으라 하시고","세 제자에게 말씀하셨다. \"내 마음이 괴로워 죽을 것 갈구나. 여기 머물러 있으라. 여기서 나와 함께 깨어 있어 다오.\"","Then he said to them, “My soul is sorrowful even to death. Remain here and keep watch with me.”","Then saith he unto them, My soul is exceeding sorrowful, even unto death: tarry ye here, and watch with me.","Then he said to them, \"My soul is overwhelmed with sorrow to the point of death. Stay here and keep watch with me.\"","Tunc ait illis:  “Tristis est anima mea usque ad mortem; sustinete hic et vigilate mecum “.","ויאמר להם נפשי מרה לי עד מות עמדו פה ושקדו עמי׃"],["47","26","39","그런 다음 앞으로 조금 나아가 얼굴을 땅에 대고 기도하시며 이렇게 말씀하셨다. “아버지, 하실 수만 있으시면 이 잔이 저를 비켜 가게 해 주십시오. 그러나 제가 원하는 대로 하지 마시고 아버지께서 원하시는 대로 하십시오.”","조금 더 나아가 땅에 엎드려 기도하셨다. \"아버지, 아버지께서는 하시고자만 하시면 무엇이든 다 하실 수 있으시니 이 잔을 저에게서 거두어주소서. 그러나 제 뜻대로 마시고 아버지의 뜻대로 하소서.\"","조금 나아가사 얼굴을 땅에 대시고 엎드려 기도하여 이르시되 내 아버지여 만일 할 만하시거든 이 잔을 내게서 지나가게 하옵소서 그러나 나의 원대로 마시옵고 아버지의 원대로 하옵소서 하시고","조금 나아가사 얼굴을 땅에 대시고 엎드려 기도하여 가라사대 내 아버지여 만일 할만하시거든 이 잔을 내게서 지나가게 하옵소서 그러나 나의 원대로 마옵시고 아버지의 원대로 하옵소서 하시고","예수께서는 홀로 조금 앞으로 나아가서 얼굴을 땅에 대고 기도하셨다. \"아버지, 만일 하실 수만 있으시다면 이 잔을 내게서 거두어 주소서. 그러나 내 뜻대로 마시고 아버지의 뜻대로 하소서.\"","He advanced a little and fell prostrate in prayer, saying, “My Father, if it is possible, let this cup pass from me; yet, not as I will, but as you will.”","And he went a little farther, and fell on his face, and prayed, saying, O my Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from me: nevertheless not as I will, but as thou wilt.","Going a little farther, he fell with his face to the ground and prayed, \"My Father, if it is possible, may this cup be taken from me. Yet not as I will, but as you will.\"","Et progressus pusillum, procidit in faciem suam orans et dicens:  “Pater mi, si possibile est, transeat a me calix iste; verumtamen non sicut ego volo, sed sicut tu “.","וילך מעט האלה ויפל על פניו ויתפלל לאמר אבי אם יוכל להיות תעבר נא מעלי הכוס הזאת אך לא כרצוני כי אם כרצונך׃"],["47","26","40","그러고 나서 제자들에게 돌아와 보시니 그들은 자고 있었다. 그래서 베드로에게 “이렇게 너희는 나와 함께 한 시간도 깨어 있을 수 없더란 말이냐?","기도를 마치시고 세 제자에게 돌아와 보시니 제자들은 자고 있었다. 그래서 베드로에게 \"너희는 나와 함께 단 한 시간도 깨어 있을 수 없단 말이냐?","제자들에게 오사 그 자는 것을 보시고 베드로에게 말씀하시되 너희가 나와 함께 한 시간도 이렇게 깨어 있을 수 없더냐","제자들에게 오사 그 자는 것을 보시고 베드로에게 말씀하시되 너희가 나와 함께 한 시 동안도 이렇게 깨어 있을 수 없더냐","그리고 세 제자에게 돌아오셔서 그들이 자고 있는 것을 보고는 베드로에게 말씀하셨다. \"너희는 단 한시간도 나와 함께 깨어 있을 수 없단 말이냐?","When he returned to his disciples he found them asleep. He said to Peter, “So you could not keep watch with me for one hour?","And he cometh unto the disciples, and findeth them asleep, and saith unto Peter, What, could ye not watch with me one hour?","Then he returned to his disciples and found them sleeping. \"Could you men not keep watch with me for one hour?\" he asked Peter.","Et venit ad discipulos et invenit eos dormientes; et dicit Petro:  “Sic non potuistis una hora vigilare mecum?","ויבא אל התלמידים וימצאם ישנים ויאמר אל פטרוס הנה לא היה ביכלתכם לשקד עמי שעה אחת׃"],["47","26","41","유혹에 빠지지 않도록 깨어 기도하여라. 마음은 간절하나 몸이 따르지 못한다.” 하시고,","유혹에 빠지지 않도록 깨어 기도하여라. 마음은 간절하나 몸이 말을 듣지 않는구나!\" 하시며 한탄하셨다.","시험에 들지 않게 깨어 기도하라 마음에는 원이로되 육신이 약하도다 하시고","시험에 들지 않게 깨어 있어 기도하라 마음에는 원이로되 육신이 약하도다 하시고","깨어 기도하라. 그렇지 않으면 시험을 감당하지 못할 것이다. 마음은 간절하나 육신이 약하구나!\"","Watch and pray that you may not undergo the test. The spirit is willing, but the flesh is weak.”","Watch and pray, that ye enter not into temptation: the spirit indeed is willing, but the flesh is weak.","\"Watch and pray so that you will not fall into temptation. The spirit is willing, but the body is weak.\"","Vigilate et orate, ut non intretis in tentationem; spiritus quidem promptus est, caro autem infirma “.","שקדו והתפללו פן תבאו לידי נסיון הן הרוח היא חפצה והבשר הוא רפה׃"],["47","26","42","다시 두 번째로 가서 기도하셨다. “아버지, 이 잔이 비켜 갈 수 없는 것이라서 제가 마셔야 한다면, 아버지의 뜻이 이루어지게 하십시오.”","예수께서 다시 가셔서 \"아버지, 이것이 제가 마시지 않고는 치워질 수 없는 잔이라면 아버지의 뜻대로 하소서.\" 하고 기도하셨다.","다시 두 번째 나아가 기도하여 이르시되 내 아버지여 만일 내가 마시지 않고는 이 잔이 내게서 지나갈 수 없거든 아버지의 원대로 되기를 원하나이다 하시고","다시 두번째 나아가 기도하여 가라사대 내 아버지여 만일 내가 마시지 않고는 이 잔이 내게서 지나갈 수 없거든 아버지의 원대로 되기를 원하나이다 하시고","예수께서는 다시 그들을 떠나 기도하셨다. \"나의 아버지! 만일 이 잔이 내가 마시지 않고는 치워질 수 없는 것이거든 아버지의 뜻대로 하소서.\"","Withdrawing a second time, he prayed again, “My Father, if it is not possible that this cup pass without my drinking it, your will be done!”","He went away again the second time, and prayed, saying, O my Father, if this cup may not pass away from me, except I drink it, thy will be done.","He went away a second time and prayed, \"My Father, if it is not possible for this cup to be taken away unless I drink it, may your will be done.\"","Iterum secundo abiit et oravit dicens:  “Pater mi, si non potest hoc transire, nisi bibam illud, fiat voluntas tua “.","ויוסף ללכת לו שנית ויתפלל לאמר אבי אם לא תוכל הכוס הזאת לעבר ממני מבלי שתותי אתה יהי כרצונך׃"]]