[["1","14","24","나는 아무것도 필요 없소. 다만 젊은이들이 먹은 것을 빼고, 나와 함께 갔던 사람들 곧 아네르와 에스콜과 마므레만은 저희의 몫을 가지게 해 주시오.”","나는 아무것도 바라지 않지만, 젊은이들이 먹은 것만은 찾지 마시오. 그리고 함께 갔던 아넬과 에스골과 마므레만은 저희의 몫을 차지하게 해야 하겠소.\"","오직 젊은이들이 먹은 것과 나와 동행한 아넬과 에스골과 마므레의 분깃을 제할지니 그들이 그 분깃을 가질 것이니라","오직 소년들의 먹은 것과 나와 동행한 아넬과 에스골과 마므레의 분깃을 제할찌니 그들이 그 분깃을 취할 것이니라","하지만 내 사병들이 먹을 것은 가져가야겠소. 또한 나와 동맹을 맺고 같이 싸우러 간 아넬과 에스골과 마므레도 자기들 몫을 챙겨야 할 것이오. 이 사람들이 제 몫을 가져가는 것은 당연한 일이니 말이오\"","Nothing for me except what my servants have consumed and the share that is due to the men who went with me—Aner, Eshcol and Mamre; let them take their share.”","Save only that which the young men have eaten, and the portion of the men which went with me, Aner, Eshcol, and Mamre; let them take their portion.","I will accept nothing but what my men have eaten and the share that belongs to the men who  went with me--to Aner, Eshcol and Mamre. Let them have their share.\"","exceptis his, quae comederunt iuvenes, et partibus virorum, qui venerunt mecum, Aner, Eschol et Mambre: isti accipient partes suas “.","בלעדי רק אשר אכלו הנערים וחלק האנשים אשר הלכו אתי ענר אשכל וממרא הם יקחו חלקם׃"],["1","15","1","이런 일들이 있은 뒤, 주님의 말씀이 환시 중에 아브람에게 내렸다. “아브람아, 두려워하지 마라. 나는 너의 방패다. 너는 매우 큰 상을 받을 것이다.”","이런 일들이 있은 뒤에 야훼께서 아브람에게 환상으로 나타나시어 말씀하셨다. \"무서워하지 말아라, 아브람아, 나는 방패가 되어 너를 지켜주며, 매우 큰 상을 너에게 내리리라.\"","이 후에 여호와의 말씀이 환상 중에 아브람에게 임하여 이르시되 아브람아 두려워하지 말라 나는 네 방패요 너의 지극히 큰 상급이니라","이 후에 여호와의 말씀이 이상 중에 아브람에게 임하여 가라사대 아브람아 두려워 말라 나는 너의 방패요 너의 지극히 큰 상급이니라","이런 일이 있은 뒤 여호와의 말씀이 환상 가운데서 아브람에게 내렸다. \"무서워하지 말아라. 아브람아! 네가 어떤 위험에 빠진다 해도 내가 너를 지켜 주겠다. 내가 네게 큰 상을 베풀겠다.\"","Some time afterward, the word of the LORD came to Abram in a vision: Do not fear, Abram! I am your shield; I will make your reward very great.","After these things the word of the LORD came unto Abram in a vision, saying, Fear not, Abram: I am thy shield, and thy exceeding great reward.","After this, the word of the LORD came to Abram in a vision: \"Do not be afraid, Abram. I am  your shield, your very great reward.\"","His itaque transactis, factus est sermo Domini ad Abram per visionem dicens:  “Noli timere, Abram! Ego protector tuus sum, et merces tua magna erit nimis “.","אחר הדברים האלה היה דבר יהוה אל אברם במחזה לאמר אל תירא אברם אנכי מגן לך שכרך הרבה מאד׃"],["1","15","2","그러자 아브람이 아뢰었다. “주 하느님, 저에게 무엇을 주시렵니까? 저는 자식 없이 살아가는 몸, 제 집안의 상속자는 다마스쿠스 사람 엘리에제르가 될 것입니다.”","그러자 아브람이 말씀 드렸다. \"야훼 나의 주여, 나는 자식이 없는 몸입니다. 가문의 대를 이을 사람이라고는 다마스쿠스 사람 엘리에젤밖에 없는데, 나에게 무엇을 주신다는 말씀입니까?","아브람이 이르되 주 여호와여 무엇을 내게 주시려 하나이까 나는 자식이 없사오니 나의 상속자는 이 다메섹 사람 엘리에셀이니이다","아브람이 가로되 주 여호와여 무엇을 내게 주시려나이까 나는 무자하오니 나의 상속자는 이 다메섹 엘리에셀이니이다","그러자 아브람이 대답하였다. \"여호와 나의 주님, 주께서 내게 큰 상을 내리신다 한들 그게 내게 무슨 소용이 있겠습니까? 내겐 여전히 자식 하나 없지 않습니까? 내 재산을 물려받을 사람이라고 해야 고작 다메섹 사람 엘리에셀밖에 더 있습니까?\"","But Abram said, “Lord GOD, what can you give me, if I die childless and have only a servant of my household, Eliezer of Damascus?”","And Abram said, LORD God, what wilt thou give me, seeing I go childless, and the steward of my house is this Eliezer of Damascus?","But Abram said, \"O Sovereign LORD, what can you give me since I remain childless and the one  who will inherit my estate is Eliezer of Damascus?\"","Dixitque Abram:  “Domine Deus, quid dabis mihi? Ego vadam absque liberis, et heres domus meae erit Damascenus Eliezer “.","ויאמר אברם אדני יהוה מה תתן לי ואנכי הולך ערירי ובן משק ביתי הוא דמשק אליעזר׃"],["1","15","3","아브람이 다시 아뢰었다. “저를 보십시오. 당신께서 자식을 주지 않으셔서, 제 집의 종이 저를 상속하게 되었습니다.”","나를 보십시오. 하느님께서는 나에게 자식 하나도 점지해 주지 않으셨습니다. 내 대를 이을 사람이라고는 내 집의 이 종밖에는 없지 않습니까?\" 아브람이 이렇게 여쭙자,","아브람이 또 이르되 주께서 내게 씨를 주지 아니하셨으니 내 집에서 길린 자가 내 상속자가 될 것이니이다","아브람이 또 가로되 주께서 내게 씨를 아니주셨으니 내 집에서 길리운 자가 나의 후사가 될것이니이다","아브람이 말을 이었다. \"보십시오, 내게 자식이 없기에 우리 집 재산을 관리하고 있는 엘리에셀이란 종이 내 재산을 물려받게 될 것입니다. 이는 주께서 내게 자식을 허락하시지 않은 까닭이 아니겠습니까?\"","Abram continued, “Look, you have given me no offspring, so a servant of my household will be my heir.”","And Abram said, Behold, to me thou hast given no seed: and, lo, one born in my house is mine heir.","And Abram said, \"You have given me no children; so a servant in my household will be my  heir.\"","Addiditque Abram:  “En mihi non dedisti semen, et ecce vernaculus meus heres meus erit “.","ויאמר אברם הן לי לא נתתה זרע והנה בן ביתי יורש אתי׃"],["1","15","4","그러자 주님의 말씀이 그에게 내렸다. “그가 너를 상속하지 못할 것이다. 네 몸에서 나온 아이가 너를 상속할 것이다.”","야훼께서 그에게 말씀하셨다. \"네 대를 이을 사람은 그가 아니다. 장차 네 몸에서 날 네 친아들이 네 대를 이을 것이다.\"","여호와의 말씀이 그에게 임하여 이르시되 그 사람이 네 상속자가 아니라 네 몸에서 날 자가 네 상속자가 되리라 하시고","여호와의 말씀이 그에게 임하여 가라사대 그 사람은 너의 후사가 아니라 네 몸에서 날 자가 네 후사가 되리라 하시고","그러자 여호와의 말씀이 또 아브람에게 내렸다 \"아니다 네 종이 네 재산을 물려받게 되지는 않을 것이다. 네 몸에서 난 자식이 네 재산을 물려 받을 것이다. 걱정 말아라.\"","Then the word of the LORD came to him: No, that one will not be your heir; your own offspring will be your heir.","And, behold, the word of the LORD came unto him, saying, This shall not be thine heir; but he that shall come forth out of thine own bowels shall be thine heir.","Then the word of the LORD came to him: \"This man will not be your heir, but a son coming  from your own body will be your heir.\"","Sed ecce sermo Domini factus est ad eum:  “Non erit hic heres tuus, sed qui egredietur de visceribus tuis, ipsum habebis heredem “.","והנה דבר יהוה אליו לאמר לא יירשך זה כי אם אשר יצא ממעיך הוא יירשך׃"],["1","15","5","그러고는 그를 밖으로 데리고 나가서 말씀하셨다. “하늘을 쳐다보아라. 네가 셀 수 있거든 저 별들을 세어 보아라.” 그에게 또 말씀하셨다. “너의 후손이 저렇게 많아질 것이다.”","그리고는 그를 밖으로 데리고 나가시어 말씀하셨다. \"하늘을 쳐다보아라. 셀 수 있거든 저 별들을 세어보아라. 네 자손이 저렇게 많이 불어날 것이다.\"","그를 이끌고 밖으로 나가 이르시되 하늘을 우러러 뭇별을 셀 수 있나 보라 또 그에게 이르시되 네 자손이 이와 같으리라","그를 이끌고 밖으로 나가 가라사대 하늘을 우러러 뭇별을 셀 수 있나 보라 또 그에게 이르시되 네 자손이 이와 같으리라","그리고 아브람을 밖으로 데리고 나가 말을 이으셨다. \"아브람아, 보거라. 저 하늘을 쳐다보아라. 네가 하늘에 저렇게 총총히 반짝이는 별을 다 셀 수가 있겠느냐? 네 후손이 하늘에 떠 있는 저 무수한 별만큼이나 많을 것이다.\"","He took him outside and said: Look up at the sky and count the stars, if you can. Just so, he added, will your descendants be.","And he brought him forth abroad, and said, Look now toward heaven, and tell the stars, if thou be able to number them: and he said unto him, So shall thy seed be.","He took him outside and said, \"Look up at the heavens and count the stars--if indeed you can  count them.\" Then he said to him, \"So shall your offspring be.\"","Eduxitque eum foras et ait illi:  “Suspice caelum et numera stellas, si potes “. Et dixit ei:  “Sic erit semen tuum “.","ויוצא אתו החוצה ויאמר הבט נא השמימה וספר הכוכבים אם תוכל לספר אתם ויאמר לו כה יהיה זרעך׃"],["1","15","6","아브람이 주님을 믿으니, 주님께서 그 믿음을 의로움으로 인정해 주셨다.","그가 야훼를 믿으니, 야훼께서 이를 갸륵하게 여기시어,","아브람이 여호와를 믿으니 여호와께서 이를 그의 의로 여기시고","아브람이 여호와를 믿으니 여호와께서 이를 그의 의로 여기시고","아브람은 이렇게 말씀하시는 여호와를 굳게 믿었다. 여호와께서는 이렇게 믿는 아브람을 흐뭇하게 생각하시고 그를 인정해 주셨다.","Abram put his faith in the LORD, who attributed it to him as an act of righteousness.","And he believed in the LORD; and he counted it to him for righteousness.","Abram believed the LORD, and he credited it to him as righteousness.","Credidit Domino, et reputatum est ei ad iustitiam.","והאמן ביהוה ויחשבה לו צדקה׃"],["1","15","7","주님께서 그에게 말씀하셨다. “나는 주님이다. 이 땅을 너에게 주어 차지하게 하려고, 너를 칼데아의 우르에서 이끌어 낸 이다.”","이렇게 말씀하셨다. \"나는 이 땅을 너에게 주어 차지하게 하려고 너를 갈대아 우르에서 이끌어낸 야훼다.\"","또 그에게 이르시되 나는 이 땅을 네게 주어 소유를 삼게 하려고 너를 갈대아인의 우르에서 이끌어 낸 여호와니라","또 그에게 이르시되 나는 이 땅을 네게 주어 업을 삼게 하려고 너를 갈대아 우르에서 이끌어낸 여호와로라","여호와께서 계속해서 이렇게 말씀하셨다. \"나는 여호와라. 내가 너와 네 후손이 이 땅을 차지하게 하려고 너를 바벨론에 있는 우르에서 이끌어 내었다.\"","He then said to him: I am the LORD who brought you from Ur of the Chaldeans to give you this land as a possession.","And he said unto him, I am the LORD that brought thee out of Ur of the Chaldees, to give thee this land to inherit it.","He also said to him, \"I am the LORD, who brought you out of Ur of the Chaldeans to give you  this land to take possession of it.\"","Dixitque ad eum:  “Ego Dominus, qui eduxi te de Ur Chaldaeorum, ut darem tibi terram istam, et possideres eam “.","ויאמר אליו אני יהוה אשר הוצאתיך מאור כשדים לתת לך את הארץ הזאת לרשתה׃"],["1","15","8","아브람이 “주 하느님, 제가 그것을 차지하리라는 것을 무엇으로 알 수 있겠습니까?” 하고 묻자,","아브람이 \"내가 이 땅을 차지하게 되리라는 것을 무엇으로 알 수가 있겠습니까?\" 하고 묻자","그가 이르되 주 여호와여 내가 이 땅을 소유로 받을 것을 무엇으로 알리이까","그가 가로되 주 여호와여 내가 이 땅으로 업을 삼을 줄을 무엇으로 알리이까","그러자 아브람은 여호와께 이렇게 물었다 \"여호와 나의 주님, 무엇을 근거로 이 땅을 나와 내 후손이 차지하게 되리라고 믿겠습니까?\"","“Lord GOD,” he asked, “how will I know that I will possess it?”","And he said, LORD God, whereby shall I know that I shall inherit it?","But Abram said, \"O Sovereign LORD, how can I know that I will gain possession of it?\"","Et ille ait:  “Domine Deus, unde scire possum quod possessurus sim eam? “.","ויאמר אדני יהוה במה אדע כי אירשנה׃"],["1","15","9","주님께서 그에게 말씀하셨다. “삼 년 된 암송아지 한 마리와 삼 년 된 암염소 한 마리와 삼 년 된 숫양 한 마리, 그리고 산비둘기 한 마리와 어린 집비둘기 한 마리를 나에게 가져오너라.”","야훼께서 말씀하셨다. \"삼 년 된 암소와 삼 년 된 암염소와 삼 년 된 숫양과 산비둘기, 집비둘기를 한 마리씩 나에게 바쳐라.\"","여호와께서 그에게 이르시되 나를 위하여 삼 년 된 암소와 삼 년 된 암염소와 삼 년 된 숫양과 산비둘기와 집비둘기 새끼를 가져올지니라","여호와께서 그에게 이르시되 나를 위하여 삼년 된 암소와 삼년 된 암염소와 삼년 된 수양과 산비둘기와 집비둘기 새끼를 취할찌니라","여호와께서 대답하셨다. \"삼 년된 소 암컷과 삼 년된 염소 암컷과 삼 년된 양 수컷을 각각 한 마리씩, 또 어린 산비둘기 한 마리와 어린 집비둘기 한 마리를 내게 가져오너라.","He answered him: Bring me a three-year-old heifer, a three-year-old female goat, a three-year-old ram, a turtledove, and a young pigeon.","And he said unto him, Take me an heifer of three years old, and a she goat of three years old, and a ram of three years old, and a turtledove, and a young pigeon.","So the LORD said to him, \"Bring me a heifer, a goat and a ram, each three years old, along  with a dove and a young pigeon.\"","Respondens Dominus:  “Sume, inquit, mihi vitulam triennem et capram trimam et arietem annorum trium, turturem quoque et columbam “.","ויאמר אליו קחה לי עגלה משלשת ועז משלשת ואיל משלש ותר וגוזל׃"],["1","15","10","그는 이 모든 것을 주님께 가져와서 반으로 잘라, 잘린 반쪽들을 마주 보게 차려 놓았다. 그러나 날짐승들은 자르지 않았다.","그는 이 모든 것을 잡아다가 반으로 쪼개고 그 쪼갠 것을 짝을 맞추어 마주 놓았다. 그러나 날짐승만은 쪼개지 않았다.","아브람이 그 모든 것을 가져다가 그 중간을 쪼개고 그 쪼갠 것을 마주 대하여 놓고 그 새는 쪼개지 아니하였으며","아브람이 그 모든 것을 취하여 그 중간을 쪼개고 그 쪼갠 것을 마주 대하여 놓고 그 새는 쪼개지 아니하였으며","아브람은 여호와께서 이르신 대로 그것들을 가져다가 반으로 쪼개어 양쪽으로 죽 늘어놓았다. 그러나 비둘기들만은 쪼개지 않고 통째로 그냥 놓았다.","He brought him all these, split them in two, and placed each half opposite the other; but the birds he did not cut up.","And he took unto him all these, and divided them in the midst, and laid each piece one against another: but the birds divided he not.","Abram brought all these to him, cut them in two and arranged the halves opposite each  other; the birds, however, he did not cut in half.","Qui tollens universa haec divisit ea per medium et utrasque partes contra se altrinsecus posuit; aves autem non divisit.","ויקח לו את כל אלה ויבתר אתם בתוך ויתן איש בתרו לקראת רעהו ואת הצפר לא בתר׃"],["1","15","11","맹금들이 죽은 짐승들 위로 날아들자, 아브람은 그것들을 쫓아냈다.","솔개들이 그 잡아놓은 짐승들 위에 날아오면, 아브람은 이를 쫓고 있었다.","솔개가 그 사체 위에 내릴 때에는 아브람이 쫓았더라","솔개가 그 사체 위에 내릴 때에는 아브람이 쫓았더라","솔개들이 잡아 놓은 제물 위에 내려앉으려 하면 아브람이 솔개들을 쫓아버렸다.","Birds of prey swooped down on the carcasses, but Abram scared them away.","And when the fowls came down upon the carcases, Abram drove them away.","Then birds of prey came down on the carcasses, but Abram drove them away.","Descenderuntque volucres super cadavera, et abigebat eas Abram.","וירד העיט על הפגרים וישב אתם אברם׃"],["1","15","12","해 질 무렵, 아브람 위로 깊은 잠이 쏟아지는데, 공포와 짙은 암흑이 그를 휩쌌다.","해 질 무렵, 아브람이 신비경에 빠져들어 심한 두려움에 사로잡혀 있는데,","해 질 때에 아브람에게 깊은 잠이 임하고 큰 흑암과 두려움이 그에게 임하였더니","해질 때에 아브람이 깊이 잠든 중에 캄캄함이 임하므로 심히 두려워하더니","해가 떨어지자 아브람은 깊은 잠에 떨어졌다. 공포와 두려움이 그를 엄습하였다.","As the sun was about to set, a deep sleep fell upon Abram, and a great, dark dread descended upon him.","And when the sun was going down, a deep sleep fell upon Abram; and, lo, an horror of great darkness fell upon him.","As the sun was setting, Abram fell into a deep sleep, and a thick and dreadful darkness  came over him.","Cumque sol occumberet, sopor irruit super Abram, et ecce horror magnus et tenebrosus invasit eum.","ויהי השמש לבוא ותרדמה נפלה על אברם והנה אימה חשכה גדלה נפלת עליו׃"],["1","15","13","그때 주님께서 아브람에게 말씀하셨다. “너는 잘 알아 두어라. 너의 후손은 남의 나라에서 나그네살이하며 사백 년 동안 그들의 종살이를 하고 학대를 받을 것이다.","야훼께서 그에게 이렇게 말씀하셨다. \"똑똑히 알아두어라. 네 자손이 남의 나라에 가서 그들의 종이 되어 얹혀살며 사백 년 동안 압제를 받을 것이다.","여호와께서 아브람에게 이르시되 너는 반드시 알라 네 자손이 이방에서 객이 되어 그들을 섬기겠고 그들은 사백 년 동안 네 자손을 괴롭히리니","여호와께서 아브람에게 이르시되 너는 정녕히 알라 네 자손이 이방에서 객이 되어 그들을 섬기겠고 그들은 사백년 동안 네 자손을 괴롭게 하리니","그러자 여호와께서 아브람에게 말씀하셨다 \"아브람아, 잘 들어 두어라. 네 후손들이 이제 이방 땅에서 나그네 신세가 되리라. 그 이방 땅에서 식객 노릇하면서 종살이를 하게 될 것이다. 그 이방나라 사람들은 400년 동안 네 후손들을 혹독하게 부려먹고 마구 짓누를 것이다.","Then the LORD said to Abram: Know for certain that your descendants will reside as aliens in a land not their own, where they shall be enslaved and oppressed for four hundred years.","And he said unto Abram, Know of a surety that thy seed shall be a stranger in a land that is not their's, and shall serve them; and they shall afflict them four hundred years;","Then the LORD said to him, \"Know for certain that your descendants will be strangers in a  country not their own, and they will be enslaved and mistreated four hundred years.","Dictumque est ad eum:  “Scito praenoscens quod peregrinum futurum sit semen tuum in terra non sua, et subicient eos servituti et affligent quadringentis annis.","ויאמר לאברם ידע תדע כי גר יהיה זרעך בארץ לא להם ועבדום וענו אתם ארבע מאות שנה׃"],["1","15","14","그러나 네 후손이 종이 되어 섬길 민족을 나는 심판하겠다. 그런 다음, 네 후손은 많은 재물을 가지고 나올 것이다.","그러나 네 자손을 부리던 민족을 나는 심판하리라. 그런 다음, 네 자손에게 많은 재물을 들려 거기에서 나오게 하리라.","그들이 섬기는 나라를 내가 징벌할지며 그 후에 네 자손이 큰 재물을 이끌고 나오리라","그 섬기는 나라를 내가 징치할찌며 그 후에 네 자손이 큰 재물을 이끌고 나오리라","하지만 네 후손들을 못살게 군 그 나라를 내가 내리치리라. 네 후손들은 엄청난 재산을 가지고 그곳을 나오게 될 것이다.","But I will bring judgment on the nation they must serve, and after this they will go out with great wealth.","And also that nation, whom they shall serve, will I judge: and afterward shall they come out with great substance.","But I will punish the nation they serve as slaves, and afterward they will come out with  great possessions.","Verumtamen et gentem, cui servituri sunt, ego iudicabo, et post haec egredientur cum magna substantia.","וגם את הגוי אשר יעבדו דן אנכי ואחרי כן יצאו ברכש גדול׃"],["1","15","15","너는 평화로이 네 조상들에게로 갈 것이다. 너는 장수를 누리고 무덤에 묻힐 것이다.","그러나 너는 네 명대로 살다가 고이 세상을 떠나 안장될 것이다.","너는 장수하다가 평안히 조상에게로 돌아가 장사될 것이요","너는 장수하다가 평안히 조상에게로 돌아가 장사될 것이요","아브람아, 너는 오래도록 살다가 평안히 세상을 떠나 땅에 묻힐 것이다.","You, however, will go to your ancestors in peace; you will be buried at a ripe old age.","And thou shalt go to thy fathers in peace; thou shalt be buried in a good old age.","You, however, will go to your fathers in peace and be buried at a good old age.","Tu autem ibis ad patres tuos in pace, sepultus in senectute bona.","ואתה תבוא אל אבתיך בשלום תקבר בשיבה טובה׃"],["1","15","16","그리고 그들은 사 대째가 되어서야 여기로 돌아올 것이다. 아모리족의 죄악이 아직 다 차지 않았기 때문이다.”","네 자손은 아모리족의 죄가 찰 만큼 찬 다음, 사 대만에야 돌아오게 될 것이다.\"","네 자손은 사대 만에 이 땅으로 돌아오리니 이는 아모리 족속의 죄악이 아직 가득 차지 아니함이니라 하시더니","네 자손은 사대만에 이 땅으로 돌아 오리니 이는 아모리 족속의 죄악이 아직 관영치 아니함이니라 하시더니","네 후손이 이 땅으로 되돌아오려면 네 세대는 지나야 할 것이다. 그때까지는 내가 이 땅에 살고 있는 아모리 사람에게 벌을 내리지 않을 것이다. 그러나 그때가 되면 아모리 사람들이 하는 짓이 너무도 험악하여 극에 달할 것인데 그때에 내가 그들을 징벌할 것이다. 바로 그때쯤 네 후손이 이 땅으로 되돌아올 것이다.\"","In the fourth generation your descendants will return here, for the wickedness of the Amorites is not yet complete.","But in the fourth generation they shall come hither again: for the iniquity of the Amorites is not yet full.","In the fourth generation your descendants will come back here, for the sin of the Amorites  has not yet reached its full measure.\"","Generatione autem quarta revertentur huc; necdum enim completae sunt iniquitates Amorraeorum usque ad praesens tempus “.","ודור רביעי ישובו הנה כי לא שלם עון האמרי עד הנה׃"],["1","15","17","해가 지고 어둠이 깔리자, 연기 뿜는 화덕과 타오르는 횃불이 그 쪼개 놓은 짐승들 사이로 지나갔다.","해가 져서 캄캄해지자, 연기 뿜는 가마가 나타나고 활활 타는 횃불이 쪼개놓은 짐승들 사이로 지나가는 것이었다.","해가 져서 어두울 때에 연기 나는 화로가 보이며 타는 횃불이 쪼갠 고기 사이로 지나더라","해가 져서 어둘 때에 연기 나는 풀무가 보이며 타는 횃불이 쪼갠 고기 사이로 지나더라","해가 져서 주위에 어둠이 깔릴 때 연기가 피어 오르는 화로와 불붙어 있는 횃불이 갑자기 나타나 반으로 쪼개 놓은 제물 사이로 지나가는 것이었다.","When the sun had set and it was dark, there appeared a smoking fire pot and a flaming torch, which passed between those pieces.","And it came to pass, that, when the sun went down, and it was dark, behold a smoking furnace, and a burning lamp that passed between those pieces.","When the sun had set and darkness had fallen, a smoking firepot with a blazing torch  appeared and passed between the pieces.","Cum ergo occubuisset sol, facta est caligo tenebrosa, et apparuit clibanus fumans et lampas ignis transiens inter divisiones illas.","ויהי השמש באה ועלטה היה והנה תנור עשן ולפיד אש אשר עבר בין הגזרים האלה׃"],["1","15","18","그날 주님께서는 아브람과 계약을 맺으시며 이렇게 말씀하셨다. “나는 이집트 강에서 큰 강 곧 유프라테스 강까지 이르는 이 땅을 너의 후손에게 준다.","그 날 야훼께서 아브람과 계약을 맺으시며 말씀하셨다. \"나는 이집트 개울에서 큰 강 유프라테스에 이르는 이 땅을 네 후손에게 준다.","그 날에 여호와께서 아브람과 더불어 언약을 세워 이르시되 내가 이 땅을 애굽 강에서부터 그 큰 강 유브라데까지 네 자손에게 주노니","그 날에 여호와께서 아브람으로 더불어 언약을 세워 가라사대 내가 이 땅을 애굽강에서부터 그 큰 강 유브라데까지 네 자손에게 주노니","그러자 여호와께서 아브람과 계약을 맺으시면서 이르셨다. \"내가 애굽 경계에서부터 큰 강인 유브라데강까지 그 온 땅을 네 후손에게 주겠다.","On that day the LORD made a covenant with Abram, saying: To your descendants I give this land, from the Wadi of Egypt to the Great River, the Euphrates,","In the same day the LORD made a covenant with Abram, saying, Unto thy seed have I given this land, from the river of Egypt unto the great river, the river Euphrates:","On that day the LORD made a covenant with Abram and said, \"To your descendants I give this  land, from the river of Egypt to the great river, the Euphrates--","In illo die pepigit Dominus cum Abram foedus dicens:  “Semini tuo dabo terram hanc a fluvio Aegypti usque ad magnum fluvium Euphraten,","ביום ההוא כרת יהוה את אברם ברית לאמר לזרעך נתתי את הארץ הזאת מנהר מצרים עד הנהר הגדל נהר פרת׃"],["1","15","19","이는 카인족, 크나즈족, 카드몬족,","이 곳은 켄족, 크니즈족, 카드몬족,","곧 겐 족속과 그니스 족속과 갓몬 족속과","곧 겐 족속과 그니스 족속과 갓몬 족속과","그 땅 곧 겐 사람과 그니스 사람과 갓몬 사람과","the land of the Kenites, the Kenizzites, the Kadmonites,","The Kenites, and the Kenizzites, and the Kadmonites,","the land of the Kenites, Kenizzites, Kadmonites,","Cinaeos et Cenezaeos, Cedmonaeos","את הקיני ואת הקנזי ואת הקדמני׃"],["1","15","20","히타이트족, 프리즈족, 라파족,","헷족, 브리즈족, 르바족,","헷 족속과 브리스 족속과 르바 족속과","헷 족속과 브리스 족속과 르바 족속과","헷 사람과 브리스 사람과 르바 사람과 아모리 사람과 가나안 사람과 기르가스 사람과 여부스 사람이 살고 있는 온 땅을 네 후손에게 주겠다\"","the Hittites, the Perizzites, the Rephaim,","And the Hittites, and the Perizzites, and the Rephaims,","Hittites, Perizzites, Rephaites,","et Hetthaeos et Pherezaeos, Raphaim quoque","ואת החתי ואת הפרזי ואת הרפאים׃"],["1","15","21","아모리족, 가나안족, 기르가스족, 그리고 여부스족이 살고 있는 땅이다.”","아모리족, 가나안족, 기르갓족, 여부스족이 살고 있는 땅이다.\"","아모리 족속과 가나안 족속과 기르가스 족속과 여부스 족속의 땅이니라 하셨더라","아모리 족속과 가나안 족속과 기르가스 족속과 여부스 족속의 땅이니라 하셨더라",null,"the Amorites, the Canaanites, the Girgashites, and the Jebusites.","And the Amorites, and the Canaanites, and the Girgashites, and the Jebusites.","Amorites, Canaanites, Girgashites and Jebusites.\"","et Amorraeos et Chananaeos et Gergesaeos et Iebusaeos “.","ואת האמרי ואת הכנעני ואת הגרגשי ואת היבוסי׃"],["1","16","1","아브람의 아내 사라이는 그에게 자식을 낳아 주지 못하였다. 사라이에게는 이집트인 여종이 하나 있었는데, 그 이름은 하가르였다.","아브람의 아내 사래는 아직 아이를 낳지 못했는데, 마침 사래에게는 하갈이라는 이집트인 몸종이 있었다.","아브람의 아내 사래는 출산하지 못하였고 그에게 한 여종이 있으니 애굽 사람이요 이름은 하갈이라","아브람의 아내 사래는 생산치 못하였고 그에게 한 여종이 있으니 애굽 사람이요 이름은 하갈이라","아브람의 아내 사래는 애굽 출신의 하갈이라는 몸종이 있었다. 사래는 아이를 낳지 못하는 몸이었으므로","Abram’s wife Sarai had borne him no children. Now she had an Egyptian maidservant named Hagar.","Now Sarai Abram's wife bare him no children: and she had an handmaid, an Egyptian, whose name was Hagar.","Now Sarai, Abram's wife, had borne him no children. But she had an Egyptian maidservant  named Hagar;","Sarai autem uxor Abram non genuerat ei liberos; sed habens ancillam Aegyptiam nomine Agar,","ושרי אשת אברם לא ילדה לו ולה שפחה מצרית ושמה הגר׃"],["1","16","2","사라이가 아브람에게 말하였다. “여보, 주님께서 나에게 자식을 갖지 못하게 하시니, 내 여종과 한자리에 드셔요. 행여 그 아이의 몸을 빌려서라도 내가 아들을 얻을 수 있을지 모르잖아요.” 아브람은 사라이의 말을 들었다.","사래가 아브람에게 말하였다. \"야훼께서 나에게 자식을 주지 않으시니, 내 몸종을 받아주십시오. 그 몸에서라도 아들을 얻어 대를 이었으면 합니다.\" 아브람은 사래의 뜻을 받아들이기로 하였다.","사래가 아브람에게 이르되 여호와께서 내 출산을 허락하지 아니하셨으니 원하건대 내 여종에게 들어가라 내가 혹 그로 말미암아 자녀를 얻을까 하노라 하매 아브람이 사래의 말을 들으니라","사래가 아브람에게 이르되 여호와께서 나의 생산을 허락지 아니하셨으니 원컨대 나의 여종과 동침하라 내가 혹 그로 말미암아 자녀를 얻을까 하노라 하매 아브람이 사래의 말을 들으니라","남편인 아브람에게 이렇게 말하였다. \"여보, 여호와께서 우리에게 자식 하나 점지해 주지 않으시는군요. 그러니 당신이 내 몸종과 잠자리를 같이하는게 어떻겠어요? 그러면 혹시라도 내 대신 그녀가 우리에게 자식을 안겨줄지 누가 알아요?\" 아브람은 사래가 하자는 대로 하였다.","Sarai said to Abram: “The LORD has kept me from bearing children. Have intercourse with my maid; perhaps I will have sons through her.” Abram obeyed Sarai.","And Sarai said unto Abram, Behold now, the LORD hath restrained me from bearing: I pray thee, go in unto my maid; it may be that I may obtain children by her. And Abram hearkened to the voice of Sarai.","so she said to Abram, \"The LORD has kept me from having children. Go, sleep with my  maidservant; perhaps I can build a family through her.\" Abram agreed to what Sarai said.","dixit marito suo:  “Ecce conclusit me Dominus, ne parerem; ingredere ad ancillam meam, si forte saltem ex illa suscipiam filios “. Cumque ille acquiesceret deprecanti,","ותאמר שרי אל אברם הנה נא עצרני יהוה מלדת בא נא אל שפחתי אולי אבנה ממנה וישמע אברם לקול שרי׃"],["1","16","3","그리하여 아브람의 아내 사라이는 자기의 이집트인 여종 하가르를 데려다, 자기 남편 아브람에게 아내로 주었다. 아브람이 가나안 땅에 자리 잡은 지 십 년이 지난 뒤의 일이었다.","아브람의 아내 사래는 이집트인 몸종 하갈을 남편 아브람에게 소실로 들여보냈다. 이것은 아브람이 가나안 땅에 정착한 지 십 년이 지난 뒤의 일이었다.","아브람의 아내 사래가 그 여종 애굽 사람 하갈을 데려다가 그 남편 아브람에게 첩으로 준 때는 아브람이 가나안 땅에 거주한 지 십 년 후였더라","아브람의 아내 사래가 그 여종 애굽 사람 하갈을 가져 그 남편 아브람에게 첩으로 준 때는 아브람이 가나안 땅에 거한지 십년 후이었더라","그래서 아브람의 아내 사래는 몸종인 애굽 여인 하갈을 남편에게 데려와 소실로 맞아들이게 하였다. 이때가 아브람이 가나안 땅에서 10년쯤 살았던 때였다.","Thus, after Abram had lived ten years in the land of Canaan, his wife Sarai took her maid, Hagar the Egyptian, and gave her to her husband Abram to be his wife.","And Sarai Abram's wife took Hagar her maid the Egyptian, after Abram had dwelt ten years in the land of Canaan, and gave her to her husband Abram to be his wife.","So after Abram had been living in Canaan ten years, Sarai his wife took her Egyptian  maidservant Hagar and gave her to her husband to be his wife.","tulit Agar Aegyptiam ancillam suam post annos decem quam habitare coeperant in terra Chanaan, et dedit eam viro suo uxorem.","ותקח שרי אשת אברם את הגר המצרית שפחתה מקץ עשר שנים לשבת אברם בארץ כנען ותתן אתה לאברם אישה לו לאשה׃"],["1","16","4","그가 하가르와 한자리에 들자 그 여자가 임신하였다. 그 여자는 자기가 임신한 것을 알고서 제 여주인을 업신여겼다.","아브람이 하갈과 한자리에 들었더니, 하갈의 몸에 태기가 있게 되었다. 하갈은 그것을 알고 안주인을 업신여기게 되었다.","아브람이 하갈과 동침하였더니 하갈이 임신하매 그가 자기의 임신함을 알고 그의 여주인을 멸시한지라","아브람이 하갈과 동침하였더니 하갈이 잉태하매 그가 자기의 잉태함을 깨닫고 그 여주인을 멸시한지라","아브람이 하갈과 잠자리를 같이하여 하갈이 아이를 갖게 되었다. 하갈은 자신이 아이를 가진 것을 알고는 그때부터 자기가 섬기던 여주인을 우습게 여기기 시작하였다.","He had intercourse with her, and she became pregnant. As soon as Hagar knew she was pregnant, her mistress lost stature in her eyes.","And he went in unto Hagar, and she conceived: and when she saw that she had conceived, her mistress was despised in her eyes.","He slept with Hagar, and she conceived. When she knew she was pregnant, she began to despise  her mistress.","Qui ingressus est ad eam. At illa concepisse se videns despexit dominam suam.","ויבא אל הגר ותהר ותרא כי הרתה ותקל גברתה בעיניה׃"],["1","16","5","그래서 사라이가 아브람에게 말하였다. “내가 이렇게 부당한 일을 겪는 것은 당신 책임이에요. 내가 내 여종을 당신 품 안에 안겨 주었는데, 이 여종은 자기가 임신한 것을 알고서 나를 업신여긴답니다. 아, 주님께서 나와 당신 사이의 시비를 가려 주셨으면!”","그러자 사래가 아브람에게 호소하였다. \"내가 이렇게 멸시를 받는 것은 당신 탓입니다. 나는 내 몸종을 당신 품에 안겨드렸습니다. 그런데 그가 자기 몸에 태기가 있는 것을 알고는 저를 업신여깁니다. 야훼께서 나와 당신 사이의 시비를 가려주시기 바랍니다.\"","사래가 아브람에게 이르되 내가 받는 모욕은 당신이 받아야 옳도다 내가 나의 여종을 당신의 품에 두었거늘 그가 자기의 임신함을 알고 나를 멸시하니 당신과 나 사이에 여호와께서 판단하시기를 원하노라","사래가 아브람에게 이르되 나의 받는 욕은 당신이 받아야 옳도다 내가 나의 여종을 당신의 품에 두었거늘 그가 자기의 잉태함을 깨닫고 나를 멸시하니 당신과 나 사이에 여호와께서 판단하시기를 원하노라","그러자 사래가 아브람에게 따졌다. \"여보, 당신 잘못이에요. 하갈이 나를 우습게 여기다니! 아니 이럴 수가 있어요? 아이를 갖더니 이젠 뵈는 게 없는 모양이죠. 이건 모두 당신 책임이에요. 하갈을 소실로 맞아들이라고 한 것은 물론 나예요. 하지만 하갈이 당신 아이를 갖고부터는 나를 우습게 여기지 뭐예요. 정말 이럴 수 있는거예요? 도대체 당신하고 나하고 누가 잘못하였는지 여호와께서 가려 주시길 바랄 뿐이에요.\"","So Sarai said to Abram: “This outrage against me is your fault. I myself gave my maid to your embrace; but ever since she knew she was pregnant, I have lost stature in her eyes. May the LORD decide between you and me!”","And Sarai said unto Abram, My wrong be upon thee: I have given my maid into thy bosom; and when she saw that she had conceived, I was despised in her eyes: the LORD judge between me and thee.","Then Sarai said to Abram, \"You are responsible for the wrong I am suffering. I put my  servant in your arms, and now that she knows she is pregnant, she despises me. May the LORD judge  between you and me.\"","Dixitque Sarai ad Abram:  “Inique agis contra me; ego dedi ancillam meam in sinum tuum, quae videns quod conceperit, despectui me habet. Iudicet Dominus inter me et te “.","ותאמר שרי אל אברם חמסי עליך אנכי נתתי שפחתי בחיקך ותרא כי הרתה ואקל בעיניה ישפט יהוה ביני וביניך׃"],["1","16","6","아브람이 사라이에게 말하였다. 여보, 당신의 여종이니 당신 손에 달려 있지 않소? 당신 좋을 대로 하구려. 그리하여 사라이가 하가르를 구박하니, 하가르는 사라이를 피하여 도망쳤다.","아브람이 사래에게 말하였다. \"당신의 몸종인데 당신 마음대로 할 수 있지 않소? 당신 좋을 대로 하시오.\"","아브람이 사래에게 이르되 당신의 여종은 당신의 수중에 있으니 당신의 눈에 좋을 대로 그에게 행하라 하매 사래가 하갈을 학대하였더니 하갈이 사래 앞에서 도망하였더라","아브람이 사래에게 이르되 그대의 여종은 그대의 수중에 있으니 그대의 눈에 좋은대로 그에게 행하라 하매 사래가 하갈을 학대하였더니 하갈이 사래의 앞에서 도망하였더라","이렇게 사래가 분노를 나타내자 아브람이 대답하였다. \"하갈은 당신 몸종이 아니오? 그러니 당신 맘대로 할 수 있지 않소 당신이 알아서 하시오\" 그러자 사래는 하갈을 심하게 학대하기 시작하였다. 하갈은 견디지 못하고 도망하였다.","Abram told Sarai: “Your maid is in your power. Do to her what you regard as right.” Sarai then mistreated her so much that Hagar ran away from her.","But Abram said unto Sarai, Behold, thy maid is in thine hand; do to her as it pleaseth thee. And when Sarai dealt hardly with her, she fled from her face.","\"Your servant is in your hands,\" Abram said. \"Do with her whatever you think best.\" Then  Sarai mistreated Hagar; so she fled from her.","Cui respondens Abram:  “Ecce, ait, ancilla tua in manu tua est; utere ea, ut libet “. Affligente igitur eam Sarai, aufugit ab ea.","ויאמר אברם אל שרי הנה שפחתך בידך עשי לה הטוב בעיניך ותענה שרי ותברח מפניה׃"],["1","16","7","주님의 천사가 광야에 있는 샘터에서 하가르를 만났다. 그것은 수르로 가는 길가에 있는 샘이었다.","야훼의 천사가 빈들에 있는 샘터에서 하갈을 만났다. 그 샘터는 수르로 가는 길가에 있었다.","여호와의 사자가 광야의 샘물 곁 곧 술 길 샘 곁에서 그를 만나","여호와의 사자가 광야의 샘곁 곧 술 길 샘물 곁에서 그를 만나","하갈은 광야로 나가 술로 가는 길목에 있는 어느 샘가에서 쉬고 있었다. 그때 여호와의 심부름꾼이 샘가에 앉아 있는 하갈을 발견하고는","The LORD’s angel found her by a spring in the wilderness, the spring on the road to Shur,","And the angel of the LORD found her by a fountain of water in the wilderness, by the fountain in the way to Shur.","The angel of the LORD found Hagar near a spring in the desert; it was the spring that is  beside the road to Shur.","Cumque invenisset illam angelus Domini iuxta fontem aquae in deserto, ad fontem in via Sur,","וימצאה מלאך יהוה על עין המים במדבר על העין בדרך שור׃"],["1","16","8","그 천사가 “사라이의 여종 하가르야, 어디에서 와서 어디로 가는 길이냐?” 하고 묻자, 그가 대답하였다. “저의 여주인 사라이를 피하여 도망치는 길입니다.”","그 천사가 \"사래의 종 하갈아! 어디에서 와서 어디로 가는 길이냐?\" 하고 물었다. \"나의 주인 사래를 피하여 도망치는 길입니다.\" 하갈이 이렇게 대답하자,","이르되 사래의 여종 하갈아 네가 어디서 왔으며 어디로 가느냐 그가 이르되 나는 내 여주인 사래를 피하여 도망하나이다","가로되 사래의 여종 하갈아 네가 어디서 왔으며 어디로 가느냐 그가 가로되 나는 나의 여주인 사래를 피하여 도망하나이다","물었다. \"사래의 몸종 하갈아! 그래, 어디서 오는 길이냐? 어디로 가려고 그러느냐?\" \"예, 나의 주인 사래에게서 도망쳐 나오는 길입니다\" 하고 하갈이 대답하였다.","and he asked, “Hagar, maid of Sarai, where have you come from and where are you going?” She answered, “I am running away from my mistress, Sarai.”","And he said, Hagar, Sarai's maid, whence camest thou? and whither wilt thou go? And she said, I flee from the face of my mistress Sarai.","And he said, \"Hagar, servant of Sarai, where have you come from, and where are you going?\"  \"I'm running away from my mistress Sarai,\" she answered.","dixit:  “Agar, ancilla Sarai, unde venis et quo vadis? “. Quae respondit:  “A facie Sarai dominae meae ego fugio “.","ויאמר הגר שפחת שרי אי מזה באת ואנה תלכי ותאמר מפני שרי גברתי אנכי ברחת׃"],["1","16","9","주님의 천사가 그에게 말하였다. “너의 여주인에게 돌아가서 그에게 복종하여라.”","야훼의 천사는 주인 곁으로 돌아가, 고생을 참고 견디라면서","여호와의 사자가 그에게 이르되 네 여주인에게로 돌아가서 그 수하에 복종하라","여호와의 사자가 그에게 이르되 네 여주인에게로 돌아가서 그 수하에 복종하라","그러자 여호와의 심부름꾼이 하갈을 타일렀다. \"하갈아, 어서 되돌아가거라. 네 여주인에게로 돌아가서 그를 잘 모셔라.\"","But the LORD’s angel told her: “Go back to your mistress and submit to her authority.","And the angel of the LORD said unto her, Return to thy mistress, and submit thyself under her hands.","Then the angel of the LORD told her, \"Go back to your mistress and submit to her.\"","Dixitque ei angelus Domini:  “Revertere ad dominam tuam et humiliare sub manibus ipsius “.","ויאמר לה מלאך יהוה שובי אל גברתך והתעני תחת ידיה׃"],["1","16","10","주님의 천사가 다시 그에게 말하였다. “내가 너의 후손을 셀 수 없을 만큼 번성하게 해 주겠다.”","이렇게 일러주는 것이었다. \"내가 네 자손을 아무도 셀 수 없을 만큼 많이 불어나게 하리라.\"","여호와의 사자가 또 그에게 이르되 내가 네 씨를 크게 번성하여 그 수가 많아 셀 수 없게 하리라","여호와의 사자가 또 그에게 이르되 내가 네 자손으로 크게 번성하여 그 수가 많아 셀 수 없게 하리라","하면서 말을 이었다. \"내가 네 후손이 엄청날만큼 불어나게 하리라. 너무 많아 셀 수도 없을 만큼 많아지게 하리라.\"","I will make your descendants so numerous,” added the LORD’s angel, “that they will be too many to count.”","And the angel of the LORD said unto her, I will multiply thy seed exceedingly, that it shall not be numbered for multitude.","The angel added, \"I will so increase your descendants that they will be too numerous to  count.\"","Et dixit ei angelus Domini:  “Multiplicans multiplicabo semen tuum, et non numerabitur prae multitudine “.","ויאמר לה מלאך יהוה הרבה ארבה את זרעך ולא יספר מרב׃"],["1","16","11","주님의 천사가 또 그에게 말하였다. “보라, 너는 임신한 몸 이제 아들을 낳으리니 그 이름을 이스마엘이라 하여라. 네가 고통 속에서 부르짖는 소리를 주님께서 들으셨다.","야훼의 천사는 다시 \"너는 아들을 배었으니 낳거든 이름을 이스마엘이라 하여라. 네 울부짖음을 야훼께서 들어주셨다.","여호와의 사자가 또 그에게 이르되 네가 임신하였은즉 아들을 낳으리니 그 이름을 이스마엘이라 하라 이는 여호와께서 네 고통을 들으셨음이니라","여호와의 사자가 또 그에게 이르되 네가 잉태하였은즉 아들을 낳으리니 그 이름을 1)이스마엘이라 하라 이는 여호와께서 네 고통을 들으셨음이니라 하나님이 들으심","여호와의 심부름꾼은 또 이런 말을 하였다. \"네가 지금 아이를 가졌으니, 이제 그 아이를 낳으리라. 그 아이의 이름을 이스마엘이라고 지어라. 여호와께서 네 고통을 모두 들어주셨기 때문이다.","Then the LORD’s angel said to her: “You are now pregnant and shall bear a son; you shall name him Ishmael, For the LORD has heeded your affliction.","And the angel of the LORD said unto her, Behold, thou art with child and shalt bear a son, and shalt call his name Ishmael; because the LORD hath heard thy affliction.","The angel of the LORD also said to her: \"You are now with child and you will have a son.  You shall name him Ishmael, for the LORD has heard of your misery.","Et dixit ei angelus Domini:  “Ecce, concepisti et paries filium vocabisque nomen eius Ismael, eo quod audierit Dominus afflictionem tuam.","ויאמר לה מלאך יהוה הנך הרה וילדת בן וקראת שמו ישמעאל כי שמע יהוה אל עניך׃"],["1","16","12","그는 들나귀 같은 사람이 되리라. 그는 모든 이를 치려고 손을 들고 모든 이는 그를 치려고 손을 들리라. 그는 자기의 모든 형제들에게 맞서 혼자 살아가리라.”","네 아들은 들나귀 같은 사람이라, 닥치는 대로 치고 받아 모든 골육의 형제와 등지고 살리라.\"","그가 사람 중에 들나귀 같이 되리니 그의 손이 모든 사람을 치겠고 모든 사람의 손이 그를 칠지며 그가 모든 형제와 대항해서 살리라 하니라","그가 사람 중에 들나귀 같이 되리니 그 손이 모든 사람을 치겠고 모든 사람의 손이 그를 칠찌며 그가 모든 형제의 동방에서 살리라 하니라","네가 낳은 그 아들은 고삐 풀린 들나귀처럼 살아가리라. 그는 닥치는대로 사람에게 달려들어 받으리라. 또한 사람들도 모두 다 그에게 달려들어 치고 받으리라. 그렇듯 피붙이들까지도 서로 외면하리라.\"","He shall be a wild ass of a man, his hand against everyone, and everyone’s hand against him; Alongside all his kindred shall he encamp.”","And he will be a wild man; his hand will be against every man, and every man's hand against him; and he shall dwell in the presence of all his brethren.","He will be a wild donkey of a man; his hand will be against everyone and everyone's hand  against him, and he will live in hostility toward all his brothers.\"","Hic erit homo onagro similis; manus eius contra omnes, et manus omnium contra eum; et e regione universorum fratrum suorum figet tabernacula “.","והוא יהיה פרא אדם ידו בכל ויד כל בו ועל פני כל אחיו ישכן׃"],["1","16","13","하가르는 “내가 그분을 뵈었는데 아직도 살아 있는가?” 하면서, 자기에게 말씀하신 주님의 이름을 “당신은 ‘저를 돌보시는 하느님’이십니다.”라고 하였다.","하갈은 자기에게 말씀해 주시는 야훼를 '나를 돌보아 주시는 하느님'이라고 불렀다. 하갈이 \"이런 데서 나를 돌보시는 하느님을 뵙다니!\" 하고 말한 데서 그런 이름이 생긴 것이다.","하갈이 자기에게 이르신 여호와의 이름을 나를 살피시는 하나님이라 하였으니 이는 내가 어떻게 여기서 나를 살피시는 하나님을 뵈었는고 함이라","하갈이 자기에게 이르신 여호와의 이름을 감찰하시는 하나님이라 하였으니 이는 내가 어떻게 여기서 나를 감찰하시는 하나님을 뵈었는고 함이라","하갈이 \"아이구, 내가 여기서 나를 돌보아 주시는 하나님을 뵙다니\" 하고 소리치면서 자기와 이야기를 나눈 여호와의 이름을 \"돌보아 주시는 하나님\"이라는 뜻으로 엘로이라고 불렀다.","To the LORD who spoke to her she gave a name, saying, “You are God who sees me”; she meant, “Have I really seen God and remained alive after he saw me?”","And she called the name of the LORD that spake unto her, Thou God seest me: for she said, Have I also here looked after him that seeth me?","She gave this name to the LORD who spoke to her: \"You are the God who sees me,\" for she  said, \"I have now seen the One who sees me.\"","Vocavit autem nomen Domini, qui loquebatur ad eam:  “Tu Deus, qui vidisti me “. Dixit enim:  “Profecto hic vidi posteriora videntis me “.","ותקרא שם יהוה הדבר אליה אתה אל ראי כי אמרה הגם הלם ראיתי אחרי ראי׃"],["1","16","14","그리하여 그 우물을 브에르 라하이 로이라 하였다. 그것은 카데스와 베렛 사이에 있다.","그래서 그 샘터를 '라하이 로이'라고 불렀다. 그 샘터는 카데스와 베렛 사이에 있었다.","이러므로 그 샘을 브엘라해로이라 불렀으며 그것은 가데스와 베렛 사이에 있더라","이러므로 그 샘을 2)브엘라해로이라 불렀으며 그것이 가데스와 베렛 사이에 있더라 나를 감찰하시는 생존자의 우물이라","그리고 사람들은 하갈이 앉아서 쉬었던 그 샘을 \"나를 돌보아 주시는 살아 계신 분의 샘\"이라는 뜻으로 ㄱ) 브엘라해로이라고 불렀다. (ㄱ. 히. 브에르 라하이 로이)","That is why the well is called Beer-lahai-roi. It is between Kadesh and Bered.","Wherefore the well was called Beerlahairoi; behold, it is between Kadesh and Bered.","That is why the well was called Beer Lahai Roi; it is still there, between Kadesh and  Bered.","Propterea appellatur puteus ille Lahairoi (id est Viventis et Videntis me); ipse est inter Cades et Barad.","על כן קרא לבאר באר לחי ראי הנה בין קדש ובין ברד׃"],["1","16","15","하가르는 아브람에게 아들을 낳아 주었다. 아브람은 하가르가 낳은 아들의 이름을 이스마엘이라 하였다.","하갈은 아브람에게 아들을 낳아주었다. 아브람은 하갈이 낳아준 아들의 이름을 이스마엘이라 하였다.","하갈이 아브람의 아들을 낳으매 아브람이 하갈이 낳은 그 아들을 이름하여 이스마엘이라 하였더라","하갈이 아브람의 아들을 낳으매 아브람이 하갈의 낳은 그 아들을 이름하여 이스마엘이라 하였더라","하갈은 아브람의 아들을 낳았다. 그러자 아브람이 그 아이의 이름을 이스마엘이라고 지어 불렀다.","Hagar bore Abram a son, and Abram named the son whom Hagar bore him Ishmael.","And Hagar bare Abram a son: and Abram called his son's name, which Hagar bare, Ishmael.","So Hagar bore Abram a son, and Abram gave the name Ishmael to the son she had borne.","Peperitque Agar Abrae filium; qui vocavit nomen filii sui, quem pepererat Agar, Ismael.","ותלד הגר לאברם בן ויקרא אברם שם בנו אשר ילדה הגר ישמעאל׃"],["1","16","16","하가르가 아브람에게 이스마엘을 낳아 줄 때, 아브람의 나이는 여든여섯 살이었다.","하갈이 아브람에게 아들을 낳아준 것은 아브람의 나이 팔십육 세 되던 해의 일이었다.","하갈이 아브람에게 이스마엘을 낳았을 때에 아브람이 팔십육 세였더라","하갈이 아브람에게 이스마엘을 낳을 때에 아브람이 팔십 륙세이었더라","그때 아브람의 나이는 86세였다.","Abram was eighty-six years old when Hagar bore him Ishmael.","And Abram was fourscore and six years old, when Hagar bare Ishmael to Abram.","Abram was eighty-six years old when Hagar bore him Ishmael.","Octoginta et sex annorum erat Abram, quando peperit ei Agar Ismaelem.","ואברם בן שמנים שנה ושש שנים בלדת הגר את ישמעאל לאברם׃"],["1","17","1","아브람의 나이가 아흔아홉 살이 되었을 때, 주님께서 아브람에게 나타나 말씀하셨다. “나는 전능한 하느님이다. 너는 내 앞에서 살아가며 흠 없는 이가 되어라.","아브람이 구십구 세 되던 해에 야훼께서 아브람에게 나타나시어 말씀하셨다. \"나는 전능한 신이다. 너는 내 앞을 떠나지 말고 흠없이 살아라.","아브람이 구십구 세 때에 여호와께서 아브람에게 나타나서 그에게 이르시되 나는 전능한 하나님이라 너는 내 앞에서 행하여 완전하라","아브람의 구십 구세 때에 여호와께서 아브람에게 나타나서 그에게 이르시되 나는 전능한 하나님이라 너는 내 앞에서 행하여 완전하라","아브람이 나이 99세가 되었을 때 여호와께서 아브람에게 나타나셔서 말씀하셨다. ㄴ) \"나는 전능한 하나님이다. 너는 언제나 내 앞에서 살아가도록 하여라. 내가 항상 너를 바라보고 있다고 생각하며 살도록 하여라. 무엇이 올바른 것인지를 생각하며 살아라. 그리고 바른 길만 걷도록 하여라. (ㄴ. 히. 엘 삿다이)","When Abram was ninety-nine years old, the LORD appeared to Abram and said: I am God the Almighty. Walk in my presence and be blameless.","And when Abram was ninety years old and nine, the LORD appeared to Abram, and said unto him, I am the Almighty God; walk before me, and be thou perfect.","When Abram was ninety-nine years old, the LORD appeared to him and said, \"I am God Almighty;  walk before me and be blameless.","Postquam Abram nonaginta et novem annorum factus est, apparuit ei Dominus dixitque ad eum:  “Ego Deus omnipotens, ambula coram me et esto perfectus.","ויהי אברם בן תשעים שנה ותשע שנים וירא יהוה אל אברם ויאמר אליו אני אל שדי התהלך לפני והיה תמים׃"],["1","17","2","나는 나와 너 사이에 계약을 세우고, 너를 크게 번성하게 하겠다.”","나는 너와 나 사이에 계약을 세워 네 후손을 많이 불어나게 하리라.\"","내가 내 언약을 나와 너 사이에 두어 너를 크게 번성하게 하리라 하시니","내가 내 언약을 나와 너 사이에 세워 너로 심히 번성케 하리라 하시니","나는 너와 계약을 맺어 네 후손이 수도 없이 불어나게 하리라.\"","Between you and me I will establish my covenant, and I will multiply you exceedingly.","And I will make my covenant between me and thee, and will multiply thee exceedingly.","I will confirm my covenant between me and you and will greatly increase your numbers.\"","Ponamque foedus meum inter me et te et multiplicabo te vehementer nimis “.","ואתנה בריתי ביני ובינך וארבה אותך במאד מאד׃"],["1","17","3","아브람이 얼굴을 땅에 대고 엎드리자, 하느님께서 그에게 이르셨다.","아브람이 얼굴을 땅에 대고 엎드리자 하느님께서 그에게 다시 말씀하셨다.","아브람이 엎드렸더니 하나님이 또 그에게 말씀하여 이르시되","아브람이 엎드린대 하나님이 또 그에게 일러 가라사대","아브람이 얼굴을 땅에 대고 엎드리자 하나님께서 계속해서 이르셨다.","Abram fell face down and God said to him:","And Abram fell on his face: and God talked with him, saying,","Abram fell facedown, and God said to him,","Cecidit Abram pronus in faciem.","ויפל אברם על פניו וידבר אתו אלהים לאמר׃"],["1","17","4","“나를 보아라. 너와 맺는 내 계약은 이것이다. 너는 많은 민족들의 아버지가 될 것이다.","\"내가 너와 계약을 맺는다. 너는 많은 민족의 조상이 되리라.","보라 내 언약이 너와 함께 있으니 너는 여러 민족의 아버지가 될지라","내가 너와 내 언약을 세우니 너는 열국의 아비가 될찌라","\"내가 너와 계약을 맺는다. 이제 너는 수많은 무리의 조상이 되리라. 내가 분명히 약속하마.","For my part, here is my covenant with you: you are to become the father of a multitude of nations.","As for me, behold, my covenant is with thee, and thou shalt be a father of many nations.","\"As for me, this is my covenant with you: You will be the father of many nations.","Dixitque ei Deus:  “Ecce pactum meum tecum. Erisque pater multarum gentium,","אני הנה בריתי אתך והיית לאב המון גוים׃"],["1","17","5","너는 더 이상 아브람이라 불리지 않을 것이다. 이제 너의 이름은 아브라함이다. 내가 너를 많은 민족들의 아버지로 만들었기 때문이다.","내가 너를 많은 민족의 조상으로 삼으리니, 네 이름은 이제 아브람이 아니라 아브라함이라 불리리라.","이제 후로는 네 이름을 아브람이라 하지 아니하고 아브라함이라 하리니 이는 내가 너를 여러 민족의 아버지가 되게 함이니라","이제 후로는 네 이름을 아브람이라 하지 아니하고 1)아브라함이라 하리니 이는 내가 너로 열국의 아비가 되게 함이니라 많은 무리의 아비","네 이름은 이제 아브람이 아니다. \"수많은 무리의 조상\" 이라는 뜻으로 아브라함이라고 부를 것이다. 네 이름은 이제부터 아브라함이다.","No longer will you be called Abram; your name will be Abraham, for I am making you the father of a multitude of nations.","Neither shall thy name any more be called Abram, but thy name shall be Abraham; for a father of many nations have I made thee.","No longer will you be called Abram; your name will be Abraham, for I have made you a father  of many nations.","nec ultra vocabitur nomen tuum Abram, sed Abraham erit nomen tuum, quia patrem multarum gentium constitui te.","ולא יקרא עוד את שמך אברם והיה שמך אברהם כי אב המון גוים נתתיך׃"],["1","17","6","나는 네가 매우 많은 자손을 낳아, 여러 민족이 되게 하겠다. 너에게서 임금들도 나올 것이다.","나는 너에게서 많은 자손이 태어나 큰 민족을 이루게 하고 왕손도 너에게서 나오게 하리라.","내가 너로 심히 번성하게 하리니 내가 네게서 민족들이 나게 하며 왕들이 네게로부터 나오리라","내가 너로 심히 번성케 하리니 나라들이 네게로 좇아 일어나며 열왕이 네게로 좇아 나리라","나는 네 후손이 수도 없이 불어나게 하리라. 네 후손 가운데에서는 여러 왕도 나올 것이다. 네 후손이 엄청나게 불어나 여러 나라를 이룰 것이다.","I will make you exceedingly fertile; I will make nations of you; kings will stem from you.","And I will make thee exceeding fruitful, and I will make nations of thee, and kings shall come out of thee.","I will make you very fruitful; I will make nations of you, and kings will come from you.","Faciamque te crescere vehementissime et ponam te in gentes; regesque ex te egredientur.","והפרתי אתך במאד מאד ונתתיך לגוים ומלכים ממך יצאו׃"],["1","17","7","나는 나와 너 사이에, 그리고 네 뒤에 오는 후손들 사이에 대대로 내 계약을 영원한 계약으로 세워, 너와 네 뒤에 오는 후손들에게 하느님이 되어 주겠다.","나는 너와 네 후손의 하느님이 되어주기로, 너와 대대로 네 뒤를 이을 후손들과 나 사이에 나의 계약을 세워 이를 영원한 계약으로 삼으리라.","내가 내 언약을 나와 너 및 네 대대 후손 사이에 세워서 영원한 언약을 삼고 너와 네 후손의 하나님이 되리라","내가 내 언약을 나와 너와 네 대대 후손의 사이에 세워서 영원한 언약을 삼고 너와 네 후손의 하나님이 되리라","나는 네게 한 이 약속을 반드시 지킬 것이다. 또한 앞으로 오고올 세대인 네 후손들과도 이 약속을 지킬 것이다.","I will maintain my covenant between me and you and your descendants after you throughout the ages as an everlasting covenant, to be your God and the God of your descendants after you.","And I will establish my covenant between me and thee and thy seed after thee in their generations for an everlasting covenant, to be a God unto thee, and to thy seed after thee.","I will establish my covenant as an everlasting covenant between me and you and your  descendants after you for the generations to come, to be your God and the God of your descendants  after you.","Et statuam pactum meum inter me et te et inter semen tuum post te in generationibus suis foedere sempiterno, ut sim Deus tuus et seminis tui post te.","והקמתי את בריתי ביני ובינך ובין זרעך אחריך לדרתם לברית עולם להיות לך לאלהים ולזרעך אחריך׃"],["1","17","8","나는 네가 나그네살이하는 이 땅, 곧 가나안 땅 전체를 너와 네 뒤에 오는 후손들에게 영원한 소유로 주고, 그들에게 하느님이 되어 주겠다.”","네가 몸붙여 살고 있는 가나안 온 땅을 너와 네 후손에게 준다. 나는 그들의 하느님이 되어주리라.\"","내가 너와 네 후손에게 네가 거류하는 이 땅 곧 가나안 온 땅을 주어 영원한 기업이 되게 하고 나는 그들의 하나님이 되리라","내가 너와 네 후손에게 너의 우거하는 이 땅 곧 가나안 일경으로 주어 영원한 기업이 되게 하고 나는 그들의 하나님이 되리라","그리하여 이 약속이 나와 너, 그리고 네 후손 사이에 세운 영원한 계약이 되게 할 것이다. 그리하여 나는 너와 네 후손의 하나님이 되리라.\"","I will give to you and to your descendants after you the land in which you are now residing as aliens, the whole land of Canaan, as a permanent possession; and I will be their God.","And I will give unto thee, and to thy seed after thee, the land wherein thou art a stranger, all the land of Canaan, for an everlasting possession; and I will be their God.","The whole land of Canaan, where you are now an alien, I will give as an everlasting  possession to you and your descendants after you; and I will be their God.\"","Daboque tibi et semini tuo post te terram peregrinationis tuae, omnem terram Chanaan in possessionem aeternam; eroque Deus eorum “.","ונתתי לך ולזרעך אחריך את ארץ מגריך את כל ארץ כנען לאחזת עולם והייתי להם לאלהים׃"],["1","17","9","하느님께서 다시 아브라함에게 말씀하셨다. “너는 내 계약을 지켜야 한다. 너와 네 뒤에 오는 후손들이 대대로 지켜야 한다.","하느님께서 또 아브라함에게 말씀하셨다. \"너는 내 계약을 지켜야 한다. 너뿐 아니라, 네 후손 대대로 지켜야 한다.","하나님이 또 아브라함에게 이르시되 그런즉 너는 내 언약을 지키고 네 후손도 대대로 지키라","하나님이 또 아브라함에게 이르시되 그런즉 너는 내 언약을 지키고 네 후손도 대대로 지키라","하나님께서는 계속해서 말씀하셨다 \"그러니 너는 나와 맺은 계약을 굳게 지키도록 하여라. 너뿐만 아니라 네 후손들도 이 계약을 굳게 지키도록 일러라.","God said to Abraham: For your part, you and your descendants after you must keep my covenant throughout the ages.","And God said unto Abraham, Thou shalt keep my covenant therefore, thou, and thy seed after thee in their generations.","Then God said to Abraham, \"As for you, you must keep my covenant, you and your descendants  after you for the generations to come.","Dixit iterum Deus ad Abraham:  “Tu autem pactum meum custodies, et semen tuum post te in generationibus suis.","ויאמר אלהים אל אברהם ואתה את בריתי תשמר אתה וזרעך אחריך לדרתם׃"],["1","17","10","너희가 지켜야 하는 계약, 곧 나와 너희 사이에, 그리고 네 뒤에 오는 후손들 사이에 맺어지는 계약은 이것이다. 곧 너희 가운데 모든 남자가 할례를 받는 것이다.","너희 남자들은 모두 할례를 받아라. 이것이 너와 네 후손과 나 사이에 세운 내 계약으로서 너희가 지켜야 할 일이다.","너희 중 남자는 다 할례를 받으라 이것이 나와 너희와 너희 후손 사이에 지킬 내 언약이니라","너희 중 남자는 다 할례를 받으라 이것이 나와 너희와 너희 후손 사이에 지킬 내 언약이니라","너희 가운데 남자는 모두 다 할례를 받게 하여라. 오고 오는 세대가 반드시 할례를 받도록 하여야 한다. 이것이 바로 나와 너 사이에 맺은 계약의 표시이다.","This is the covenant between me and you and your descendants after you that you must keep: every male among you shall be circumcised.","This is my covenant, which ye shall keep, between me and you and thy seed after thee; Every man child among you shall be circumcised.","This is my covenant with you and your descendants after you, the covenant you are to keep:  Every male among you shall be circumcised.","Hoc est pactum meum, quod observabitis, inter me et vos et semen tuum post te. Circumcidetur ex vobis omne masculinum,","זאת בריתי אשר תשמרו ביני וביניכם ובין זרעך אחריך המול לכם כל זכר׃"],["1","17","11","너희는 포피를 베어 할례를 받아야 한다. 이것이 나와 너희 사이에 세운 계약의 표징이다.","너희는 포경을 베어 할례를 베풀어야 한다. 이것이 나와 너희 사이에 세운 계약의 표다.","너희는 포피를 베어라 이것이 나와 너희 사이의 언약의 표징이니라","너희는 양피를 베어라 이것이 나와 너희 사이의 언약의 표징이니라","남자 성기 끝에 있는 곁 껍질을 베어내어라. 이것이 너희가 나와 계약을 맺었다는 징표가 될 것이다.","Circumcise the flesh of your foreskin. That will be the sign of the covenant between me and you.","And ye shall circumcise the flesh of your foreskin; and it shall be a token of the covenant betwixt me and you.","You are to undergo circumcision, and it will be the sign of the covenant between me and  you.","et circumcidetis carnem praeputii vestri, ut sit in signum foederis inter me et vos.","ונמלתם את בשר ערלתכם והיה לאות ברית ביני וביניכם׃"],["1","17","12","대대로 너희 가운데 모든 남자는 난 지 여드레 만에 할례를 받아야 한다. 씨종과, 너의 후손이 아닌 외국인에게서 돈으로 산 종도 할례를 받아야 한다.","대대로 너희 모든 남자는 난 지 팔 일 만에 할례를 받아야 한다. 네 후손이 아닌, 네 집에서 난 씨종이나 외국인에게서 돈 주고 산 종이라도 할례를 받아야 한다.","너희의 대대로 모든 남자는 집에서 난 자나 또는 너희 자손이 아니라 이방 사람에게서 돈으로 산 자를 막론하고 난 지 팔 일 만에 할례를 받을 것이라","대대로 남자는 집에서 난 자나 혹 너희 자손이 아니요 이방 사람에게서 돈으로 산 자를 무론하고 난지 팔일만에 할례를 받을 것이라","누구든 남자 아이는 태어난 지 여드레 만에 반드시 할례를 받도록 하여야 한다. 집에서 태어난 종뿐만 아니라 이방 사람 가운데에서 돈을 주고 사온 종도 마찬가지로 반드시 할례를 받도록 하여야 한다. 바로 이 할례가 너희와 내가 계약을 맺었다는 것을 보여주는 징표가 될 것이다.","Throughout the ages, every male among you, when he is eight days old, shall be circumcised, including houseborn slaves and those acquired with money from any foreigner who is not of your descendants.","And he that is eight days old shall be circumcised among you, every man child in your generations, he that is born in the house, or bought with money of any stranger, which is not of thy seed.","For the generations to come every male among you who is eight days old must be circumcised,  including those born in your household or bought with money from a foreigner--those who are not  your offspring.","Infans octo dierum circumcidetur in vobis: omne masculinum in generationibus vestris, tam vernaculus quam empticius ex omnibus alienigenis, quicumque non fuerit de stirpe vestra.","ובן שמנת ימים ימול לכם כל זכר לדרתיכם יליד בית ומקנת כסף מכל בן נכר אשר לא מזרעך הוא׃"],["1","17","13","네 씨종과 돈으로 산 종도 할례를 받아야 한다. 그러면 내 계약이 너희 몸에 영원한 계약으로 새겨질 것이다.","네 집에서 난 씨종이나 돈 주고 산 종도 반드시 할례를 받아야 한다. 그러면 내 계약이 영원한 계약으로서 너희 몸에 새겨질 것이다.","너희 집에서 난 자든지 너희 돈으로 산 자든지 할례를 받아야 하리니 이에 내 언약이 너희 살에 있어 영원한 언약이 되려니와","너희 집에서 난 자든지 너희 돈으로 산 자든지 할례를 받아야 하리니 이에 내 언약이 너희 살에 있어 영원한 언약이 되려니와","다시 한 번 말한다만 너희 집에서 태어난 종도 또 너희가 돈을 주고 사들인 종도 모두 다 할례를 받아야 한다. 나와 계약을 맺었다는 그 징표가 너희의 몸에 남아 있어야 너와 내가 맺은 계약이 영원한 계약이 될 게 아니겠느냐?","Yes, both the houseborn slaves and those acquired with money must be circumcised. Thus my covenant will be in your flesh as an everlasting covenant.","He that is born in thy house, and he that is bought with thy money, must needs be circumcised: and my covenant shall be in your flesh for an everlasting covenant.","Whether born in your household or bought with your money, they must be circumcised. My  covenant in your flesh is to be an everlasting covenant.","Circumcidetur vernaculus et empticius, eritque pactum meum in carne vestra in foedus aeternum. 14 Masculus, cuius praeputii caro circumcisa non fuerit, delebitur anima illa de populo suo; pactum meum irritum fecit “.","המול ימול יליד ביתך ומקנת כספך והיתה בריתי בבשרכם לברית עולם׃"],["1","17","14","할례를 받지 않은 남자, 곧 포피를 베어 할례를 받지 않은 자, 그자는 자기 백성에게서 잘려 나가야 한다. 그는 내 계약을 깨뜨린 자다.”","포경을 베어 할례를 받지 않은 남자는 내 계약을 깨뜨린 사람이니 겨레에게서 따돌림을 받게 되리라.\"","할례를 받지 아니한 남자 곧 그 포피를 베지 아니한 자는 백성 중에서 끊어지리니 그가 내 언약을 배반하였음이니라","할례를 받지 아니한 남자 곧 그 양피를 베지 아니한 자는 백성 중에서 끊어지리니 그가 내 언약을 배반하였음이니라","너희 남자 가운데에서 성기 겉 껍질을 베어내지 아니한 사람 곧 할례를 받지 않은 사람은 내 백성이라는 말을 들을 수 없으리라. 이 공동체에서 쫓겨나리라. 그것은 그가 나와 맺은 계약을 지키지 않은 까닭이다.\"","If a male is uncircumcised, that is, if the flesh of his foreskin has not been cut away, such a one will be cut off from his people; he has broken my covenant.","And the uncircumcised man child whose flesh of his foreskin is not circumcised, that soul shall be cut off from his people; he hath broken my covenant.","Any uncircumcised male, who has not been circumcised in the flesh, will be cut off from his  people; he has broken my covenant.\"",null,"וערל זכר אשר לא ימול את בשר ערלתו ונכרתה הנפש ההוא מעמיה את בריתי הפר׃"],["1","17","15","하느님께서 다시 아브라함에게 말씀하셨다. “너의 아내 사라이를 더 이상 사라이라는 이름으로 부르지 마라. 사라가 그의 이름이다.","하느님께서 아브라함에게 분부하셨다. \"네 아내 사래를 사래라는 이름으로 부르지 마라. 그의 이름은 사라이다.","하나님이 또 아브라함에게 이르시되 네 아내 사래는 이름을 사래라 하지 말고 사라라 하라","하나님이 또 아브라함에게 이르시되 네 아내 사래는 이름을 사래라 하지 말고 그 이름을 2)사라라 하라 여주","하나님께서 또 아브라함에게 이르셨다. \"너는 이제 더 이상 네 아내를 사래라고 부르지 말아라. 지금부터는 사라라고 불러라.","God further said to Abraham: As for Sarai your wife, do not call her Sarai; her name will be Sarah.","And God said unto Abraham, As for Sarai thy wife, thou shalt not call her name Sarai, but Sarah shall her name be.","God also said to Abraham, \"As for Sarai your wife, you are no longer to call her Sarai; her  name will be Sarah.","Dixit quoque Deus ad Abraham:  “Sarai uxorem tuam non vocabis nomen eius Sarai, sed Sara erit nomen eius.","ויאמר אלהים אל אברהם שרי אשתך לא תקרא את שמה שרי כי שרה שמה׃"],["1","17","16","나는 그에게 복을 내리겠다. 그리고 네가 그에게서 아들을 얻게 해 주겠다. 나는 복을 내려 사라가 여러 민족이 되게 하겠다. 여러 나라의 임금들도 그에게서 나올 것이다.”","내가 그에게 복을 내려 너에게 아들을 낳아주게 하리라. 그에게 복을 내려 많은 민족의 어미가 되게 하고 그에게서 민족들을 다스릴 왕손이 일어나게 하리라.\"","내가 그에게 복을 주어 그가 네게 아들을 낳아 주게 하며 내가 그에게 복을 주어 그를 여러 민족의 어머니가 되게 하리니 민족의 여러 왕이 그에게서 나리라","내가 그에게 복을 주어 그로 네게 아들을 낳아주게 하며 내가 그에게 복을 주어 그로 열국의 어미가 되게 하리니 민족의 열왕이 그에게서 나리라","이제 내가 사라에게 복을 내려 네 아이를 낳게 하고 여러 나라의 어미가 되게 하리라. 사라가 낳은 후손들 가운데서는 많은 왕들이 나올 것이다.\"","I will bless her, and I will give you a son by her. Her also will I bless; she will give rise to nations, and rulers of peoples will issue from her.","And I will bless her, and give thee a son also of her: yea, I will bless her, and she shall be a mother of nations; kings of people shall be of her.","I will bless her and will surely give you a son by her. I will bless her so that she will  be the mother of nations; kings of peoples will come from her.\"","Et benedicam ei; et ex illa quoque dabo tibi filium. Benedicturus sum eam, eritque in nationes; reges populorum orientur ex ea “.","וברכתי אתה וגם נתתי ממנה לך בן וברכתיה והיתה לגוים מלכי עמים ממנה יהיו׃"],["1","17","17","아브라함은 얼굴을 땅에 대고 엎드려 웃으면서 마음속으로 생각하였다. ‘나이 백 살 된 자에게서 아이가 태어난다고? 그리고 아흔 살이 된 사라가 아이를 낳을 수 있단 말인가?’","아브라함은 땅에 얼굴을 대고 엎드려 있으면서도 속으로는 우스워서 \"나이 백 살에 아들을 보다니! 사라도 아흔 살이나 되었는데 어떻게 아기를 낳겠는가?\" 하고 중얼거렸다.","아브라함이 엎드려 웃으며 마음속으로 이르되 백 세 된 사람이 어찌 자식을 낳을까 사라는 구십 세니 어찌 출산하리요 하고","아브라함이 엎드리어 웃으며 심중에 이르되 백세 된 사람이 어찌 자식을 낳을까 사라는 구십세니 어찌 생산하리요 하고","그러자 아브라함이 웃음을 참지 못하고 얼굴을 땅에 대고 엎드리어 이렇게 중얼거렸다. \"아이고, 백 살이나 먹은 늙은이가 어떻게 아이를 낳는단 말인가? 사라가 아흔살이나 먹었는데 아이를 낳는다고?\"","Abraham fell face down and laughed as he said to himself, “Can a child be born to a man who is a hundred years old? Can Sarah give birth at ninety?”","Then Abraham fell upon his face, and laughed, and said in his heart, Shall a child be born unto him that is an hundred years old? and shall Sarah, that is ninety years old, bear?","Abraham fell facedown; he laughed and said to himself, \"Will a son be born to a man a  hundred years old? Will Sarah bear a child at the age of ninety?\"","Cecidit Abraham in faciem suam et risit dicens in corde suo:  “Putasne centenario nascetur filius? Et Sara nonagenaria pariet? “.","ויפל אברהם על פניו ויצחק ויאמר בלבו הלבן מאה שנה יולד ואם שרה הבת תשעים שנה תלד׃"],["1","17","18","그러면서 아브라함이 하느님께 “이스마엘이나 당신 앞에서 오래 살기를 바랍니다.” 하고 아뢰자,","그러면서 하느님께 이스마엘이나 당신의 귀여움을 받으며 살게 해달라고 청하자","아브라함이 이에 하나님께 아뢰되 이스마엘이나 하나님 앞에 살기를 원하나이다","아브라함이 이에 하나님께 고하되 이스마엘이나 하나님 앞에 살기를 원하나이다","아브라함이 하나님께 여쭈었다. \"주여, 이스마엘이나 오래도록 살게 해주소서. 이스마엘이나 내 대를 이어 재산을 물려받게 해주십시오. 주께서 하신 약속을 이스마엘에게나 잘 지켜주십시오\"","So Abraham said to God, “If only Ishmael could live in your favor!”","And Abraham said unto God, O that Ishmael might live before thee!","And Abraham said to God, \"If only Ishmael might live under your blessing!\"","Dixitque ad Deum:  “Utinam Ismael vivat coram te “.","ויאמר אברהם אל האלהים לו ישמעאל יחיה לפניך׃"],["1","17","19","하느님께서 말씀하셨다. “아니다. 너의 아내 사라가 너에게 아들을 낳아 줄 것이다. 너는 그 이름을 이사악이라 하여라. 나는 그의 뒤에 오는 후손들을 위하여 그와 나의 계약을 영원한 계약으로 세우겠다.","하느님께서는 이렇게 말씀하셨다. \"아니다. 네 아내 사라가 너에게 아들을 낳아줄 터이니, 그의 이름을 이사악이라고 하여라. 나는 그와 나의 계약을 세우리라. 그와 그의 후손의 하느님이 되어주기로 영원한 계약을 세워주리라.","하나님이 이르시되 아니라 네 아내 사라가 네게 아들을 낳으리니 너는 그 이름을 이삭이라 하라 내가 그와 내 언약을 세우리니 그의 후손에게 영원한 언약이 되리라","하나님이 가라사대 아니라 네 아내 사라가 정녕 네게 아들을 낳으리니 너는 그 이름을 3)이삭이라 하라 내가 그와 내 언약을 세우리니 그의 후손에게 영원한 언약이 되리라 웃음","그러자 하나님께서 말씀하셨다. \"아니다. 네 아내 사라가 네 대를 이을 아들을 낳을 것이다. 그 아들이 태어나거든 이름을 이삭이라고 지어라. 나는 너와 맺은 이 계약을 반드시 지키겠다. 이 계약은 네 아들 이삭뿐만 아니라 이삭의 후손들에게도 영원토록 이어질 것이다.","God replied: Even so, your wife Sarah is to bear you a son, and you shall call him Isaac. It is with him that I will maintain my covenant as an everlasting covenant and with his descendants after him.","And God said, Sarah thy wife shall bear thee a son indeed; and thou shalt call his name Isaac: and I will establish my covenant with him for an everlasting covenant, and with his seed after him.","Then God said, \"Yes, but your wife Sarah will bear you a son, and you will call him Isaac.  I will establish my covenant with him as an everlasting covenant for his descendants after him.","Et ait Deus:  “Sara uxor tua pariet tibi filium, vocabisque nomen eius Isaac; et constituam pactum meum illi in foedus sempiternum et semini eius post eum.","ויאמר אלהים אבל שרה אשתך ילדת לך בן וקראת את שמו יצחק והקמתי את בריתי אתו לברית עולם לזרעו אחריו׃"],["1","17","20","이스마엘을 위한 너의 소원도 들어 주겠다. 나는 그에게 복을 내리고, 그가 자식을 많이 낳아 크게 번성하게 하겠다. 그는 열두 족장을 낳고, 나는 그를 큰 민족으로 만들어 줄 것이다.","이스마엘을 생각하고 하는 네 말도 들어주리라. 그에게도 복을 내려 자손이 많이 태어나 수없이 불어나게 하겠다. 그에게서 열두 영도자가 나서 큰 민족이 일어나게 하겠다.","이스마엘에 대하여는 내가 네 말을 들었나니 내가 그에게 복을 주어 그를 매우 크게 생육하고 번성하게 할지라 그가 열두 두령을 낳으리니 내가 그를 큰 나라가 되게 하려니와","이스마엘에게 이르러는 내가 네 말을 들었나니 내가 그에게 복을 주어 생육이 중다하여 그로 크게 번성케 할찌라 그가 열 두 방백을 낳으리니 내가 그로 큰 나라가 되게 하려니와","네가 이스마엘을 얼마나 아끼는가는 지금 네 말을 들어서 잘 알았다. 그러니 걱정하지 말아라. 내가 이스마엘에게도 복을 내려 그가 많은 자식을 얻게 하리라. 그의 후손도 부쩍부쩍 불어나게 하리라. 이스마엘이 열두 부족의 지도자가 되게 하고 그 후손들이 큰 나라를 이루게 하리라.","Now as for Ishmael, I will heed you: I hereby bless him. I will make him fertile and will multiply him exceedingly. He will become the father of twelve chieftains, and I will make of him a great nation.","And as for Ishmael, I have heard thee: Behold, I have blessed him, and will make him fruitful, and will multiply him exceedingly; twelve princes shall he beget, and I will make him a great nation.","And as for Ishmael, I have heard you: I will surely bless him; I will make him fruitful and  will greatly increase his numbers. He will be the father of twelve rulers, and I will make him  into a great nation.","Super Ismael quoque exaudivi te: ecce benedicam ei et crescere faciam et multiplicabo eum vehementissime; duodecim duces generabit, et faciam illum in gentem magnam.","ולישמעאל שמעתיך הנה ברכתי אתו והפריתי אתו והרביתי אתו במאד מאד שנים עשר נשיאם יוליד ונתתיו לגוי גדול׃"],["1","17","21","그러나 나의 이 계약은 내년 이맘때에 사라가 너에게 낳아 줄 이사악과 세우겠다.”","나의 이 계약은 사라가 내년 이맘 때 너에게 낳아줄 이사악에게 세워주는 것이다.\"","내 언약은 내가 내년 이 시기에 사라가 네게 낳을 이삭과 세우리라","내 언약은 내가 명년 이 기한에 사라가 네게 낳을 이삭과 세우리라","하지만 내년 이맘때쯤에는 네 아내가 낳을 네 아들 이삭과도 계약을 맺을 것이다.\"","But my covenant I will maintain with Isaac, whom Sarah shall bear to you by this time next year.","But my covenant will I establish with Isaac, which Sarah shall bear unto thee at this set time in the next year.","But my covenant I will establish with Isaac, whom Sarah will bear to you by this time next  year.\"","Pactum vero meum statuam ad Isaac, quem pariet tibi Sara tempore isto in anno altero “.","ואת בריתי אקים את יצחק אשר תלד לך שרה למועד הזה בשנה האחרת׃"],["1","17","22","하느님께서는 아브라함과 말씀을 마치시고 그를 떠나 올라가셨다.","하느님께서는 아브라함에게 하실 말씀을 다 하시고 그를 떠나 올라가셨다.","하나님이 아브라함과 말씀을 마치시고 그를 떠나 올라가셨더라","하나님이 아브라함과 말씀을 마치시고 그를 떠나 올라가셨더라","하나님께서는 이렇게 아브라함과 이야기하시고 떠나가셨다.","When he had finished speaking with Abraham, God departed from him.","And he left off talking with him, and God went up from Abraham.","When he had finished speaking with Abraham, God went up from him.","Cumque cessasset loqui cum eo, ascendit Deus ab Abraham.","ויכל לדבר אתו ויעל אלהים מעל אברהם׃"],["1","17","23","아브라함은 그날로 자기 아들 이스마엘과 씨종들과 돈으로 산 종들, 곧 아브라함의 집안 사람들 가운데에서 남자들을 모두 데려다가, 하느님께서 자기에게 이르신 대로 포피를 베어 할례를 베풀었다.","아브라함은 그 날로 아들 이스마엘을 비롯하여 집에서 난 씨종과 돈 주고 산 종에 이르기까지 집 안에 있는 모든 남자를 다 불러들여 포경을 베어 할례를 베풀었다.","이에 아브라함이 하나님이 자기에게 말씀하신 대로 이 날에 그 아들 이스마엘과 집에서 태어난 모든 자와 돈으로 산 모든 자 곧 아브라함의 집 사람 중 모든 남자를 데려다가 그 포피를 베었으니","이에 아브라함이 하나님이 자기에게 말씀하신대로 이 날에 그 아들 이스마엘과 집에서 생장한 모든 자와 돈으로 산 모든 자 곧 아브라함의 집 사람 중 모든 남자를 데려다가 그 양피를 베었으니","아브라함이 하나님과 이러한 이야기를 나누던 날 아브라함은 하나님께서 이르신 대로하였다고 아브라함은 아들 이스마엘뿐만 아니라 집에서 태어난 종과 또 돈을 주고 이방 사람에게서 사온 종을 포함하여 아브라함의 집에서 한솥밥을 먹는 남자들을 모두 불러 모아 성기의 겉 껍질을 베어내었다.","Then Abraham took his son Ishmael and all his slaves, whether born in his house or acquired with his money—every male among the members of Abraham’s household—and he circumcised the flesh of their foreskins on that same day, as God had told him to do.","And Abraham took Ishmael his son, and all that were born in his house, and all that were bought with his money, every male among the men of Abraham's house; and circumcised the flesh of their foreskin in the selfsame day, as God had said unto him.","On that very day Abraham took his son Ishmael and all those born in his household or bought  with his money, every male in his household, and circumcised them, as God told him.","Tulit ergo Abraham Ismael filium suum et omnes vernaculos domus suae universosque, quos emerat: cunctos mares ex omnibus viris domus suae; et circumcidit carnem praeputii eorum statim in ipsa die, sicut praeceperat ei Deus.","ויקח אברהם את ישמעאל בנו ואת כל ילידי ביתו ואת כל מקנת כספו כל זכר באנשי בית אברהם וימל את בשר ערלתם בעצם היום הזה כאשר דבר אתו אלהים׃"],["1","17","24","아브라함이 포피를 베어 할례를 받았을 때, 그의 나이는 아흔아홉 살이었고,","아브라함도 포경을 베어 할례를 받았는데, 그 때 나이가 구십구 세였고","아브라함이 그의 포피를 벤 때는 구십구 세였고","아브라함이 그 양피를 벤 때는 구십 구세이었고","그때 아브라함의 나이 99세였고","Abraham was ninety-nine years old when the flesh of his foreskin was circumcised,","And Abraham was ninety years old and nine, when he was circumcised in the flesh of his foreskin.","Abraham was ninety-nine years old when he was circumcised,","Abraham nonaginta novem erat annorum, quando circumcisus est in carne praeputii sui;","ואברהם בן תשעים ותשע שנה בהמלו בשר ערלתו׃"],["1","17","25","그의 아들 이스마엘이 포피를 베어 할례를 받았을 때, 그의 나이는 열세 살이었다.","아들 이스마엘이 포경을 베어 할례를 받은 것은 십삼 세 되던 해였다.","그의 아들 이스마엘이 그의 포피를 벤 때는 십삼 세였더라","그 아들 이스마엘이 그 양피를 벤 때는 십 삼세이었더라","그의 아들 이스마엘은 13세였다.","and his son Ishmael was thirteen years old when the flesh of his foreskin was circumcised.","And Ishmael his son was thirteen years old, when he was circumcised in the flesh of his foreskin.","and his son Ishmael was thirteen;","et Ismael filius eius tredecim annos impleverat tempore circumcisionis suae.","וישמעאל בנו בן שלש עשרה שנה בהמלו את בשר ערלתו׃"],["1","17","26","바로 그날에 아브라함과 그의 아들 이스마엘이 할례를 받았다.","이렇게 아브라함과 그의 아들 이스마엘은 같은 날 할례를 받았다.","그 날에 아브라함과 그 아들 이스마엘이 할례를 받았고","당일에 아브라함과 그 아들 이스마엘이 할례를 받았고","이렇게 아버지 아브라함과 아들 이스마엘이 같은 날 함께 할례를 받았고","Thus, on that same day Abraham and his son Ishmael were circumcised;","In the selfsame day was Abraham circumcised, and Ishmael his son.","Abraham and his son Ishmael were both circumcised on that same day.","Eadem die circumcisus est Abraham et Ismael filius eius;","בעצם היום הזה נמול אברהם וישמעאל בנו׃"],["1","17","27","그리고 집안의 모든 남자들, 곧 씨종들과 외국인에게서 돈으로 산 종들도 그와 함께 할례를 받았다.","아브라함의 집에 있는 모든 남자들, 집에서 난 씨종이나 외국인에게서 돈 주고 산 종도 모두 아브라함과 함께 할례를 받았다.","그 집의 모든 남자 곧 집에서 태어난 자와 돈으로 이방 사람에게서 사온 자가 다 그와 함께 할례를 받았더라","그 집의 모든 남자 곧 집에서 생장한 자와 돈으로 이방 사람에게서 사온 자가 다 그와 함께 할례를 받았더라","집에서 태어난 종과 이방 사람에게서 돈을 주고 사온 종을 포함하여 아브라함의 집안 남자들이 모두 아브라함과 함께 할례를 받았다.","and all the males of his household, including the slaves born in his house or acquired with his money from foreigners, were circumcised with him.","And all the men of his house, born in the house, and bought with money of the stranger, were circumcised with him.","And every male in Abraham's household, including those born in his household or bought from  a foreigner, was circumcised with him.","et omnes viri domus illius, tam vernaculi quam empticii ex alienigenis, circumcisi sunt cum eo.","וכל אנשי ביתו יליד בית ומקנת כסף מאת בן נכר נמלו אתו׃"],["1","18","1","주님께서는 마므레의 참나무들 곁에서 아브라함에게 나타나셨다. 아브라함은 한창 더운 대낮에 천막 어귀에 앉아 있었다.","야훼께서는 마므레의 상수리나무 곁에서 아브라함에게 나타나셨다. 아브라함은 한창 더운 대낮에 천막 문 어귀에 앉아 있다가","여호와께서 마므레의 상수리나무들이 있는 곳에서 아브라함에게 나타나시니라 날이 뜨거울 때에 그가 장막 문에 앉아 있다가","여호와께서 마므레 상수리 수풀 근처에서 아브라함에게 나타나시니라 오정 즈음에 그가 장막 문에 앉았다가","여호와께서 마므레라고 하는 상수리나무 수풀 곧 거룩한 나무가 많이 있는 수풀에서 아브라함에게 나타나셨다. 한참 뜨거운 때인 한낮에 아브라함이 자기 천막 앞에 앉아 있다가","The LORD appeared to Abraham by the oak of Mamre, as he sat in the entrance of his tent, while the day was growing hot.","And the LORD appeared unto him in the plains of Mamre: and he sat in the tent door in the heat of the day;","The LORD appeared to Abraham near the great trees of Mamre while he was sitting at the  entrance to his tent in the heat of the day.","Apparuit autem ei Dominus iuxta Quercus Mambre se denti in ostio tabernaculi sui in ipso fervore diei.","וירא אליו יהוה באלני ממרא והוא ישב פתח האהל כחם היום׃"],["1","18","2","그가 눈을 들어 보니 자기 앞에 세 사람이 서 있었다. 그는 그들을 보자 천막 어귀에서 달려 나가 그들을 맞으면서 땅에 엎드려","고개를 들어 웬 사람 셋이 자기를 향해 서 있는 것을 보았다. 그는 그들을 보자마자 천막 문에서 뛰어나가 맞으며 땅에 엎드려","눈을 들어 본즉 사람 셋이 맞은편에 서 있는지라 그가 그들을 보자 곧 장막 문에서 달려나가 영접하며 몸을 땅에 굽혀","눈을 들어 본즉 사람 셋이 맞은편에 섰는지라 그가 그들을 보자 곧 장막 문에서 달려나가 영접하며 몸을 땅에 굽혀","언뜻 눈을 들어 보니 그 앞에 세 사람이 서 있는 것이 아닌가? 아브라함은 그 세 사람을 보자마자 그 사람들이 있는 곳으로 달려가 그들을 맞아들이고자 하였다. 그는 얼굴을 땅에 댈 정도로 깊이 절을 하고는","Looking up, he saw three men standing near him. When he saw them, he ran from the entrance of the tent to greet them; and bowing to the ground,","And he lift up his eyes and looked, and, lo, three men stood by him: and when he saw them, he ran to meet them from the tent door, and bowed himself toward the ground,","Abraham looked up and saw three men standing nearby. When he saw them, he hurried from the  entrance of his tent to meet them and bowed low to the ground.","Cumque elevasset oculos, apparuerunt ei tres viri stantes prope eum. Quos cum vidisset, cucurrit in occursum eorum de ostio tabernaculi et adoravit in terram","וישא עיניו וירא והנה שלשה אנשים נצבים עליו וירא וירץ לקראתם מפתח האהל וישתחו ארצה׃"],["1","18","3","말하였다. “나리, 제가 나리 눈에 든다면, 부디 이 종을 그냥 지나치지 마십시오.","청을 드렸다. \"손님네들, 괜찮으시다면 소인 곁을 그냥 지나쳐 가지 마십시오.","이르되 내 주여 내가 주께 은혜를 입었사오면 원하건대 종을 떠나 지나가지 마시옵고","가로되 내 주여 내가 주께 은혜를 입었사오면 원컨대 종을 떠나 지나가지 마옵시고","말을 붙였다. \"어르신들, 제가 올리는 소청이 괜찮으시다면 저의 집을 그냥 지나치지 마십시오. 잠시만이라도 쉬었다 가시지요.","he said: “Sir, if it please you, do not go on past your servant.","And said, My LORD, if now I have found favour in thy sight, pass not away, I pray thee, from thy servant:","He said, \"If I have found favor in your eyes, my lord, do not pass your servant by.","et dixit:  “Domine mi, si inveni gratiam in oculis tuis, ne transeas servum tuum;","ויאמר אדני אם נא מצאתי חן בעיניך אל נא תעבר מעל עבדך׃"],["1","18","4","물을 조금 가져오게 하시어 발을 씻으시고, 이 나무 아래에서 쉬십시오.","물을 길어올 터이니 발을 씻으시고 나무 밑에서 좀 쉬십시오.","물을 조금 가져오게 하사 당신들의 발을 씻으시고 나무 아래에서 쉬소서","물을 조금 가져오게 하사 당신들의 발을 씻으시고 나무 아래서 쉬소서","날도 이렇게 더운데 물을 좀 가져오겠습니다. 하오니 발도 좀 씻으시고 시원한 저 나무 아래에서 쉬었다가 가시지요.","Let some water be brought, that you may bathe your feet, and then rest under the tree.","Let a little water, I pray you, be fetched, and wash your feet, and rest yourselves under the tree:","Let a little water be brought, and then you may all wash your feet and rest under this tree.","afferatur pauxillum aquae, et lavate pedes vestros et requiescite sub arbore.","יקח נא מעט מים ורחצו רגליכם והשענו תחת העץ׃"],["1","18","5","제가 빵도 조금 가져오겠습니다. 이렇게 이 종의 곁을 지나게 되셨으니, 원기를 돋우신 다음에 길을 떠나십시오.” 그들이 “말씀하신 대로 그렇게 해 주십시오.” 하고 대답하였다.","떡도 가져올 터이니 잡수시고 피곤을 푸신 뒤에 길을 떠나십시오. 모처럼 소인한테 오셨는데, 어찌 그냥 가시겠습니까?\" 그들이 대답하였다. \"아! 그렇게 하여주시겠소?\"","내가 떡을 조금 가져오리니 당신들의 마음을 상쾌하게 하신 후에 지나가소서 당신들이 종에게 오셨음이니이다 그들이 이르되 네 말대로 그리하라","내가 떡을 조금 가져오리니 당신들의 마음을 쾌활케 하신 후에 지나가소서 당신들이 종에게 오셨음이니이다 그들이 가로되 네 말대로 그리하라","소인이 어르신들 드실 음식을 가져오겠습니다. 하오니 음식을 드시고서 기운을 차리신 뒤에 길을 떠나시지요. 어르신들께서 이 소인의 집을 찾아 주셨으니 그지없이 고마울 따름입니다\" \"고맙소. 그렇게 합시다\" 라고 그들이 대답하였다.","Now that you have come to your servant, let me bring you a little food, that you may refresh yourselves; and afterward you may go on your way.” “Very well,” they replied, “do as you have said.”","And I will fetch a morsel of bread, and comfort ye your hearts; after that ye shall pass on: for therefore are ye come to your servant. And they said, So do, as thou hast said.","Let me get you something to eat, so you can be refreshed and then go on your way--now that  you have come to your servant.\" \"Very well,\" they answered, \"do as you say.\"","Ponamque buccellam panis, et confortate cor vestrum, postea transibitis; idcirco enim declinastis ad servum vestrum “. Qui dixerunt:  “Fac ut locutus es “.","ואקחה פת לחם וסעדו לבכם אחר תעברו כי על כן עברתם על עבדכם ויאמרו כן תעשה כאשר דברת׃"],["1","18","6","아브라함은 급히 천막으로 들어가 사라에게 말하였다. “빨리 고운 밀가루 세 스아를 가져다 반죽하여 빵을 구우시오.”","아브라함은 급히 천막으로 들어가 사라에게 고운 밀가루 서 말을 내다가 반죽하여 떡을 만들라고 이르고","아브라함이 급히 장막으로 가서 사라에게 이르되 속히 고운 가루 세 스아를 가져다가 반죽하여 떡을 만들라 하고","아브라함이 급히 장막에 들어가 사라에게 이르러 이르되 속히 고운 가루 세 스아를 가져다가 반죽하여 떡을 만들라 하고","아브라함이 급히 천막 안으로 들어가 사라에게 일렀다. \"여보, 어서 가장 좋은 밀가루 세 되를 가져다가 빨리 떡 좀 만드시오. 저 손님들을 대접해 드려야겠소\"","Abraham hurried into the tent to Sarah and said, “Quick, three measures of bran flour! Knead it and make bread.”","And Abraham hastened into the tent unto Sarah, and said, Make ready quickly three measures of fine meal, knead it, and make cakes upon the hearth.","So Abraham hurried into the tent to Sarah. \"Quick,\" he said, \"get three seahs of fine flour  and knead it and bake some bread.\"","Festinavit Abraham in tabernaculum ad Saram dixitque:  “Accelera, tria sata similae commisce et fac subcinericios panes “.","וימהר אברהם האהלה אל שרה ויאמר מהרי שלש סאים קמח סלת לושי ועשי עגות׃"],["1","18","7","그러고서 아브라함이 소 떼가 있는 데로 달려가 살이 부드럽고 좋은 송아지 한 마리를 끌어다가 하인에게 주니, 그가 그것을 서둘러 잡아 요리하였다.","소떼가 있는 곳으로 달려가 살이 연하고 맛있어 보이는 송아지 한 마리를 끌어다가 종에게 맡겨 빨리 잡아서 요리하게 하고는","아브라함이 또 가축 떼 있는 곳으로 달려가서 기름지고 좋은 송아지를 잡아 하인에게 주니 그가 급히 요리한지라","아브라함이 또 짐승 떼에 달려가서 기름지고 좋은 송아지를 취하여 하인에게 주니 그가 급히 요리한지라","이렇게 말하고는 가축 떼가 있는 곳으로 달려가 통통하고 기름지게 생긴 송아지 한 마리를 골라다가 종에게 넘겨 주면서 빨리 잡아 요리를 만들라고 일렀다. 그 종은 급히 송아지 요리를 준비하였다.","He ran to the herd, picked out a tender, choice calf, and gave it to a servant, who quickly prepared it.","And Abraham ran unto the herd, and fetcht a calf tender and good, and gave it unto a young man; and he hasted to dress it.","Then he ran to the herd and selected a choice, tender calf and gave it to a servant, who  hurried to prepare it.","Ipse vero ad armentum cucurrit et tulit inde vitulum tenerrimum et optimum deditque puero; qui festinavit et coxit illum.","ואל הבקר רץ אברהם ויקח בן בקר רך וטוב ויתן אל הנער וימהר לעשות אתו׃"],["1","18","8","아브라함은 엉긴 젖과 우유와 요리한 송아지 고기를 가져다 그들 앞에 차려 놓았다. 그들이 먹는 동안 그는 나무 아래에 서서 그들을 시중들었다.","그 송아지 요리에다가 엉긴 젖과 우유를 곁들여서 손님들 앞에 차려놓고, 손님들이 나무 밑에서 먹는 동안 그 곁에 서서 시중을 들었다.","아브라함이 엉긴 젖과 우유와 하인이 요리한 송아지를 가져다가 그들 앞에 차려 놓고 나무 아래에 모셔 서매 그들이 먹으니라","아브라함이 뻐터와 우유와 하인이 요리한 송아지를 가져다가 그들의 앞에 진설하고 나무 아래 모셔 서매 그들이 먹으니라","그래서 아브라함은 버터와 우유와 송이지 요리를 그 손님들 앞에 차려 놓았다. 그 세 사람이 나무 그늘 아래에서 식사를 하는 동안 아브라함은 곁에서 시중을 들었다.","Then he got some curds and milk, as well as the calf that had been prepared, and set these before them, waiting on them under the tree while they ate.","And he took butter, and milk, and the calf which he had dressed, and set it before them; and he stood by them under the tree, and they did eat.","He then brought some curds and milk and the calf that had been prepared, and set these  before them. While they ate, he stood near them under a tree.","Tulit quoque butyrum et lac et vitulum, quem coxerat, et posuit coram eis. Ipse vero stabat iuxta eos sub arbore; et comederunt.","ויקח חמאה וחלב ובן הבקר אשר עשה ויתן לפניהם והוא עמד עליהם תחת העץ ויאכלו׃"],["1","18","9","그들이 아브라함에게 “댁의 부인 사라는 어디에 있습니까?” 하고 물으니, 그가 “천막에 있습니다.” 하고 대답하였다.","그들이 아브라함에게 \"부인 사라는 어디 계시오?\" 하고 묻자, 아브라함은 사라가 천막에 있다고 대답하였다.","그들이 아브라함에게 이르되 네 아내 사라가 어디 있느냐 대답하되 장막에 있나이다","그들이 아브라함에게 이르되 네 아내 사라가 어디 있느냐 대답하되 장막에 있나이다","식사를 하면서 그들이 아브라함에게 물었다. \"그대 부인 사라는 어디에 계시오?\" \"예, 지금 저 천막 안에 있습니다\" 하고 아브라함이 대답하였다.","“Where is your wife Sarah?” they asked him. “There in the tent,” he replied.","And they said unto him, Where is Sarah thy wife? And he said, Behold, in the tent.","\"Where is your wife Sarah?\" they asked him. \"There, in the tent,\" he said.","Dixeruntque ad eum:  “Ubi est Sara uxor tua? “. Ille respondit:  “Ecce in tabernaculo est “.","ויאמרו אליו איה שרה אשתך ויאמר הנה באהל׃"],["1","18","10","그러자 그분께서 말씀하셨다. “내년 이때에 내가 반드시 너에게 돌아올 터인데, 그때에는 너의 아내 사라에게 아들이 있을 것이다.” 사라는 아브라함의 등 뒤 천막 어귀에서 이 말을 듣고 있었다.","그러자 하느님께서 말씀하셨다. \"내년 봄 새싹이 돋아날 무렵, 내가 틀림없이 너를 찾아오리라. 그 때 네 아내 사라는 이미 아들을 낳았을 것이다.\" 사라는 아브라함이 등지고 서 있는 천막 문 어귀에서 이 말을 엿듣고 있었다.","그가 이르시되 내년 이맘때 내가 반드시 네게로 돌아오리니 네 아내 사라에게 아들이 있으리라 하시니 사라가 그 뒤 장막 문에서 들었더라","그가 가라사대 기한이 이를 때에 내가 정녕 네게로 돌아오리니 네 아내 사라에게 아들이 있으리라 하시니 사라가 그 뒤 장막 문에서 들었더라","그 손님들 중에 한 사람이 이렇게 말하였다. \"내년 이맘때쯤에 내가 다시 이 집으로 찾아올 것이오 그때쯤 되면 그대의 부인 사라가 아들을 낳을 것이오\" 그때 사라는 아브라함의 뒤 천막 문간에 서서 이렇게 오가는 말을 들었다.","One of them said, “I will return to you about this time next year, and Sarah will then have a son.” Sarah was listening at the entrance of the tent, just behind him.","And he said, I will certainly return unto thee according to the time of life; and, lo, Sarah thy wife shall have a son. And Sarah heard it in the tent door, which was behind him.","Then the LORD said, \"I will surely return to you about this time next year, and Sarah your  wife will have a son.\" Now Sarah was listening at the entrance to the tent, which was behind him.","Cui dixit:  “Revertens veniam ad te tempore isto, et habebit filium Sara uxor tua “. Quo audito, Sara risit ad ostium tabernaculi, quod erat post eum.","ויאמר שוב אשוב אליך כעת חיה והנה בן לשרה אשתך ושרה שמעת פתח האהל והוא אחריו׃"],["1","18","11","아브라함과 사라는 이미 나이 많은 노인들로서, 사라는 여인들에게 있는 일조차 그쳐 있었다.","아브라함과 사라는 이미 나이 많은 늙은이였고 사라는 달거리가 끊긴 지도 오래였다.","아브라함과 사라는 나이가 많아 늙었고 사라에게는 여성의 생리가 끊어졌는지라","아브라함과 사라가 나이 많아 늙었고 사라의 경수는 끊어졌는지라","아브라함과 사라는 이미 나이가 너무 많이 들어 늙었고 사리는 달거리가 끊긴 지 오래되었다.","Now Abraham and Sarah were old, advanced in years, and Sarah had stopped having her menstrual periods.","Now Abraham and Sarah were old and well stricken in age; and it ceased to be with Sarah after the manner of women.","Abraham and Sarah were already old and well advanced in years, and Sarah was past the age  of childbearing.","Erant autem ambo senes provectaeque aetatis, et desierant Sarae fieri muliebria.","ואברהם ושרה זקנים באים בימים חדל להיות לשרה ארח כנשים׃"],["1","18","12","그래서 사라는 속으로 웃으면서 말하였다. ‘이렇게 늙어 버린 나에게 무슨 육정이 일어나랴? 내 주인도 이미 늙은 몸인데.’","그래서 사라는 속으로 웃으며 \"내가 이렇게 늙었고 내 남편도 다 늙었는데, 이제 무슨 낙을 다시 보랴!\" 하고 중얼거렸다.","사라가 속으로 웃고 이르되 내가 노쇠하였고 내 주인도 늙었으니 내게 무슨 즐거움이 있으리요","사라가 속으로 웃고 이르되 내가 노쇠하였고 내 주인도 늙었으니 내게 어찌 낙이 있으리요","그래서 사라는 속으로 웃으면서 \"내가 이리도 늙었고 내 남편도 저렇게 나이 많이 먹었는데 잠자리를 같이 한다고 무슨 낙이 있겠나\" 하고 중얼거렸다.","So Sarah laughed to herself and said, “Now that I am worn out and my husband is old, am I still to have sexual pleasure?”","Therefore Sarah laughed within herself, saying, After I am waxed old shall I have pleasure, my lord being old also?","So Sarah laughed to herself as she thought, \"After I am worn out and my master is old, will  I now have this pleasure?\"","Quae risit occulte dicens:  “Postquam consenui, et dominus meus vetulus est, voluptas mihi erit? “.","ותצחק שרה בקרבה לאמר אחרי בלתי היתה לי עדנה ואדני זקן׃"],["1","18","13","그러자 주님께서 아브라함에게 말씀하셨다. “어찌하여 사라는 웃으면서, ‘내가 이미 늙었는데, 정말로 아이를 낳을 수 있으랴?’ 하느냐?","그러자 야훼께서 아브라함에게 말씀하셨다. \"사라가, 다 늙은 몸으로 어떻게 아기를 낳으랴 하며 웃으니, 될 말이냐?","여호와께서 아브라함에게 이르시되 사라가 왜 웃으며 이르기를 내가 늙었거늘 어떻게 아들을 낳으리요 하느냐","여호와께서 아브라함에게 이르시되 사라가 왜 웃으며 이르기를 내가 늙었거늘 어떻게 아들을 낳으리요 하느냐","그러자 여호와께서 아브라함에게 말씀하셨다. \"아니, 사라가 나의 말을 듣고 비웃기만 하는구나 그러고는 \"내가 이렇게 늙었는데 어떻게 자식을 낳으랴\" 하는구나.","But the LORD said to Abraham: “Why did Sarah laugh and say, ‘Will I really bear a child, old as I am?’","And the LORD said unto Abraham, Wherefore did Sarah laugh, saying, Shall I of a surety bear a child, which am old?","Then the LORD said to Abraham, \"Why did Sarah laugh and say, 'Will I really have a child,  now that I am old?'","Dixit autem Dominus ad Abraham:  “Quare risit Sara dicens:  “Num vere paritura sum anus? “ “.","ויאמר יהוה אל אברהם למה זה צחקה שרה לאמר האף אמנם אלד ואני זקנתי׃"],["1","18","14","너무 어려워 주님이 못 할 일이라도 있다는 말이냐? 내가 내년 이맘때에 너에게 돌아올 터인데, 그때에는 사라에게 아들이 있을 것이다.”","이 야훼가 무슨 일인들 못 하겠느냐? 내년 봄 새싹이 돋아날 무렵에 내가 다시 찾아오리라. 그 때 사라는 이미 아들을 낳았을 것이다.\"","여호와께 능하지 못한 일이 있겠느냐 기한이 이를 때에 내가 네게로 돌아오리니 사라에게 아들이 있으리라","여호와께 능치 못한 일이 있겠느냐 기한이 이를 때에 내가 네게로 돌아오리니 사라에게 아들이 있으리라","아니, 그래 나 여호와에게 불가능한 일이 있느냐? 내가 조금 전에도 말하였다만 내년 이맘때쯤이면 내가 반드시 이 집에 다시 찾아올 터인데 그때에는 사라가 분명히 아들을 낳을 것이다.\"","Is anything too marvelous for the LORD to do? At the appointed time, about this time next year, I will return to you, and Sarah will have a son.”","Is any thing too hard for the LORD? At the time appointed I will return unto thee, according to the time of life, and Sarah shall have a son.","Is anything too hard for the LORD? I will return to you at the appointed time next year and  Sarah will have a son.\"","Numquid Domino est quidquam difficile? Revertar ad te hoc eodem tempore, et habebit Sara filium “.","היפלא מיהוה דבר למועד אשוב אליך כעת חיה ולשרה בן׃"],["1","18","15","사라가 두려운 나머지 “저는 웃지 않았습니다.” 하면서 부인하자, 그분께서 “아니다. 너는 웃었다.” 하고 말씀하셨다.","그러자 사라는 겁이 나서 웃지 않았다고 잡아뗐으나, 야훼께서는 \"아니다. 너는 분명히 웃었다.\" 하시며 꾸짖으셨다.","사라가 두려워서 부인하여 이르되 내가 웃지 아니하였나이다 이르시되 아니라 네가 웃었느니라","사라가 두려워서 승인치 아니하여 가로되 내가 웃지 아니하였나이다 가라사대 아니라 네가 웃었느니라","그러자 사라는 무서워하면서 \"난 비웃지 않았어요\" 하고 말하였다. 그러나 그분은 \"아니다. 너는 분명히 내가 하는 말을 듣고 웃었다.\" 하고 나무라셨다.","Sarah lied, saying, “I did not laugh,” because she was afraid. But he said, “Yes, you did.”","Then Sarah denied, saying, I laughed not; for she was afraid. And he said, Nay; but thou didst laugh.","Sarah was afraid, so she lied and said, \"I did not laugh.\" But he said, \"Yes, you did  laugh.\"","Negavit Sara dicens:  “Non risi “, timore perterrita. Ille autem dixit:  “Non; sed risisti “.","ותכחש שרה לאמר לא צחקתי כי יראה ויאמר לא כי צחקת׃"],["1","18","16","그 사람들은 그곳을 떠나 소돔이 내려다보이는 곳에 이르렀다. 아브라함은 그들을 배웅하려고 함께 걸어갔다.","사람들은 길을 떠나 소돔이 내려다보이는 곳에 이르렀다. 아브라함도 그들을 배웅하느라고 같이 왔다.","그 사람들이 거기서 일어나서 소돔으로 향하고 아브라함은 그들을 전송하러 함께 나가니라","그 사람들이 거기서 일어나서 소돔으로 향하고 아브라함은 그들을 전송하러 함께 나가니라","그 손님들은 식사를 마치고 길을 떠나 소돔이 내려다보이는 곳에 이르렀다. 아브라함은 길 떠나는 손님들을 배웅하느라 함께 따라왔다.","With Abraham walking with them to see them on their way, the men set out from there and looked down toward Sodom.","And the men rose up from thence, and looked toward Sodom: and Abraham went with them to bring them on the way.","When the men got up to leave, they looked down toward Sodom, and Abraham walked along with  them to see them on their way.","Cum ergo surrexissent inde viri, direxerunt oculos contra Sodomam; et Abraham simul gradiebatur deducens eos.","ויקמו משם האנשים וישקפו על פני סדם ואברהם הלך עמם לשלחם׃"],["1","18","17","그때에 주님께서 말씀하셨다. “내가 앞으로 하려는 일을 어찌 아브라함에게 숨기랴?","야훼께서는 속으로 이런 생각을 하셨다. '내가 장차 하려는 일을 어찌 아브라함에게 숨기랴?","여호와께서 이르시되 내가 하려는 것을 아브라함에게 숨기겠느냐","여호와께서 가라사대 나의 하려는 것을 아브라함에게 숨기겠느냐","여호와께서는 속으로 생각하셨다. \"내가 앞으로 할 일을 아브라함에게는 숨길 필요가 없지.","The LORD considered: Shall I hide from Abraham what I am about to do,","And the LORD said, Shall I hide from Abraham that thing which I do;","Then the LORD said, \"Shall I hide from Abraham what I am about to do?","Dixitque Dominus:  “Num celare potero Abraham, quae gesturus sum,","ויהוה אמר המכסה אני מאברהם אשר אני עשה׃"],["1","18","18","아브라함은 반드시 크고 강한 민족이 되고, 세상 모든 민족들이 그를 통하여 복을 받을 것이다.","아브라함은 강대한 민족이 되고 세상 민족들은 아브라함의 이름을 부르며 서로 복을 빌 것이 아닌가?","아브라함은 강대한 나라가 되고 천하 만민은 그로 말미암아 복을 받게 될 것이 아니냐","아브라함은 강대한 나라가 되고 천하 만민은 그를 인하여 복을 받게 될 것이 아니냐","아브라함의 후손이 엄청나게 불어나 매우 크고 막강한 나라를 이룰 것이고, 또 아브라함을 통하여 내가 세상 모든 나라들에게 복을 내릴 터인데,","now that he is to become a great and mighty nation, and all the nations of the earth are to find blessing in him?","Seeing that Abraham shall surely become a great and mighty nation, and all the nations of the earth shall be blessed in him?","Abraham will surely become a great and powerful nation, and all nations on earth will be  blessed through him.","cum futurus sit in gentem magnam ac robustissimam, et benedicendae sint in illo omnes nationes terrae?","ואברהם היו יהיה לגוי גדול ועצום ונברכו בו כל גויי הארץ׃"],["1","18","19","내가 그를 선택한 것은, 그가 자기 자식들과 뒤에 올 자기 집안에 명령을 내려 그들이 정의와 공정을 실천하여 주님의 길을 지키게 하고, 그렇게 하여 이 주님이 아브라함에게 한 약속을 그대로 이루려고 한 것이다.”","나는 그로 하여금 그의 자손과 그의 뒤를 이을 가문에게 옳고 바른 일을 지시하여 이 야훼의 가르침을 지키게 하려고 그를 뽑아 세우지 않았던가? 그러니, 나는 아브라함에게 약속한 것을 그대로 이루어주어야 하리라.'","내가 그로 그 자식과 권속에게 명하여 여호와의 도를 지켜 의와 공도를 행하게 하려고 그를 택하였나니 이는 나 여호와가 아브라함에게 대하여 말한 일을 이루려 함이니라","내가 그로 그 자식과 권속에게 명하여 여호와의 도를 지켜 의와 공도를 행하게 하려고 그를 택하였나니 이는 나 여호와가 아브라함에게 대하여 말한 일을 이루려 함이니라","내가 아브라함을 가려 뽑는 까닭도 이 사람이 자식들과 후손들에게 내 말을 잘 따르라고 일러두어 저희가 올곧은 일만을 하고 올바른 일만을 하게 하려는 것 아닌가. 만일 저희 후손들이 그렇게 잘 따라 준다면 내가 아브라함에게 한 약속을 모두 지켜야겠다.\"","Indeed, I have singled him out that he may direct his children and his household in the future to keep the way of the LORD by doing what is right and just, so that the LORD may put into effect for Abraham the promises he made about him.","For I know him, that he will command his children and his household after him, and they shall keep the way of the LORD, to do justice and judgment; that the LORD may bring upon Abraham that which he hath spoken of him.","For I have chosen him, so that he will direct his children and his household after him to  keep the way of the LORD by doing what is right and just, so that the LORD will bring about for  Abraham what he has promised him.\"","Nam elegi eum, ut praecipiat filiis suis et domui suae post se, ut custodiant viam Domini et faciant iustitiam et iudicium, ut adducat Dominus super Abraham omnia, quae locutus est ad eum “.","כי ידעתיו למען אשר יצוה את בניו ואת ביתו אחריו ושמרו דרך יהוה לעשות צדקה ומשפט למען הביא יהוה על אברהם את אשר דבר עליו׃"],["1","18","20","이어 주님께서 말씀하셨다. “소돔과 고모라에 대한 원성이 너무나 크고, 그들의 죄악이 너무나 무겁구나.","이렇게 생각하시고 야훼께서 그에게 말씀하셨다. \"소돔과 고모라에서 들려오는 저 아우성을 나는 차마 들을 수가 없다. 너무나 엄청난 죄를 짓고들 있다.","여호와께서 또 이르시되 소돔과 고모라에 대한 부르짖음이 크고 그 죄악이 심히 무거우니","여호와께서 또 가라사대 소돔과 고모라에 대한 부르짖음이 크고 그 죄악이 심히 중하니","이렇게 생각하시고 여호와께서는 아브라함에게 말씀하셨다. \"소돔과 고모라에서 들려 오는 부르짖음이 너무나도 크구나. 그곳 사람들의 죄가 이루 말할 수 없는 지경인 모양이구나.","So the LORD said: The outcry against Sodom and Gomorrah is so great, and their sin so grave,","And the LORD said, Because the cry of Sodom and Gomorrah is great, and because their sin is very grievous;","Then the LORD said, \"The outcry against Sodom and Gomorrah is so great and their sin so  grievous","Dixit itaque Dominus:  “Clamor contra Sodomam et Gomorram multiplicatus est, et peccatum eorum aggravatum est nimis.","ויאמר יהוה זעקת סדם ועמרה כי רבה וחטאתם כי כבדה מאד׃"],["1","18","21","이제 내가 내려가서, 저들 모두가 저지른 짓이 나에게 들려온 그 원성과 같은 것인지 아닌지를 알아보아야겠다.”","내려가서 그 하는 짓들이 모두 나에게 들려오는 저 아우성과 정말 같은 것인지 알아보아야 하겠다.\"","내가 이제 내려가서 그 모든 행한 것이 과연 내게 들린 부르짖음과 같은지 그렇지 않은지 내가 보고 알려 하노라","내가 이제 내려가서 그 모든 행한 것이 과연 내게 들린 부르짖음과 같은지 그렇지 않은지 내가 보고 알려하노라","그래서 그들이 정말 사람들을 억울하게 하는지, 나에게까지 들려 오는 그 울부짖음이 사실인지 알아보아야겠다. 그래서 내가 지금 그곳으로 내려가는 길이다.\"","that I must go down to see whether or not their actions are as bad as the cry against them that comes to me. I mean to find out.","I will go down now, and see whether they have done altogether according to the cry of it, which is come unto me; and if not, I will know.","that I will go down and see if what they have done is as bad as the outcry that has reached  me. If not, I will know.\"","Descendam et videbo utrum clamorem, qui venit ad me, opere compleverint an non; sciam “.","ארדה נא ואראה הכצעקתה הבאה אלי עשו כלה ואם לא אדעה׃"],["1","18","22","그 사람들은 거기에서 몸을 돌려 소돔으로 갔다. 그러나 아브라함은 주님 앞에 그대로 서 있었다.","그 사람들은 걸음을 옮겨 소돔 쪽으로 갔다. 그러나 아브라함은 그냥 야훼 앞에 서 있었다.","그 사람들이 거기서 떠나 소돔으로 향하여 가고 아브라함은 여호와 앞에 그대로 섰더니","그 사람들이 거기서 떠나 소돔으로 향하여 가고 아브라함은 여호와 앞에 그대로 섰더니","손님 가운데 두 사람은 그곳을 떠나 소돔 쪽으로 내려갔다. 그러나 아브라함은 여전히 그곳 주 여호와 앞에 그대로 서 있었다.","As the men turned and walked on toward Sodom, Abraham remained standing before the LORD.","And the men turned their faces from thence, and went toward Sodom: but Abraham stood yet before the LORD.","The men turned away and went toward Sodom, but Abraham remained standing before the LORD.","Converteruntque se inde viri et abierunt Sodomam; Abraham vero adhuc stabat coram Domino.","ויפנו משם האנשים וילכו סדמה ואברהם עודנו עמד לפני יהוה׃"],["1","18","23","아브라함이 다가서서 말씀드렸다. “진정 의인을 죄인과 함께 쓸어버리시렵니까?","아브라함이 다가서서 물었다. \"당신께서는 죄없는 사람을 죄인과 함께 기어이 쓸어버리시렵니까?","아브라함이 가까이 나아가 이르되 주께서 의인을 악인과 함께 멸하려 하시나이까","가까이 나아가 가로되 주께서 의인을 악인과 함께 멸하시려나이까","그러면서 여호와께 가까이 다가가 아뢰었다. \"주여, 흠없이 올바르게 살아가려고 애쓰는 이들을 못된 짓만 일삼는 자들과 똑같이 없애 버리시렵니까?","Then Abraham drew near and said: “Will you really sweep away the righteous with the wicked?","And Abraham drew near, and said, Wilt thou also destroy the righteous with the wicked?","Then Abraham approached him and said: \"Will you sweep away the righteous with the wicked?","Et appropinquans ait:  “Numquid vere perdes iustum cum impio?","ויגש אברהם ויאמר האף תספה צדיק עם רשע׃"],["1","18","24","혹시 그 성읍 안에 의인이 쉰 명 있다면, 그래도 쓸어버리시렵니까? 그 안에 있는 의인 쉰 명 때문에라도 그곳을 용서하지 않으시렵니까?","저 도시 안에 죄없는 사람이 오십 명이 있다면 그래도 그 곳을 쓸어버리시렵니까? 죄없는 사람 오십 명을 보시고 용서해 주시지 않으시렵니까?","그 성 중에 의인 오십 명이 있을지라도 주께서 그 곳을 멸하시고 그 오십 의인을 위하여 용서하지 아니하시리이까","그 성중에 의인 오십이 있을찌라도 주께서 그 곳을 멸하시고 그 오십 의인을 위하여 용서치 아니하시리이까","주님, 저 성안에 올바로 살고자 애쓰는 사람이 쉰 명 있다면 어찌하시렵니까? 그래도 저 온 성읍을 쓸어 버리시렵니까? 저 올바로 살고자 애쓰는 쉰 명을 위해 성읍을 그냥 놔두실 생각은 없으신지요?","Suppose there were fifty righteous people in the city; would you really sweep away and not spare the place for the sake of the fifty righteous people within it?","Peradventure there be fifty righteous within the city: wilt thou also destroy and not spare the place for the fifty righteous that are therein?","What if there are fifty righteous people in the city? Will you really sweep it away and not  spare the place for the sake of the fifty righteous people in it?","Si forte fuerint quinquaginta iusti in civitate, vere perdes et non parces loco illi propter quinquaginta iustos, si fuerint in eo?","אולי יש חמשים צדיקם בתוך העיר האף תספה ולא תשא למקום למען חמשים הצדיקם אשר בקרבה׃"],["1","18","25","의인을 죄인과 함께 죽이시어 의인이나 죄인이나 똑같이 되게 하시는 것, 그런 일은 당신께 어울리지 않습니다. 그런 일은 당신께 어울리지 않습니다. 온 세상의 심판자께서는 공정을 실천하셔야 하지 않겠습니까?”","죄없는 사람을 어찌 죄인과 똑같이 보시고 함께 죽이시려고 하십니까? 온 세상을 다스리시는 이라면 공정하셔야 할 줄 압니다.\"","주께서 이같이 하사 의인을 악인과 함께 죽이심은 부당하오며 의인과 악인을 같이 하심도 부당하니이다 세상을 심판하시는 이가 정의를 행하실 것이 아니니이까","주께서 이같이 하사 의인을 악인과 함께 죽이심은 불가하오며 의인과 악인을 균등히 하심도 불가하니이다 세상을 심판하시는 이가 공의를 행하실 것이 아니니이까","저는 주께서 올바로 살아가려고 몸부림치는 이들을 못된 짓만 일삼는 것들과 함께 죽이시는 분이 아니라는 사실을 잘 알고 있습니다. 물론 그렇게 하시면 안되지요. 절대로 그럴 수는 없습니다. 만일 저 성읍을 쓸어 버리신다면 그것은 아무런 잘못도 없는 올바로 살아가려고 하는 이들을 죽어 마땅한 못된 것들과 함께 죽이시는 셈이 됩니다. 그럴 수는 없습니다. 세상을 다스리는 하나님은 공정하셔야 할 줄 압니다\"","Far be it from you to do such a thing, to kill the righteous with the wicked, so that the righteous and the wicked are treated alike! Far be it from you! Should not the judge of all the world do what is just?”","That be far from thee to do after this manner, to slay the righteous with the wicked: and that the righteous should be as the wicked, that be far from thee: Shall not the Judge of all the earth do right?","Far be it from you to do such a thing--to kill the righteous with the wicked, treating the  righteous and the wicked alike. Far be it from you! Will not the Judge of all the earth do  right?\"","Absit a te, ut rem hanc facias et occidas iustum cum impio, fiatque iustus sicut impius; absit a te. Nonne iudex universae terrae faciet iudicium? “.","חללה לך מעשת כדבר הזה להמית צדיק עם רשע והיה כצדיק כרשע חללה לך השפט כל הארץ לא יעשה משפט׃"],["1","18","26","그러자 주님께서 대답하셨다. “소돔 성읍 안에서 내가 의인 쉰 명을 찾을 수만 있다면, 그들을 보아서 그곳 전체를 용서해 주겠다.”","야훼께서 대답하셨다. \"소돔 성에 죄없는 사람이 오십 명만 있으면, 그 죄없는 사람을 보아서라도 다 용서해 줄 수 있다.\"","여호와께서 이르시되 내가 만일 소돔 성읍 가운데에서 의인 오십 명을 찾으면 그들을 위하여 온 지역을 용서하리라","여호와께서 가라사대 내가 만일 소돔 성중에서 의인 오십을 찾으면 그들을 위하여 온 지경을 용서하리라","여호와께서 대답하셨다. \"그래, 네 말대로 저 소돔성 안에 올바르게 살고자 애쓰는 이가 쉰 명만 있다면 저 성읍을 쓸어 버리지 않겠다. 그 사람들을 생각하여 온 성읍을 그냥 두리라.\"","The LORD replied: If I find fifty righteous people in the city of Sodom, I will spare the whole place for their sake.","And the LORD said, If I find in Sodom fifty righteous within the city, then I will spare all the place for their sakes.","The LORD said, \"If I find fifty righteous people in the city of Sodom, I will spare the  whole place for their sake.\"","Dixitque Dominus:  “Si invenero Sodomae quinquaginta iustos in medio civitatis, dimittam omni loco propter eos “.","ויאמר יהוה אם אמצא בסדם חמשים צדיקם בתוך העיר ונשאתי לכל המקום בעבורם׃"],["1","18","27","아브라함이 다시 말씀드렸다. “저는 비록 먼지와 재에 지나지 않는 몸이지만, 주님께 감히 아룁니다.","그러자 아브라함이 다시 말했다. \"티끌이나 재만도 못한 주제에 감히 아룁니다.","아브라함이 대답하여 이르되 나는 티끌이나 재와 같사오나 감히 주께 아뢰나이다","아브라함이 말씀하여 가로되 티끌과 같은 나라도 감히 주께 고하나이다","아브라함이 다시 여쭈었다. \"주여, 제가 건방지게 또 주께 여쭙는 것을 용서하소서. 저는 부족한 사람인지라 주님 앞에서 감히 말씀드릴 자격조차 없습니다.","Abraham spoke up again: “See how I am presuming to speak to my Lord, though I am only dust and ashes!","And Abraham answered and said, Behold now, I have taken upon me to speak unto the LORD, which am but dust and ashes:","Then Abraham spoke up again: \"Now that I have been so bold as to speak to the Lord, though  I am nothing but dust and ashes,","Respondensque Abraham ait:  “Ecce coepi loqui ad Dominum meum, cum sim pulvis et cinis.","ויען אברהם ויאמר הנה נא הואלתי לדבר אל אדני ואנכי עפר ואפר׃"],["1","18","28","혹시 의인 쉰 명에서 다섯이 모자란다면, 그 다섯 명 때문에 온 성읍을 파멸시키시렵니까?” 그러자 그분께서 대답하셨다. “내가 그곳에서 마흔다섯 명을 찾을 수만 있다면 파멸시키지 않겠다.”","죄없는 사람 오십 명에서 다섯이 모자란다면 그 다섯 때문에 온 성을 멸하시겠습니까?\" 야훼께서 대답하셨다. \"저 곳에 죄없는 사람이 사십오 명만 있어도 멸하지 않겠다.\"","오십 의인 중에 오 명이 부족하다면 그 오 명이 부족함으로 말미암아 온 성읍을 멸하시리이까 이르시되 내가 거기서 사십오 명을 찾으면 멸하지 아니하리라","오십 의인 중에 오인이 부족할 것이면 그 오인 부족함을 인하여 온 성을 멸하시리이까 가라사대 내가 거기서 사십 오인을 찾으면 멸하지 아니하리라","혹시라도 저 소돔성 안에 올바르게 살아가려고 애쓰는 사람이 쉰 명이 아니라 마흔 다섯 명만 있다면 그래도 주께서는 저 온 성읍을 쓸어 버리시렵니까? 흠 없이 올바르게 살아가려는 사람 다섯이 부족하다고 해서 저 소돔성을 쓸어 버리지 않으시겠지요?\" 여호와께서 말을 받으셨다. \"그래, 저 소돔성 안에 올바르게 살아가려고 애쓰는 사람이 마흔 다섯 명만이라도 있다면 내가 소돔을 쓸어 버리지 않겠다.\"","What if there are five less than fifty righteous people? Will you destroy the whole city because of those five?” I will not destroy it, he answered, if I find forty-five there.","Peradventure there shall lack five of the fifty righteous: wilt thou destroy all the city for lack of five? And he said, If I find there forty and five, I will not destroy it.","what if the number of the righteous is five less than fifty? Will you destroy the whole  city because of five people?\" \"If I find forty-five there,\" he said, \"I will not destroy it.\"","Quid, si forte minus quinquaginta iustis quinque fuerint? Delebis propter quinque universam urbem? “. Et ait:  “Non delebo, si invenero ibi quadraginta quinque “.","אולי יחסרון חמשים הצדיקם חמשה התשחית בחמשה את כל העיר ויאמר לא אשחית אם אמצא שם ארבעים וחמשה׃"],["1","18","29","아브라함이 또다시 그분께 아뢰었다. “혹시 그곳에서 마흔 명을 찾을 수 있다면......?” 그러자 그분께서 대답하셨다. “그 마흔 명을 보아서 내가 그 일을 실행하지 않겠다.”","아브라함이 \"사십 명밖에 없다면 어떻게 하시겠습니까?\" 하고 여쭙자 야훼께서 대답하셨다. \"사십 명을 보아서라도 멸하지 않겠다.\"","아브라함이 또 아뢰어 이르되 거기서 사십 명을 찾으시면 어찌 하려 하시나이까 이르시되 사십 명으로 말미암아 멸하지 아니하리라","아브라함이 또 고하여 가로되 거기서 사십인을 찾으시면 어찌 하시려나이까 가라사대 사십인을 인하여 멸하지 아니하리라","아브라함이 또 여호와께 여쭈었다. \"만일 저 성안에 올바르게 살아가려고 애쓰는 사람이 마흔 명밖에 없다면 어찌하시렵니까?\" 여호와께서 대답하셨다. \"마흔 명만 있다하더라도 내가 저 소돔성을 쓸어 버리지 않겠다.\"","But Abraham persisted, saying, “What if only forty are found there?” He replied: I will refrain from doing it for the sake of the forty.","And he spake unto him yet again, and said, Peradventure there shall be forty found there. And he said, I will not do it for forty's sake.","Once again he spoke to him, \"What if only forty are found there?\" He said, \"For the sake of  forty, I will not do it.\"","Rursumque locutus est ad eum:  “Si forte inventi fuerint ibi quadraginta? “. Ait:  “Non percutiam propter quadraginta “.","ויסף עוד לדבר אליו ויאמר אולי ימצאון שם ארבעים ויאמר לא אעשה בעבור הארבעים׃"],["1","18","30","그가 말씀드렸다. “제가 아뢴다고 주님께서는 노여워하지 마십시오. 혹시 그곳에서 서른 명을 찾을 수 있다면......?” 그러자 그분께서 대답하셨다. “내가 그곳에서 서른 명을 찾을 수만 있다면 그 일을 실행하지 않겠다.”","아브라함이 또 여쭈었다. \"주여, 노여워하지 마십시오. 다시 말씀 드리겠습니다. 삼십 명밖에 안 된다면 어떻게 하시겠습니까?\" 야훼께서 \"삼십 명만 되어도 멸하지 않겠다.\" 하고 대답하시자","아브라함이 이르되 내 주여 노하지 마시옵고 말씀하게 하옵소서 거기서 삼십 명을 찾으시면 어찌 하려 하시나이까 이르시되 내가 거기서 삼십 명을 찾으면 그리하지 아니하리라","아브라함이 가로되 내 주여 노하지 마옵시고 말씀하게 하옵소서 거기서 삼십인을 찾으시면 어찌 하시려나이까 가라사대 내가 거기서 삼십인을 찾으면 멸하지 아니하리라","아브라함이 또 여쭈었다. \"주여, 제가 또 여쭙는다고 화내지 마소서. 만일 저 성안에 올바로 살아가려고 애쓰는 사람이 서른 명밖에 없다면 어찌하시렵니까?\" \"그래, 서른명만 있다 하더라도 소돔성을 쓸어 버리지 않겠다.\" 하고 여호와께서 대답하셨다.","Then he said, “Do not let my Lord be angry if I go on. What if only thirty are found there?” He replied: I will refrain from doing it if I can find thirty there.","And he said unto him, Oh let not the LORD be angry, and I will speak: Peradventure there shall thirty be found there. And he said, I will not do it, if I find thirty there.","Then he said, \"May the Lord not be angry, but let me speak. What if only thirty can be  found there?\" He answered, \"I will not do it if I find thirty there.\"","Ne, quaeso, inquit, indignetur Dominus meus, si loquar. Si forte ibi inventi fuerint triginta?. Respondit:  “Non faciam, si invenero ibi triginta “.","ויאמר אל נא יחר לאדני ואדברה אולי ימצאון שם שלשים ויאמר לא אעשה אם אמצא שם שלשים׃"],["1","18","31","그가 말씀드렸다. “제가 주님께 감히 아룁니다. 혹시 그곳에서 스무 명을 찾을 수 있다면......?” 그러자 그분께서 대답하셨다. “그 스무 명을 보아서 내가 파멸시키지 않겠다.”","그가 또다시 여쭈었다. \"죄송하오나, 다시 말씀 드리겠습니다. 만일 이십 명밖에 안 된다면 어떻게 하시겠습니까?\" 야훼께서 \"이십 명만 되어도 그들을 보아서 멸하지 않겠다.\" 하고 대답하셨다.","아브라함이 또 이르되 내가 감히 내 주께 아뢰나이다 거기서 이십 명을 찾으시면 어찌 하려 하시나이까 이르시되 내가 이십 명으로 말미암아 그리하지 아니하리라","아브라함이 또 가로되 내가 감히 내 주께 고하나이다 거기서 이십인을 찾으시면 어찌 하시려나이까 가라사대 내가 이십인을 인하여 멸하지 아니하리라","아브라함이 또 여쭈었다. \"여호와여, 제가 건방지게 계속하여 주께 여쭙는다고 나무라지는 마소서. 그래도 다시 여쭈어야 하겠습니다. 용서하소서. 저 성안에 그런 사람이 고작 스무 명뿐이라면 어찌하시렵니까?\" \"그래, 저 성안에 올바로 살고자 애쓰는 사람이 스무 명뿐이라 할지라도 저 성을 쓸어 버리지 않겠다.\" 하고 여호와께서 대답하셨다.","Abraham went on, “Since I have thus presumed to speak to my Lord, what if there are no more than twenty?” I will not destroy it, he answered, for the sake of the twenty.","And he said, Behold now, I have taken upon me to speak unto the LORD: Peradventure there shall be twenty found there. And he said, I will not destroy it for twenty's sake.","Abraham said, \"Now that I have been so bold as to speak to the Lord, what if only twenty  can be found there?\" He said, \"For the sake of twenty, I will not destroy it.\"","Ecce, ait, coepi loqui ad Dominum meum. Si forte inventi fuerint ibi viginti?. Dixit:  “Non interficiam propter viginti “.",null],["1","18","32","그가 말씀드렸다. “제가 다시 한 번 아뢴다고 주님께서는 노여워하지 마십시오. 혹시 그곳에서 열 명을 찾을 수 있다면......?” 그러자 그분께서 대답하셨다. “그 열 명을 보아서라도 내가 파멸시키지 않겠다.”","아브라함이 다시 \"주여, 노여워 마십시오. 한 번만 더 말씀드리겠습니다. 만일 열 사람밖에 안 되어도 되겠습니까?\" 야훼께서 대답하셨다. \"그 열 사람을 보아서라도 멸하지 않겠다.\"","아브라함이 또 이르되 주는 노하지 마옵소서 내가 이번만 더 아뢰리이다 거기서 십 명을 찾으시면 어찌 하려 하시나이까 이르시되 내가 십 명으로 말미암아 멸하지 아니하리라","아브라함이 또 가로되 주는 노하지 마옵소서 내가 이번만 더 말씀하리이다 거기서 십인을 찾으시면 어찌 하시려나이까 가라사대 내가 십인을 인하여도 멸하지 아니하리라","아브라함이 또 여쭈었다. \"여호와여, 제발 화내지 마소서. 이것이 이제 마지막으로 한 번만 더 주께 여쭙겠습니다. 만일 저 성안에 올바로 살고자 애쓰는 사람이 단 열 명뿐이라면 어찌하시렵니까?\" \"올바로 살아가려고 몸부림치는 사람이 단 열 명만 있다 하더라고 나는 저 소돔성을 쓸어 버리지 않겠다.\"","But he persisted: “Please, do not let my Lord be angry if I speak up this last time. What if ten are found there?” For the sake of the ten, he replied, I will not destroy it.","And he said, Oh let not the LORD be angry, and I will speak yet but this once: Peradventure ten shall be found there. And he said, I will not destroy it for ten's sake.","Then he said, \"May the Lord not be angry, but let me speak just once more. What if only ten  can be found there?\" He answered, \"For the sake of ten, I will not destroy it.\"","Obsecro, inquit, ne irascatur Dominus meus, si loquar adhuc semel. Si forte inventi fuerint ibi decem?. Dixit:  “Non delebo propter decem “.",null],["1","18","33","주님께서는 아브라함과 말씀을 마치시고 자리를 뜨셨다. 아브라함도 자기가 사는 곳으로 돌아갔다.","야훼께서는 아브라함과 말씀을 마치시고 자리를 뜨셨다. 아브라함도 자기 고장으로 되돌아갔다.","여호와께서 아브라함과 말씀을 마치시고 가시니 아브라함도 자기 곳으로 돌아갔더라","여호와께서 아브라함과 말씀을 마치시고 즉시 가시니 아브라함도 자기 곳으로 돌아갔더라","여호와께서는 이렇게 아브라함과 이야기를 나누시고는 떠나가셨다. 아브라함도 자기 천막으로 돌아왔다.","The LORD departed as soon as he had finished speaking with Abraham, and Abraham returned home.","And the LORD went his way, as soon as he had left communing with Abraham: and Abraham returned unto his place.","When the LORD had finished speaking with Abraham, he left, and Abraham returned home.","Abiit Dominus, postquam cessavit loqui ad Abraham; et ille reversus est in locum suum.",null],["1","19","1","저녁때에 그 두 천사가 소돔에 이르렀는데, 그때 롯은 소돔 성문에 앉아 있었다. 롯이 그들을 보자 일어나 맞으면서 얼굴을 땅에 대고 엎드려","하느님의 천사 둘이 소돔에 다다른 것은 저녁때였다. 롯이 때마침 성문께에 앉아 있다가 그들을 보고 일어나 맞으며 땅에 얼굴을 대고 엎드려 청하였다.","저녁 때에 그 두 천사가 소돔에 이르니 마침 롯이 소돔 성문에 앉아 있다가 그들을 보고 일어나 영접하고 땅에 엎드려 절하며","날이 저물 때에 그 두 천사가 소돔에 이르니 마침 롯이 소돔 성문에 앉았다가 그들을 보고 일어나 영접하고 땅에 엎드리어 절하여","저녁 나절에 하나님의 두 심부름꾼이 소돔에 이르렀다. 롯은 소돔 성문에 앉아 있다가 그들이 다가오는 것을 보고는 자리에서 일어나 그들을 맞이하였다. 롯은 그들 앞에 엎드려 절하고는","The two angels reached Sodom in the evening, as Lot was sitting at the gate of Sodom. When Lot saw them, he got up to greet them; and bowing down with his face to the ground,","And there came two angels to Sodom at even; and Lot sat in the gate of Sodom: and Lot seeing them rose up to meet them; and he bowed himself with his face toward the ground;","The two angels arrived at Sodom in the evening, and Lot was sitting in the gateway of the  city. When he saw them, he got up to meet them and bowed down with his face to the ground.","Veneruntque duo angeli Sodomam vespere, sedente Lot in foribus civitatis. Qui cum vidisset eos, surrexit et ivit obviam eis adoravitque pronus in terram","ויבאו שני המלאכים סדמה בערב ולוט ישב בשער סדם וירא לוט ויקם לקראתם וישתחו אפים ארצה׃"],["1","19","2","말하였다. “나리들, 부디 제 집으로 드시어 밤을 지내십시오. 발도 씻고 쉬신 뒤에, 내일 아침 일찍 일어나 길을 떠나십시오.” 그러자 그들은 “아니오. 광장에서 밤을 지내겠소.” 하고 대답하였다.","\"손님네들, 누추하지만 제 집에 들러 발을 씻으시고 하룻밤 편히 쉬신 다음 아침 일찍이 길을 떠나시는 것이 어떻겠습니까?\" 그들은 밖에서 밤을 새우겠다고 하면서 사양하였으나,","이르되 내 주여 돌이켜 종의 집으로 들어와 발을 씻고 주무시고 일찍이 일어나 갈 길을 가소서 그들이 이르되 아니라 우리가 거리에서 밤을 새우리라","가로되 내 주여 돌이켜 종의 집으로 들어와 발을 씻고 주무시고 일찌기 일어나 갈 길을 가소서 그들이 가로되 아니라 우리가 거리에서 경야하리라","이렇게 여쭈었다. \"어르신들, 괜찮으시다면 소인의 집에 들렀다 가시지요. 발도 좀 씻으시고 밤을 지내셨다가 아침에 길을 떠나시는 게 어떠하신지요. 웬만하시면 그리하시지요\" \"고맙소만 우리는 그냥 길거리에서 밤을 지내야겠소. 걱정 마시오\" 하고 그들이 대답하였다.","he said, “Please, my lords, come aside into your servant’s house for the night, and bathe your feet; you can get up early to continue your journey.” But they replied, “No, we will pass the night in the town square.”","And he said, Behold now, my lords, turn in, I pray you, into your servant's house, and tarry all night, and wash your feet, and ye shall rise up early, and go on your ways. And they said, Nay; but we will abide in the street all night.","\"My lords,\" he said, \"please turn aside to your servant's house. You can wash your feet and  spend the night and then go on your way early in the morning.\" \"No,\" they answered, \"we will  spend the night in the square.\"","et dixit:  “Obsecro, domini mei, declinate in domum pueri vestri et pernoctate; lavate pedes vestros et mane proficiscemini in viam vestram “. Qui dixerunt:  “Minime, sed in platea pernoctabimus “.","ויאמר הנה נא אדני סורו נא אל בית עבדכם ולינו ורחצו רגליכם והשכמתם והלכתם לדרככם ויאמרו לא כי ברחוב נלין׃"],["1","19","3","그러나 롯이 간절히 권하자, 그들은 롯의 집에 들기로 하고 그의 집으로 들어갔다. 롯이 그들에게 큰 상을 차리고 누룩 안 든 빵을 구워 주자 그들이 먹었다.","롯이 하도 간청하는 바람에 롯을 따라 그의 집에 들어갔다. 롯은 그들에게 누룩 안 든 빵을 구워주며 대접하였다.","롯이 간청하매 그제서야 돌이켜 그 집으로 들어오는지라 롯이 그들을 위하여 식탁을 베풀고 무교병을 구우니 그들이 먹으니라","롯이 간청하매 그제야 돌이켜서 그 집으로 들어 오는지라 롯이 그들을 위하여 식탁을 베풀고 무교병을 구우니 그들이 먹으니라","롯이 계속해서 쉬었다 가시라 권하며 잡아 끌자 그들은 어쩔 수 없이 롯의 집으로 들어갔다. 롯이 종들에게 누룩을 넣지 않은 떡을 굽는 등 저녁을 준비하라고 일렀다. 저녁이 준비되자 그들은 저녁을 들었다.","He urged them so strongly, however, that they turned aside to his place and entered his house. He prepared a banquet for them, baking unleavened bread, and they dined.","And he pressed upon them greatly; and they turned in unto him, and entered into his house; and he made them a feast, and did bake unleavened bread, and they did eat.","But he insisted so strongly that they did go with him and entered his house. He prepared a  meal for them, baking bread without yeast, and they ate.","Compulit illos oppido, et diverterunt ad eum. Ingressisque domum illius fecit convivium et coxit azyma, et comederunt.","ויפצר בם מאד ויסרו אליו ויבאו אל ביתו ויעש להם משתה ומצות אפה ויאכלו׃"],["1","19","4","그들이 아직 잠자리에 들기 전이었다. 성읍의 사내들 곧 소돔의 사내들이 젊은이부터 늙은이까지 온통 사방에서 몰려와 그 집을 에워쌌다.","그들이 아직 잠자리에 들기 전이었다. 소돔 시민이 늙은이 젊은이 할 것 없이 온통 몰려와 롯의 집을 둘러싸고","그들이 눕기 전에 그 성 사람 곧 소돔 백성들이 노소를 막론하고 원근에서 다 모여 그 집을 에워싸고","그들의 눕기 전에 그 성 사람 곧 소돔 백성들이 무론 노소하고 사방에서 다 모여 그 집을 에워싸고","그런데 두 사람이 막 잠자리에 들려고 하는데 밖에서 요란한 소리가 들려왔다. 소돔 사람들이 나이 든 사람이건 적게 든 사람이건 할 것없이 모두 몰려와 롯의 집을 둘러싸고 문을 두드리며 난리를 피웠다.","Before they went to bed, the townsmen of Sodom, both young and old—all the people to the last man—surrounded the house.","But before they lay down, the men of the city, even the men of Sodom, compassed the house round, both old and young, all the people from every quarter:","Before they had gone to bed, all the men from every part of the city of Sodom--both young  and old--surrounded the house.","Prius autem quam irent cubitum, viri civitatis, viri Sodomae, vallaverunt domum a iuvene usque ad senem, omnis populus simul.","טרם ישכבו ואנשי העיר אנשי סדם נסבו על הבית מנער ועד זקן כל העם מקצה׃"],["1","19","5","그러고서는 롯을 불러 말하였다. “오늘 밤 당신 집에 온 사람들 어디 있소? 우리한테로 데리고 나오시오. 우리가 그자들과 재미 좀 봐야겠소.”","롯에게 소리치는 것이었다. \"오늘 밤 네 집에 든 자들이 어디 있느냐? 그자들하고 재미를 좀 보게 끌어내어라.\"","롯을 부르고 그에게 이르되 오늘 밤에 네게 온 사람들이 어디 있느냐 이끌어 내라 우리가 그들을 상관하리라","롯을 부르고 그에게 이르되 이 저녁에 네게 온 사람이 어디 있느냐 이끌어내라 우리가 그들을 상관하리라","소돔 사람들은 롯을 불러내어 시비하였다. \"이봐, 자네 집에서 오늘 밤 묵는 사람들이 대체 누구야? 어디서 온 사람들이야? 이리 좀 끌어내. 손 좀 봐줘야겠어\" 소돔 사람들이 하나님의 심부름꾼을 끌어내라고 한 까닭은 그들을 성폭행하려는 심산에서였다.","They called to Lot and said to him, “Where are the men who came to your house tonight? Bring them out to us that we may have sexual relations with them.”","And they called unto Lot, and said unto him, Where are the men which came in to thee this night? bring them out unto us, that we may know them.","They called to Lot, \"Where are the men who came to you tonight? Bring them out to us so that  we can have sex with them.\"","Vocaveruntque Lot et dixerunt ei:  “Ubi sunt viri, qui introierunt ad te nocte? Educ illos ad nos, ut cognoscamus eos “.","ויקראו אל לוט ויאמרו לו איה האנשים אשר באו אליך הלילה הוציאם אלינו ונדעה אתם׃"],["1","19","6","롯이 문밖으로 나가 등 뒤로 문을 닫고","롯이 밖으로 나가 등 뒤로 문을 닫고","롯이 문 밖의 무리에게로 나가서 뒤로 문을 닫고","롯이 문밖의 무리에게로 나가서 뒤로 문을 닫고","그러자 롯이 밖으로 나가 등 뒤로 문을 걸어 잠그고는","Lot went out to meet them at the entrance. When he had shut the door behind him,","And Lot went out at the door unto them, and shut the door after him,","Lot went outside to meet them and shut the door behind him","Egressus ad eos Lot post tergum occludens ostium ait:","ויצא אלהם לוט הפתחה והדלת סגר אחריו׃"],["1","19","7","말하였다. “형제들, 제발 나쁜 짓 하지들 마시오.","사정하였다. \"여보시오, 제발 이런 못된 짓은 하지들 마시오.","이르되 청하노니 내 형제들아 이런 악을 행하지 말라","이르되 청하노니 내 형제들아 이런 악을 행치 말라","성 사람들에게 애원하였다. \"이것들 보시오. 내 말 좀 제발 들어보시오. 저분들은 우리 집에 찾아온 손님들이오. 그러니 제발 그러지들 마시오. 그렇게 못된 짓을 하려고는 하지 마시오. 아무나 붙들고 그러려고 하다니 될 말이오?","he said, “I beg you, my brothers, do not do this wicked thing!","And said, I pray you, brethren, do not so wickedly.","and said, \"No, my friends. Don't do this wicked thing.","Nolite, quaeso, fratres mei, nolite malum hoc facere.","ויאמר אל נא אחי תרעו׃"],["1","19","8","자, 나에게 남자를 알지 못하는 딸이 둘 있소. 그 아이들을 당신들에게 내어 줄 터이니, 당신들 좋을 대로 하시오. 다만 내 지붕 밑으로 들어온 사람들이니, 이들에게는 아무 짓도 말아 주시오.”","아시다시피 나에게는 아직 남자를 모르는 딸이 둘 있소. 그 아이들을 당신들에게 내어줄 터이니 마음대로 하시오. 그러나, 내가 모신 분들에게만은 아무 짓도 말아주시오.\"","내게 남자를 가까이 하지 아니한 두 딸이 있노라 청하건대 내가 그들을 너희에게로 이끌어 내리니 너희 눈에 좋을 대로 그들에게 행하고 이 사람들은 내 집에 들어왔은즉 이 사람들에게는 아무 일도 저지르지 말라","내게 남자를 가까이 아니한 두 딸이 있노라 청컨대 내가 그들을 너희에게로 이끌어내리니 너희 눈에 좋은대로 그들에게 행하고 이 사람들은 내 집에 들어왔은즉 이 사람들에게는 아무 짓도 하지말라","대신 우리 집에는 아직도 남자를 모르는 딸아이가 둘이 있소. 그 아이들을 당신들에게 데리고 나올 터이니 당신들 하고 싶은 대로 마음대로 하시오. 하지만 우리 집에 찾아온 이 손님들에게만은 제발 손대지 마시오. 우리 집 손님이니 내가 잘 보살펴 드려야할 것 아니오\"","I have two daughters who have never had sexual relations with men. Let me bring them out to you, and you may do to them as you please. But do not do anything to these men, for they have come under the shelter of my roof.”","Behold now, I have two daughters which have not known man; let me, I pray you, bring them out unto you, and do ye to them as is good in your eyes: only unto these men do nothing; for therefore came they under the shadow of my roof.","Look, I have two daughters who have never slept with a man. Let me bring them out to you,  and you can do what you like with them. But don't do anything to these men, for they have come  under the protection of my roof.\"","Ecce, habeo duas filias, quae necdum cognoverunt virum; educam eas ad vos, et facite eis sicut placuerit vobis, dummodo viris istis nihil faciatis; ideo enim ingressi sunt sub umbra tecti mei “.","הנה נא לי שתי בנות אשר לא ידעו איש אוציאה נא אתהן אליכם ועשו להן כטוב בעיניכם רק לאנשים האל אל תעשו דבר כי על כן באו בצל קרתי׃"],["1","19","9","그러나 그들은 “비켜라!” 하면서 “이자는 나그네살이하려고 이곳에 온 주제에 재판관 행세를 하려 하는구나. 이제 우리가 저자들보다 너를 더 고약하게 다루어야겠다.” 하고는, 그 사람 롯에게 달려들어 밀치고 문을 부수려 하였다.","그러나 그들은 \"비켜라. 네가 떠돌이 주제에 재판관 행세를 할 참이냐? 그자들보다 너부터 혼내주어야겠다.\" 하면서 롯에게 달려들었다. 그리고 문을 부수려 하였다.","그들이 이르되 너는 물러나라 또 이르되 이 자가 들어와서 거류하면서 우리의 법관이 되려 하는도다 이제 우리가 그들보다 너를 더 해하리라 하고 롯을 밀치며 가까이 가서 그 문을 부수려고 하는지라","그들이 가로되 너는 물러나라 또 가로되 이 놈이 들어와서 우거하면서 우리의 법관이 되려 하는도다 이제 우리가 그들보다 너를 더 해하리라 하고 롯을 밀치며 가까이 나아와서 그 문을 깨치려 하는지라","그러나 성 사람들은 막무가내였다. \"당신은 상관 말아. 아니 그래 우리 땅에 들어와 몸붙여 사는 주제에 이제는 우리더러 이래라 저래라 명령까지 다 하는군 그래. 만약 우리가 하는 일을 막았다가는 저치들보다 당신을 아주 우습게 만들어 버리겠어. 당장 물러서!\" 소돔 사람들은 이렇게 소리를 지르면서 롯을 밀치고 롯의 집 대문을 부숴뜨리려고 하였다.","They replied, “Stand back! This man,” they said, “came here as a resident alien, and now he dares to give orders! We will treat you worse than them!” With that, they pressed hard against Lot, moving in closer to break down the door.","And they said, Stand back. And they said again, This one fellow came in to sojourn, and he will needs be a judge: now will we deal worse with thee, than with them. And they pressed sore upon the man, even Lot, and came near to break the door.","\"Get out of our way,\" they replied. And they said, \"This fellow came here as an alien, and  now he wants to play the judge! We'll treat you worse than them.\" They kept bringing pressure on  Lot and moved forward to break down the door.","At illi dixerunt:  “Recede illuc “. Et rursus:  “Unus ingressus est, inquiunt, ut advena et vult iudicare? Te ergo ipsum magis quam hos affligemus “. Vimque faciebant Lot vehementissime, iamque prope erat, ut effringerent fores.","ויאמרו גש הלאה ויאמרו האחד בא לגור וישפט שפוט עתה נרע לך מהם ויפצרו באיש בלוט מאד ויגשו לשבר הדלת׃"],["1","19","10","그때에 그 두 사람이 손을 내밀어 롯을 집 안으로 끌어들인 다음 문을 닫았다.","일이 이쯤 되자 그 두 사람이 손을 내밀어 롯을 집 안으로 끌어들이고 문을 닫았다.","그 사람들이 손을 내밀어 롯을 집으로 끌어들이고 문을 닫고","그 사람들이 손을 내밀어 롯을 집으로 끌어 들이고 문을 닫으며","그러자 집안에 있던 두 사람이 롯을 잡아당겨 집안으로 끌어들이고는 문을 닫아 버렸다.","But his guests put out their hands, pulled Lot inside with them, and closed the door;","But the men put forth their hand, and pulled Lot into the house to them, and shut to the door.","But the men inside reached out and pulled Lot back into the house and shut the door.","Et ecce miserunt manum viri et introduxerunt ad se Lot clauseruntque ostium;","וישלחו האנשים את ידם ויביאו את לוט אליהם הביתה ואת הדלת סגרו׃"],["1","19","11","그리고 그 집 문 앞에 있는 사내들을 아이부터 어른까지 모두 눈이 멀게 하여, 문을 찾지 못하게 만들었다.","그리고 문 앞에 몰려든 사람들을 어른 아이 할 것 없이 모두 눈이 부셔 문을 찾지 못하게 만들었다.","문 밖의 무리를 대소를 막론하고 그 눈을 어둡게 하니 그들이 문을 찾느라고 헤매었더라","문밖의 무리로 무론 대소하고 그 눈을 어둡게 하니 그들이 문을 찾느라고 곤비하였더라","그러고는 문밖에 서 있는 사람들의 눈을 어둡게 만들었다. 그러자 문밖에 서 있던 사람들이 아무리 롯의 집 대문을 찾으려 해도 찾을 수가 없었다. 그저 두리번거리면서 집을 빙빙 돌뿐이었다.","they struck the men at the entrance of the house, small and great, with such a blinding light that they were utterly unable to find the doorway.","And they smote the men that were at the door of the house with blindness, both small and great: so that they wearied themselves to find the door.","Then they struck the men who were at the door of the house, young and old, with blindness  so that they could not find the door.","et eos, qui foris erant, percusserunt caecitate a minimo usque ad maximum, ita ut ostium invenire non possent.","ואת האנשים אשר פתח הבית הכו בסנורים מקטן ועד גדול וילאו למצא הפתח׃"],["1","19","12","그러고 나서 그 사람들은 롯에게 말하였다. “그대의 가족들이 여기에 또 있소? 사위들과 그대의 아들딸들, 그리고 성읍에 있는 그대의 가족을 모두 데리고 이곳에서 나가시오.","그리고 나서 롯에게 말하였다. \"네 식구가 이 곳에 또 있느냐? 아들딸말고도 이 성에 다른 식구가 있거든 다 데리고 떠나거라.","그 사람들이 롯에게 이르되 이 외에 네게 속한 자가 또 있느냐 네 사위나 자녀나 성 중에 네게 속한 자들을 다 성 밖으로 이끌어 내라","그 사람들이 롯에게 이르되 이 외에 네게 속한 자가 또 있느냐 네 사위나 자녀나 성중에 네게 속한 자들을 다 성밖으로 이끌어내라","그 두 사람이 롯에게 물었다. \"이 집에 사는 사람말고 또 가까운 친척이 이 성안에 살고 있소? 딸이나 아들이나 사위나 또 그밖에 친척들이 이 성안에 살고 있거든 모두 데리고 성밖으로 나가시오.","Then the guests said to Lot: “Who else belongs to you here? Sons-in-law, your sons, your daughters, all who belong to you in the city—take them away from this place!","And the men said unto Lot, Hast thou here any besides? son in law, and thy sons, and thy daughters, and whatsoever thou hast in the city, bring them out of this place:","The two men said to Lot, \"Do you have anyone else here--sons-in-law, sons or daughters, or  anyone else in the city who belongs to you? Get them out of here,","Dixerunt autem viri ad Lot:  “Habes hic quempiam tuorum? Generum et filios et filias et omnes, qui tui sunt in urbe, educ de loco hoc:","ויאמרו האנשים אל לוט עד מי לך פה חתן ובניך ובנתיך וכל אשר לך בעיר הוצא מן המקום׃"],["1","19","13","우리는 지금 이곳을 파멸시키려 하오. 저들에 대한 원성이 주님 앞에 너무나 크기 때문이오. 주님께서 소돔을 파멸시키시려고 우리를 보내셨소.”","이 백성이 아우성치는 소리가 야훼께 사무쳐 올랐다. 그래서 우리는 야훼의 보내심을 받아 이 곳을 멸하러 왔다.\"","그들에 대한 부르짖음이 여호와 앞에 크므로 여호와께서 이 곳을 멸하시려고 우리를 보내셨나니 우리가 멸하리라","그들에 대하여 부르짖음이 여호와 앞에 크므로 여호와께서 우리로 이곳을 멸하러 보내셨나니 우리가 멸하리라","우리가 이 성을 모조리 쓸어 버릴 작정이오. 이 성 사람들이 어찌나 못된 짓만 일삼는지 이 성 사람들 때문에 억울해하여 한이 맺혀 울부짖는 사람이 너무나 많아 여호와께서도 그 울부짖음을 들으시고 이 소돔성을 쓸어 버리라고 우리를 보내셨소\"","We are about to destroy this place, for the outcry reaching the LORD against those here is so great that the LORD has sent us to destroy it.”","For we will destroy this place, because the cry of them is waxen great before the face of the LORD; and the LORD hath sent us to destroy it.","because we are going to destroy this place. The outcry to the LORD against its people is so  great that he has sent us to destroy it.\"","delebimus enim locum istum, eo quod increverit clamor contra eos coram Domino, qui misit nos, ut perdamus eam “.","כי משחתים אנחנו את המקום הזה כי גדלה צעקתם את פני יהוה וישלחנו יהוה לשחתה׃"],["1","19","14","롯은 밖으로 나가 장차 자기 딸들을 데려갈 사위들에게 말하였다. “자, 이곳을 빠져나가게. 주님께서 곧 이 성읍을 파멸시키실 것이네.” 그러나 사위들은 롯이 우스갯소리를 한다고 생각하였다.","롯은 곧 딸들과 약혼한 사람들을 찾아가서, \"야훼께서 이 성을 멸하기로 작정하셨으니 어서 이 곳을 빠져 나가라.\" 하고 일렀다. 그러나 사위 될 사람들은 실없는 소리를 한다면서 웃어넘겼다.","롯이 나가서 그 딸들과 결혼할 사위들에게 말하여 이르기를 여호와께서 이 성을 멸하실 터이니 너희는 일어나 이 곳에서 떠나라 하되 그의 사위들은 농담으로 여겼더라","롯이 나가서 그 딸들과 정혼한 사위들에게 고하여 이르되 여호와께서 이 성을 멸하실터이니 너희는 일어나 이곳에서 떠나라 하되 그 사위들이 농담으로 여겼더라","그러자 롯이 자기 딸들과 결혼하려고 약속한 사위들에게 찾아가 말하였다. \"이보게들, 어서 서둘게. 빨리 이 성읍에서 나가도록 하세. 여호와께서 이 성읍을 쓸어 버리려고 하시네\" 그러자 그 사위들은 \"장인이 농담하고 계시겠거니\" 하고 생각할뿐이었다.","So Lot went out and spoke to his sons-in-law, who had contracted marriage with his daughters. “Come on, leave this place,” he told them; “the LORD is about to destroy the city.” But his sons-in-law thought he was joking.","And Lot went out, and spake unto his sons in law, which married his daughters, and said, Up, get you out of this place; for the LORD will destroy this city. But he seemed as one that mocked unto his sons in law.","So Lot went out and spoke to his sons-in-law, who were pledged to marry his daughters. He  said, \"Hurry and get out of this place, because the LORD is about to destroy the city!\" But his  sons-in-law thought he was joking.","Egressus itaque Lot locutus est ad generos suos, qui accepturi erant filias eius, et dixit:  “Surgite, egredimini de loco isto, quia delebit Dominus civitatem “. Et visus est eis quasi ludens loqui.","ויצא לוט וידבר אל חתניו לקחי בנתיו ויאמר קומו צאו מן המקום הזה כי משחית יהוה את העיר ויהי כמצחק בעיני חתניו׃"],["1","19","15","동이 틀 무렵에 천사들이 롯을 재촉하며 말하였다. “자, 이 성읍에 벌이 내릴 때 함께 휩쓸리지 않으려거든, 그대의 아내와 여기에 있는 두 딸을 데리고 어서 가시오.”","동 틀 무렵에 하느님의 천사들이 롯을 재촉하였다. \"이 성에 벌이 내릴 때 함께 죽지 않으려거든, 네 아내와 시집가지 않은 두 딸을 데리고 어서 떠나거라.\"","동틀 때에 천사가 롯을 재촉하여 이르되 일어나 여기 있는 네 아내와 두 딸을 이끌어 내라 이 성의 죄악 중에 함께 멸망할까 하노라","동틀 때에 천사가 롯을 재촉하여 가로되 일어나 여기 있는 네 아내와 두 딸을 이끌라 이 성의 죄악 중에 함께 멸망할까 하노라","동이 틀 무렵에 하나님의 심부름꾼들은 롯을 재촉하였다. \"이보시오 롯, 빨리 서두르시오. 빨리 아내와 두 딸을 데리고 성을 떠나시오. 그러지 않으면 우리가 이 성을 쓸어 버릴 때 당신 식구들까지도 목숨을 잃을 것이오\"","As dawn was breaking, the angels urged Lot on, saying, “Come on! Take your wife with you and your two daughters who are here, or you will be swept away in the punishment of the city.”","And when the morning arose, then the angels hastened Lot, saying, Arise, take thy wife, and thy two daughters, which are here; lest thou be consumed in the iniquity of the city.","With the coming of dawn, the angels urged Lot, saying, \"Hurry! Take your wife and your two  daughters who are here, or you will be swept away when the city is punished.\"","Cumque esset mane, cogebant eum angeli dicentes:  “Surge, tolle uxorem tuam et duas filias, quas habes hic, ne pereas in scelere civitatis “.","וכמו השחר עלה ויאיצו המלאכים בלוט לאמר קום קח את אשתך ואת שתי בנתיך הנמצאת פן תספה בעון העיר׃"],["1","19","16","그런데도 롯이 망설이자 그 사람들은 롯과 그의 아내와 두 딸의 손을 잡고 성읍 밖으로 데리고 나갔다. 주님께서 롯에게 자비를 베푸셨기 때문이다.","그래도 롯이 망설이므로 그들은 보다못해 롯과 그의 아내와 두 딸의 손을 잡고 성 ?邦막?끌어내었다. 야훼께서 롯을 그토록 불쌍히 여기셨던 것이다.","그러나 롯이 지체하매 그 사람들이 롯의 손과 그 아내의 손과 두 딸의 손을 잡아 인도하여 성 밖에 두니 여호와께서 그에게 자비를 더하심이었더라","그러나 롯이 지체하매 그 사람들이 롯의 손과 그 아내의 손과 두 딸의 손을 잡아 인도하여 성밖에 두니 여호와께서 그에게 인자를 더하심이었더라","그래도 롯이 머뭇머뭇거리자 여호와의 두 심부름꾼이 롯과 그의 아내와 두 딸을 잡아 끌어 성밖으로 데리고 나갔다. 여호와께서 롯의 식구를 아끼셨기 때문이다.","When he hesitated, the men, because of the LORD’s compassion for him, seized his hand and the hands of his wife and his two daughters and led them to safety outside the city.","And while he lingered, the men laid hold upon his hand, and upon the hand of his wife, and upon the hand of his two daughters; the LORD being merciful unto him: and they brought him forth, and set him without the city.","When he hesitated, the men grasped his hand and the hands of his wife and of his two  daughters and led them safely out of the city, for the LORD was merciful to them.","Tardante illo, apprehenderunt viri manum eius et manum uxoris ac duarum filiarum eius, eo quod parceret Dominus illi.","ויתמהמה ויחזקו האנשים בידו וביד אשתו וביד שתי בנתיו בחמלת יהוה עליו ויצאהו וינחהו מחוץ לעיר׃"],["1","19","17","그들은 롯의 가족을 밖으로 데리고 나와 말하였다. “달아나 목숨을 구하시오. 뒤를 돌아다보아서는 안 되오. 이 들판 어디에서도 멈추어 서지 마시오. 휩쓸려 가지 않으려거든 산으로 달아나시오.”","롯의 가족을 데리고 나온 그들은 \"살려거든 어서 달아나거라. 뒤를 돌아다보아서는 안 된다. 이 분지 안에는 아무데도 머물지 마라. 있는 힘을 다 내어 산으로 피해야 한다.\" 하고 재촉하였다.","그 사람들이 그들을 밖으로 이끌어 낸 후에 이르되 도망하여 생명을 보존하라 돌아보거나 들에 머물지 말고 산으로 도망하여 멸망함을 면하라","그 사람들이 그들을 밖으로 이끌어낸 후에 이르되 도망하여 생명을 보존하라 돌아보거나 들에 머무르거나 하지 말고 산으로 도망하여 멸망함을 면하라","그들은 롯의 식구를 성밖으로 끌어낸 뒤 이렇게 일러두었다. \"어서 도망치시오 목숨을 구하시오. 뒤를 돌아다보지 마시오. 또 들판에 머물러서도 안되오. 산으로 도망치시오. 곧 바로 산으로 달려가시오. 그래야 목숨을 잃지 않을 것이오\"","As soon as they had brought them outside, they said: “Flee for your life! Do not look back or stop anywhere on the Plain. Flee to the hills at once, or you will be swept away.”","And it came to pass, when they had brought them forth abroad, that he said, Escape for thy life; look not behind thee, neither stay thou in all the plain; escape to the mountain, lest thou be consumed.","As soon as they had brought them out, one of them said, \"Flee for your lives! Don't look  back, and don't stop anywhere in the plain! Flee to the mountains or you will be swept away!\"","Et eduxerunt eum posueruntque extra civitatem. Ibi locutus est:  “Salvare, agitur de vita tua; noli respicere post tergum, nec stes in omni circa regione; sed in monte salvum te fac, ne pereas “.","ויהי כהוציאם אתם החוצה ויאמר המלט על נפשך אל תביט אחריך ואל תעמד בכל הככר ההרה המלט פן תספה׃"],["1","19","18","그러나 롯은 그들에게 말하였다. “나리, 제발 그러지 마십시오.","그러나 롯은 그들에게 간청하였다. \"제발 그러지 마십시오.","롯이 그들에게 이르되 내 주여 그리 마옵소서","롯이 그들에게 이르되 내 주여 그리 마옵소서","그러나 롯이 이렇게 말하였다. \"어르신, 그건 안 됩니다. 정말 어려울 것 같습니다.","“Oh, no, my lords!” Lot replied to them.","And Lot said unto them, Oh, not so, my LORD:","But Lot said to them, \"No, my lords, please!","Dixitque Lot ad eos:  “Non, quaeso, Domine.","ויאמר לוט אלהם אל נא אדני׃"],["1","19","19","이 종이 나리 눈에 들어, 나리께서는 이제껏 저에게 하신 것처럼 큰 은혜를 베푸시어 저의 목숨을 살려 주셨습니다. 그렇지만 재앙에 휩싸여 죽을까 두려워, 저 산으로는 달아날 수가 없습니다.","저같이 하잘것없는 사람에게 이렇듯 큰 호의를 베풀어 목숨을 건져주시니 고마운 말씀 이루 다 드릴 수가 없습니다. 그러나 재앙이 당장 눈앞에 있는데 저 산으로 도망치다가는 죽고 말 것입니다.","주의 종이 주께 은혜를 입었고 주께서 큰 인자를 내게 베푸사 내 생명을 구원하시오나 내가 도망하여 산에까지 갈 수 없나이다 두렵건대 재앙을 만나 죽을까 하나이다","종이 주께 은혜를 얻었고 주께서 큰 인자를 내게 베푸사 내 생명을 구원하시오나 내가 도망하여 산까지 갈 수 없나이다 두렵건대 재앙을 만나 죽을까 하나이다","어르신께서 이다지도 이것을 잘 보아주어서 이토록 아껴 주시니 뭐라 드릴 말씀이 없습니다. 더구나 우리 목숨까지 건져 주시니 그저 고마운 마음뿐입니다. 하오나 저 산까지는 너무 멀어 도망 갈 힘이 없습니다. 너무나도 먼 길입니다. 도망가다가 재앙을 만나 저 성과 함께 쓰러질까 무섭습니다.","“You have already shown favor to your servant, doing me the great kindness of saving my life. But I cannot flee to the hills, or the disaster will overtake and kill me.","Behold now, thy servant hath found grace in thy sight, and thou hast magnified thy mercy, which thou hast shewed unto me in saving my life; and I cannot escape to the mountain, lest some evil take me, and I die:","Your servant has found favor in your eyes, and you have shown great kindness to me in  sparing my life. But I can't flee to the mountains; this disaster will overtake me, and I'll die.","Ecce invenit servus tuus gratiam coram te, et magnificasti misericordiam tuam, quam fecisti mecum, ut salvares animam meam; nec possum in monte salvari, ne forte apprehendat me malum et moriar.","הנה נא מצא עבדך חן בעיניך ותגדל חסדך אשר עשית עמדי להחיות את נפשי ואנכי לא אוכל להמלט ההרה פן תדבקני הרעה ומתי׃"],["1","19","20","보십시오, 저 성읍은 가까워 달아날 만하고 자그마한 곳입니다. 제발 그리로 달아나게 해 주십시오. 자그마하지 않습니까? 그러면 제 목숨을 살릴 수 있겠습니다.”","보십시오. 저기 보이는 도시라면 가까워서 도망칠 수 있겠습니다. 아주 작은 도시입니다. 작은 도시지만 거기에라도 가서 목숨을 건지게 해주십시오.\"","보소서 저 성읍은 도망하기에 가깝고 작기도 하오니 나를 그 곳으로 도망하게 하소서 이는 작은 성읍이 아니니이까 내 생명이 보존되리이다","보소서 저 성은 도망하기 가깝고 작기도 하오니 나로 그곳에 도망하게 하소서 이는 작은 성이 아니니이까 내 생명이 보존되리이다","보십시오. 저기 조그마한 성이 하나 보이지 않습니까? 또 가까운 거리에 있지 않습니까? 저리로는 충분히 도망칠 수 있지 않겠습니까? 저 성으로 도망 쳐 목숨을 구할까 합니다\"","Look, this town ahead is near enough to escape to. It is only a small place. Let me flee there—is it not a small place?—to save my life.”","Behold now, this city is near to flee unto, and it is a little one: Oh, let me escape thither, (is it not a little one?) and my soul shall live.","Look, here is a town near enough to run to, and it is small. Let me flee to it--it is very  small, isn't it? Then my life will be spared.\"","Ecce, civitas haec iuxta, ad quam possum fugere, parva, et salvabor in ea ­ numquid non modica est? ­ et vivet anima mea “.","הנה נא העיר הזאת קרבה לנוס שמה והיא מצער אמלטה נא שמה הלא מצער הוא ותחי נפשי׃"],["1","19","21","그러자 그가 롯에게 말하였다. “좋소. 내가 이번에도 그대의 얼굴을 보아 그대가 말하는 저 성읍을 멸망시키지 않겠소.","그러자 그는 청을 들어주겠다고 하며 롯에게 말하였다. \"저 도시는 멸하지 않을 터이니","그가 그에게 이르되 내가 이 일에도 네 소원을 들었은즉 네가 말하는 그 성읍을 멸하지 아니하리니","그가 그에게 이르되 내가 이 일에도 네 소원을 들었은즉 너의 말하는 성을 멸하지 아니하리니","\"좋은 생각이오. 그럼 저 성읍으로 몸을 피하도록 하시오. 저 성읍은 쓸어 버리지 않겠소","“Well, then,” he replied, “I grant you this favor too. I will not overthrow the town you have mentioned.","And he said unto him, See, I have accepted thee concerning this thing also, that I will not overthrow this city, for the which thou hast spoken.","He said to him, \"Very well, I will grant this request too; I will not overthrow the town  you speak of.","Dixitque ad eum:  “Ecce, etiam in hoc suscepi preces tuas, ut non subvertam urbem, pro qua locutus es.","ויאמר אליו הנה נשאתי פניך גם לדבר הזה לבלתי הפכי את העיר אשר דברת׃"],["1","19","22","서둘러 그곳으로 달아나시오. 그대가 그곳에 다다르기 전까지는 내가 일을 하지 못하기 때문이오.” 그리하여 그 성읍을 초아르라 하였다.","빨리 그 곳으로 달아나거라. 네가 그 곳에 이르기까지 나는 손을 쓸 수가 없다.\" 그 도시를 1)소알이라고 한 데는 이런 연유가 있다.작다는 뜻이다.","그리로 속히 도망하라 네가 거기 이르기까지는 내가 아무 일도 행할 수 없노라 하였더라 그러므로 그 성읍 이름을 소알이라 불렀더라","그리로 속히 도망하라 네가 거기 이르기까지는 내가 아무 일도 행할 수 없노라 하였더라 그러므로 그 성 이름을 1)소알이라 불렀더라작음","그럼 빨리 몸을 피하시오. 서둘러야 하오. 당신들이 저 성읍에 다다를 때까지는 아무 것도 하지 않을 작정이오\" 하고 그가 대답하였다. 롯이 몸을 피하려는 그 성은 작았기 때문에 사람들은 그 성을 소알이라 불렀다.","Hurry, escape there! I cannot do anything until you arrive there.” That is why the town is called Zoar.","Haste thee, escape thither; for I cannot do anything till thou be come thither. Therefore the name of the city was called Zoar.","But flee there quickly, because I cannot do anything until you reach it.\" (That is why the  town was called Zoar.)","Festina et salvare ibi, quia non potero facere quidquam, donec ingrediaris illuc “. Idcirco vocatum est nomen urbis illius Segor.","מהר המלט שמה כי לא אוכל לעשות דבר עד באך שמה על כן קרא שם העיר צוער׃"],["1","19","23","롯이 초아르에 다다르자 해가 땅 위로 솟아올랐다.","롯이 소알 땅을 밟자 해가 솟았다.","롯이 소알에 들어갈 때에 해가 돋았더라","롯이 소알에 들어갈 때에 해가 돋았더라","해가 동쪽에서 떠오를 즈음 롯은 소알에 다다랐다.","The sun had risen over the earth when Lot arrived in Zoar,","The sun was risen upon the earth when Lot entered into Zoar.","By the time Lot reached Zoar, the sun had risen over the land.","Sol egressus est super terram, et Lot ingressus est Segor.","השמש יצא על הארץ ולוט בא צערה׃"],["1","19","24","그때 주님께서 당신이 계신 곳 하늘에서 소돔과 고모라에 유황과 불을 퍼부으셨다.","야훼께서 손수 하늘에서 유황불을 소돔과 고모라에 퍼부으시어","여호와께서 하늘 곧 여호와께로부터 유황과 불을 소돔과 고모라에 비같이 내리사","여호와께서 하늘 곧 여호와에게로서 유황과 불을 비 같이 소돔과 고모라에 내리사","여호와께서는 하늘에서 소돔과 고모라에 유황과 불을 비처럼 쏟아 부으셨다.","and the LORD rained down sulfur upon Sodom and Gomorrah, fire from the LORD out of heaven.","Then the LORD rained upon Sodom and upon Gomorrah brimstone and fire from the LORD out of heaven;","Then the LORD rained down burning sulfur on Sodom and Gomorrah--from the LORD out of the  heavens.","Igitur Dominus pluit super Sodomam et Gomorram sulphur et ignem a Domino de caelo","ויהוה המטיר על סדם ועל עמרה גפרית ואש מאת יהוה מן השמים׃"],["1","19","25","그리하여 그 성읍들과 온 들판과 그 성읍의 모든 주민, 그리고 땅 위에 자란 것들을 모두 멸망시키셨다.","거기에 있는 도시들과 사람과 땅에 돋아난 푸성귀까지 모조리 태워버리셨다.","그 성들과 온 들과 성에 거주하는 모든 백성과 땅에 난 것을 다 엎어 멸하셨더라","그 성들과 온 들과 성에 거하는 모든 백성과 땅에 난 것을 다 엎어 멸하셨더라","여호와께서는 그 두 성과 성 부근에 있는 들녘과 또 성안에 있는 사람들 또 그 사람들이 가꾸던 푸성귀 등 그 땅에 나 있는 모든 것을 불태워 버리셨다.","He overthrew those cities and the whole Plain, together with the inhabitants of the cities and the produce of the soil.","And he overthrew those cities, and all the plain, and all the inhabitants of the cities, and that which grew upon the ground.","Thus he overthrew those cities and the entire plain, including all those living in the  cities--and also the vegetation in the land.","et subvertit civitates has et omnem circa regionem, universos habitatores urbium et cuncta terrae virentia.","ויהפך את הערים האל ואת כל הככר ואת כל ישבי הערים וצמח האדמה׃"],["1","19","26","그런데 롯의 아내는 뒤를 돌아다보다 소금 기둥이 되어 버렸다.","그런데 롯의 아내는 뒤를 돌아다보다가 그만 소금기둥이 되어버렸다.","롯의 아내는 뒤를 돌아보았으므로 소금 기둥이 되었더라","롯의 아내는 뒤를 돌아 본고로 소금 기둥이 되었더라","그런데 롯의 아내는 뒤를 돌아보다가 그만 소금 기둥으로 변하고 말았다.","But Lot’s wife looked back, and she was turned into a pillar of salt.","But his wife looked back from behind him, and she became a pillar of salt.","But Lot's wife looked back, and she became a pillar of salt.","Respiciensque uxor eius post se versa est in statuam salis.","ותבט אשתו מאחריו ותהי נציב מלח׃"],["1","19","27","아브라함이 아침 일찍 일어나, 자기가 주님 앞에 서 있던 곳으로 가서","아브라함이 아침 일찍이 일어나 전에 야훼와 함께 섰던 자리에 가서","아브라함이 그 아침에 일찍이 일어나 여호와 앞에 서 있던 곳에 이르러","아브라함이 그 아침에 일찌기 일어나 여호와의 앞에 섰던 곳에 이르러","그 다음날 아침 일찍 아브라함은 얼마 전에 자기가 여호와를 배웅하면서 소돔과 고모라를 멸망시키지 말아달라고 간청하며 이야기를 나누었던 곳으로 달려갔다.","The next morning Abraham hurried to the place where he had stood before the LORD.","And Abraham gat up early in the morning to the place where he stood before the LORD:","Early the next morning Abraham got up and returned to the place where he had stood before  the LORD.","Abraham autem consurgens mane venit ad locum, ubi steterat prius cum Domino,","וישכם אברהם בבקר אל המקום אשר עמד שם את פני יהוה׃"],["1","19","28","소돔과 고모라와 그 들판의 온 땅을 내려다보니, 마치 가마에서 나는 연기처럼 그 땅에서 연기가 솟아오르고 있었다.","소돔과 고모라와 그 분지 일대를 굽어보니 그 땅에서는 연기만 치솟고 있었다. 마치 아궁이에서 뿜어 나오는 연기처럼 피어 오르고 있었다.","소돔과 고모라와 그 온 지역을 향하여 눈을 들어 연기가 옹기 가마의 연기같이 치솟음을 보았더라","소돔과 고모라와 그 온 들을 향하여 눈을 들어 연기가 옹기점 연기 같이 치밀음을 보았더라","아브라함이 그곳에서 소돔과 고모라가 서 있던 계곡을 내려다보니 그 계곡에서는 연기만 솟아오르고 있었다.","As he looked down toward Sodom and Gomorrah and the whole region of the Plain, he saw smoke over the land rising like the smoke from a kiln.","And he looked toward Sodom and Gomorrah, and toward all the land of the plain, and beheld, and, lo, the smoke of the country went up as the smoke of a furnace.","He looked down toward Sodom and Gomorrah, toward all the land of the plain, and he saw  dense smoke rising from the land, like smoke from a furnace.","intuitus est Sodomam et Gomorram et universam terram regionis illius; viditque ascendentem favillam de terra quasi fornacis fumum.","וישקף על פני סדם ועמרה ועל כל פני ארץ הככר וירא והנה עלה קיטר הארץ כקיטר הכבשן׃"],["1","19","29","하느님께서 그 들판의 성읍들을 멸망시키실 때, 아브라함을 기억하셨다. 그래서 롯이 살고 있던 성읍들을 멸망시키실 때, 롯을 그 멸망의 한가운데에서 내보내 주셨다.","그 분지에 있는 도시들을 멸망시키지 않을 수 없게 되었을 때, 하느님께서는 아브라함을 기억하셨다. 그래서 롯이 살고 있던 그 도시를 뒤엎으시면서도 롯을 파멸에서 건져주셨던 것이다.","하나님이 그 지역의 성을 멸하실 때 곧 롯이 거주하는 성을 엎으실 때에 하나님이 아브라함을 생각하사 롯을 그 엎으시는 중에서 내보내셨더라","하나님이 들의 성들을 멸하실 때 곧 롯의 거하는 성을 엎으실 때에 아브라함을 생각하사 롯을 그 엎으시는 중에서 내어 보내셨더라","여호와께서는 이렇게 롯이 살던 그 계곡의 성들을 멸망시키실 때 아브라함을 생각하시고 그의 조카 롯이 몸을 피하도록 배려하셨다.","When God destroyed the cities of the Plain, he remembered Abraham and sent Lot away from the upheaval that occurred when God overthrew the cities where Lot had been living.","And it came to pass, when God destroyed the cities of the plain, that God remembered Abraham, and sent Lot out of the midst of the overthrow, when he overthrew the cities in the which Lot dwelt.","So when God destroyed the cities of the plain, he remembered Abraham, and he brought Lot  out of the catastrophe that overthrew the cities where Lot had lived.","Cum enim subverteret Deus civitates regionis illius, recordatus Abrahae liberavit Lot de subversione urbium, in quibus habitaverat.","ויהי בשחת אלהים את ערי הככר ויזכר אלהים את אברהם וישלח את לוט מתוך ההפכה בהפך את הערים אשר ישב בהן לוט׃"],["1","19","30","롯은 초아르를 떠나 산으로 올라가서 자기의 두 딸과 함께 살았다. 초아르에서 사는 것이 두려웠기 때문이다. 그리하여 롯은 자기의 두 딸과 함께 굴속에서 살았다.","롯은 소알에서 그 고장 사람들과 함께 사는 것이 두려워 두 딸을 데리고 소알에서 나와 산에 들어가 살게 되었다. 그는 두 딸과 함께 굴 속에서 살았다.","롯이 소알에 거주하기를 두려워하여 두 딸과 함께 소알에서 나와 산에 올라가 거주하되 그 두 딸과 함께 굴에 거주하였더니","롯이 소알에 거하기를 두려워하여 두 딸과 함께 소알에서 나와 산에 올라 거하되 그 두 딸과 함께 굴에 거하였더니","롯은 소알에서 살기가 무서워 소알을 떠나 두 딸과 함께 산으로 몸을 피하여 굴 속에서 생활하였다.","Since Lot was afraid to stay in Zoar, he and his two daughters went up from Zoar and settled in the hill country, where he lived with his two daughters in a cave.","And Lot went up out of Zoar, and dwelt in the mountain, and his two daughters with him; for he feared to dwell in Zoar: and he dwelt in a cave, he and his two daughters.","Lot and his two daughters left Zoar and settled in the mountains, for he was afraid to stay  in Zoar. He and his two daughters lived in a cave.","Ascenditque Lot de Segor et mansit in monte, duae quoque filiae eius cum eo; timuerat enim manere in Segor. Et mansit in spelunca ipse et duae filiae eius.","ויעל לוט מצוער וישב בהר ושתי בנתיו עמו כי ירא לשבת בצוער וישב במערה הוא ושתי בנתיו׃"],["1","19","31","그때 맏딸이 작은딸에게 말하였다. “우리 아버지는 늙으셨고, 이 땅에는 세상의 풍속대로 우리에게 올 남자가 없구나.","하루는 언니가 아우에게 말하였다. \"아버지는 늙어가고, 이 땅에는 우리가 세상의 풍속대로 시집갈 남자가 없구나.","큰 딸이 작은 딸에게 이르되 우리 아버지는 늙으셨고 온 세상의 도리를 따라 우리의 배필 될 사람이 이 땅에는 없으니","큰 딸이 작은 딸에게 이르되 우리 아버지는 늙으셨고 이 땅에는 세상의 도리를 좇아 우리의 배필 될 사람이 없으니","어느 날 큰 딸이 작은 딸에게 이런 말을 하였다. \"얘, 우리 아버지는 나이가 드시지 않았니? 그리고 이 땅에는 우리하고 혼인할 남자들도 없지 않니? 그러니 우리가 어떻게 세상 사람들이 그리하듯 혼인할 수 있겠어?","The firstborn said to the younger: “Our father is getting old, and there is not a man in the land to have intercourse with us as is the custom everywhere.","And the firstborn said unto the younger, Our father is old, and there is not a man in the earth to come in unto us after the manner of all the earth:","One day the older daughter said to the younger, \"Our father is old, and there is no man  around here to lie with us, as is the custom all over the earth.","Dixitque maior ad minorem:  “Pater noster senex est, et nullus virorum remansit in terra, qui possit ingredi ad nos iuxta morem universae terrae.","ותאמר הבכירה אל הצעירה אבינו זקן ואיש אין בארץ לבוא עלינו כדרך כל הארץ׃"],["1","19","32","자, 아버지에게 술을 드시게 하고 나서, 우리가 아버지와 함께 누워 그분에게서 자손을 얻자.”","그러니 아버지께 술을 취하도록 대접한 뒤에 우리가 아버지 자리에 들어 아버지의 씨라도 받도록 하자.\"","우리가 우리 아버지에게 술을 마시게 하고 동침하여 우리 아버지로 말미암아 후손을 이어가자 하고","우리가 우리 아버지에게 술을 마시우고 동침하여 우리 아버지로 말미암아 인종을 전하자 하고","우리가 아버지께 술 대접을 해드려 아버지가 술에 취해 주무시는 동안 아버지와 같이 잠자리를 하여 아버지의 자식을 낳도록 하는게 어떻겠니?\"","Come, let us ply our father with wine and then lie with him, that we may ensure posterity by our father.”","Come, let us make our father drink wine, and we will lie with him, that we may preserve seed of our father.","Let's get our father to drink wine and then lie with him and preserve our family line  through our father.\"","Veni, inebriemus patrem nostrum vino dormiamusque cum eo, ut servare possimus ex patre nostro semen “.","לכה נשקה את אבינו יין ונשכבה עמו ונחיה מאבינו זרע׃"],["1","19","33","그날 밤에 그들은 아버지에게 술을 들게 한 다음, 맏딸이 가서 아버지와 함께 누웠다. 그러나 그는 딸이 누웠다 일어난 것을 몰랐다.","그 날 밤, 그들은 아버지께 술을 대접하고는 언니가 아버지 자리에 들었다. 그러나 아버지는 딸이 언제 들어왔다가 언제 일어나 나갔는지 통 몰랐다.","그 밤에 그들이 아버지에게 술을 마시게 하고 큰 딸이 들어가서 그 아버지와 동침하니라 그러나 그 아버지는 그 딸이 눕고 일어나는 것을 깨닫지 못하였더라","그 밤에 그들이 아비에게 술을 마시우고 큰 딸이 들어가서 그 아비와 동침하니라 그러나 그 아비는 그 딸의 눕고 일어나는 것을 깨닫지 못하였더라","그리하여 두 딸은 그날 밤 아버지 롯에게 술을 대접하였다. 롯이 술에 취하여 잠에 곯아 떨어지자 큰 딸이 아버지와 잠자리를 같이 하였다. 그러나 롯은 자기 딸이 자기와 잠자리를 같이한 것을 알지 못하였다.","So that night they plied their father with wine, and the firstborn went in and lay with her father; but he was not aware of her lying down or getting up.","And they made their father drink wine that night: and the firstborn went in, and lay with her father; and he perceived not when she lay down, nor when she arose.","That night they got their father to drink wine, and the older daughter went in and lay with  him. He was not aware of it when she lay down or when she got up.","Dederunt itaque patri suo bibere vinum nocte illa, et ingressa est maior dormivitque cum patre; at ille non sensit, nec quando accubuit filia nec quando surrexit.","ותשקין את אביהן יין בלילה הוא ותבא הבכירה ותשכב את אביה ולא ידע בשכבה ובקומה׃"],["1","19","34","이튿날, 맏딸이 작은딸에게 말하였다. “간밤에는 내가 아버지와 함께 누웠다. 오늘 밤에도 아버지에게 술을 드시게 하자. 그리고 네가 가서 아버지와 함께 누워라. 그렇게 해서 그분에게서 자손을 얻자.”","그 이튿날 언니가 아우에게 말하였다. \"간밤에는 내가 아버지 자리에 들었으니 오늘은 네 차례다. 아버지께 술을 대접하고 자리에 들어라. 같이 아버지 씨를 받자.\"","이튿날 큰 딸이 작은 딸에게 이르되 어제 밤에는 내가 우리 아버지와 동침하였으니 오늘 밤에도 우리가 아버지에게 술을 마시게 하고 네가 들어가 동침하고 우리가 아버지로 말미암아 후손을 이어가자 하고","이튿날에 큰 딸이 작은 딸에게 이르되 어제밤에는 내가 우리 아버지와 동침하였으니 오늘밤에도 우리가 아버지에게 술을 마시우고 네가 들어가 동침하고 우리가 아버지로 말미암아 인종을 전하자 하고","다음날 큰 딸이 또 작은 딸에게 말하였다. \"얘, 어제는 내가 아버지와 잠자리를 같이하였으니 오늘 밤에는 네가 아버지와 잠자리를 같이하는 게 어떻겠니? 이렇게 해서 우리가 아버지의 아이를 낳자.\"","The next day the firstborn said to the younger: “Last night I lay with my father. Let us ply him with wine again tonight, and then you go in and lie with him, that we may ensure posterity by our father.”","And it came to pass on the morrow, that the firstborn said unto the younger, Behold, I lay yesternight with my father: let us make him drink wine this night also; and go thou in, and lie with him, that we may preserve seed of our father.","The next day the older daughter said to the younger, \"Last night I lay with my father.  Let's get him to drink wine again tonight, and you go in and lie with him so we can preserve our  family line through our father.\"","Altera quoque die dixit maior ad minorem:  “Ecce, dormivi heri cum patre meo; demus ei bibere vinum etiam hac nocte, et ingressa dormies cum eo, ut salvemus semen de patre nostro “.","ויהי ממחרת ותאמר הבכירה אל הצעירה הן שכבתי אמש את אבי נשקנו יין גם הלילה ובאי שכבי עמו ונחיה מאבינו זרע׃"],["1","19","35","그래서 그날 밤에도 그들은 아버지에게 술을 들게 한 다음, 이번에는 작은딸이 일어나 가서 아버지와 함께 누웠다. 그러나 그는 딸이 누웠다 일어난 것을 몰랐다.","그들은 그 날 밤에도 아버지에게 술을 대접하고 이번에는 아우가 아버지 자리에 들었다. 그러나 아버지는 딸이 언제 들어왔다가 언제 일어나 나갔는지 통 몰랐다.","그 밤에도 그들이 아버지에게 술을 마시게 하고 작은 딸이 일어나 아버지와 동침하니라 그러나 아버지는 그 딸이 눕고 일어나는 것을 깨닫지 못하였더라","이 밤에도 그들이 아비에게 술을 마시우고 작은 딸이 일어나 아비와 동침하니라 그러나 아비는 그 딸의 눕고 일어나는 것을 깨닫지 못하였더라","그래서 그날 밤 두 딸은 아버지 롯에게 술 대접을 하였다. 롯이 술에 취하여 잠에 곯아 떨어지자 작은 딸이 아버지와 잠자리를 같이하였다. 그러나 롯은 너무나 술에 취하여 깊은 잠에 빠졌기 때문에 자기 딸이 자리에 눕고 일어나는 것을 알지 못하였다.","So that night, too, they plied their father with wine, and then the younger one went in and lay with him; but he was not aware of her lying down or getting up.","And they made their father drink wine that night also: and the younger arose, and lay with him; and he perceived not when she lay down, nor when she arose.","So they got their father to drink wine that night also, and the younger daughter went and  lay with him. Again he was not aware of it when she lay down or when she got up.","Dederunt et illa nocte patri suo bibere vinum, ingressaque minor filia dormivit cum eo; et ne tunc quidem sensit, quando illa concubuerit vel quando surrexerit.","ותשקין גם בלילה ההוא את אביהן יין ותקם הצעירה ותשכב עמו ולא ידע בשכבה ובקמה׃"],["1","19","36","이렇게 해서 롯의 두 딸이 아버지의 아이를 가지게 되었다.","이리하여 롯의 두 딸은 아버지의 아이를 가지게 되었다.","롯의 두 딸이 아버지로 말미암아 임신하고","롯의 두 딸이 아비로 말미암아 잉태하고","이렇게 해서 롯의 두 딸은 모두 자기 아버지의 아이를 가졌다.","Thus the two daughters of Lot became pregnant by their father.","Thus were both the daughters of Lot with child by their father.","So both of Lot's daughters became pregnant by their father.","Conceperunt ergo duae filiae Lot de patre suo.","ותהרין שתי בנות לוט מאביהן׃"],["1","19","37","맏딸은 아들을 낳고 그 이름을 모압이라 하였으니, 그는 오늘날까지 이어 오는 모압족의 조상이다.","큰딸은 아들을 낳고 이름을 모압이라 하였는데, 그의 후손이 오늘날의 모압인이다.","큰 딸은 아들을 낳아 이름을 모압이라 하였으니 오늘날 모압의 조상이요","큰 딸은 아들을 낳아 이름을 모압이라 하였으니 오늘날 모압 족속의 조상이요","큰 딸은 아들을 낳고 그 이름을 모압이라 지었다. 이는 \"내 아버지에게서\"라는 뜻으로 그렇게 이름을 지은 것이다. 이 모압이 바로 오늘날 모압 사람의 조상이다.","The firstborn gave birth to a son whom she named Moab, saying, “From my father.” He is the ancestor of the Moabites of today.","And the first born bare a son, and called his name Moab: the same is the father of the Moabites unto this day.","The older daughter had a son, and she named him Moab; he is the father of the Moabites of  today.","Peperitque maior filium et vocavit nomen eius Moab; ipse est pater Moabitarum usque in praesentem diem.","ותלד הבכירה בן ותקרא שמו מואב הוא אבי מואב עד היום׃"],["1","19","38","작은딸도 아들을 낳고 그 이름을 벤 암미라 하였으니, 그는 오늘날까지 이어 오는 암몬인들의 조상이다.","둘째 딸도 아기를 낳고는 이름을 벤암미라고 하였는데, 그의 후손이 오늘날의 암몬인이다.","작은 딸도 아들을 낳아 이름을 벤암미라 하였으니 오늘날 암몬 자손의 조상이었더라","작은 딸도 아들을 낳아 이름을 벤암미라 하였으니 오늘날 암몬 족속의 조상이었더라","작은 딸도 아들을 낳아 그 이름을 벤암미라 지어 불렀다. 이는 \"내 겨레의 아들\"이라는 뜻으로 그렇게 지은 것이다. 이 벤암미가 바로 오늘날 암몬 사람의 조상이다.","The younger one, too, gave birth to a son, and she named him Ammon, saying, “The son of my kin.” He is the ancestor of the Ammonites of today.","And the younger, she also bare a son, and called his name Benammi: the same is the father of the children of Ammon unto this day.","The younger daughter also had a son, and she named him Ben-Ammi; he is the father of the  Ammonites of today.","Minor quoque peperit filium et vocavit nomen eius Benammi (id est Filius populi mei); ipse est pater Ammonitarum usque hodie.","והצעירה גם הוא ילדה בן ותקרא שמו בן עמי הוא אבי בני עמון עד היום׃"],["1","20","1","아브라함은 그곳을 떠나 네겝 땅으로 옮겨 가서, 카데스와 수르 사이에 자리를 잡았다. 그라르에서 나그네살이하게 되었을 때,","아브라함은 그 곳을 떠나 네겝 쪽으로 자리를 옮겨가다가 카데스와 수르 사이에 있는 그랄에 이르러 거기에 정착하여 살게 되었다.","아브라함이 거기서 네게브 땅으로 옮겨가 가데스와 술 사이 그랄에 거류하며","아브라함이 거기서 남방으로 이사하여 가데스와 술 사이 그랄에 우거하며","아브라함은 마므레에서 가나안 남부 지방으로 이주하여 가데스와 술 사이에 있는 그랄에 가서 살았다.","From there Abraham journeyed on to the region of the Negeb, where he settled between Kadesh and Shur. While he resided in Gerar as an alien,","And Abraham journeyed from thence toward the south country, and dwelled between Kadesh and Shur, and sojourned in Gerar.","Now Abraham moved on from there into the region of the Negev and lived between Kadesh and  Shur. For a while he stayed in Gerar,","Profectus inde Abraham in terram Nageb, habitavit in ter Cades et Sur et peregrinatus est in Geraris.","ויסע משם אברהם ארצה הנגב וישב בין קדש ובין שור ויגר בגרר׃"],["1","20","2","아브라함은 자기 아내 사라를 자기 누이라고 말하였다. 그러자 그라르 임금 아비멜렉이 사람을 보내어 사라를 데려갔다.","그 때 아브라함은 아내 사라를 누이라고 했다가 사라가 그랄 왕 아비멜렉에게 불려 들어가는 변을 당하였다.","그의 아내 사라를 자기 누이라 하였으므로 그랄 왕 아비멜렉이 사람을 보내어 사라를 데려갔더니","그 아내 사라를 자기 누이라 하였으므로 그랄 왕 아비멜렉이 보내어 사라를 취하였더니","아브라함은 그랄에 살면서 자기 아내를 누이동생이라 하였다. 그러자 그랄 왕 아비멜렉이 아리따운 사라를 그냥 둘 리 없었다. 그랄에 사람을 보내어 사라를 왕궁으로 데리고 갔다.","Abraham said of his wife Sarah, “She is my sister.” So Abimelech, king of Gerar, sent and took Sarah.","And Abraham said of Sarah his wife, She is my sister: and Abimelech king of Gerar sent, and took Sarah.","and there Abraham said of his wife Sarah, \"She is my sister.\" Then Abimelech king of Gerar  sent for Sarah and took her.","Dixitque de Sara uxore sua:  “Soror mea est “. Misit ergo Abimelech rex Gerarae et tulit eam.","ויאמר אברהם אל שרה אשתו אחתי הוא וישלח אבימלך מלך גרר ויקח את שרה׃"],["1","20","3","그날 밤 꿈에, 하느님께서 아비멜렉에게 나타나 말씀하셨다. “네가 데려온 여자 때문에 너는 죽을 것이다. 그 여자는 임자가 있는 몸이다.”","그 날 밤 하느님께서 아비멜렉의 꿈에 나타나시어 \"네가 맞아들인 여인으로 하여 너는 죽으리라. 그 여인은 남편이 있는 몸이다.\" 하고 이르셨다.","그 밤에 하나님이 아비멜렉에게 현몽하시고 그에게 이르시되 네가 데려간 이 여인으로 말미암아 네가 죽으리니 그는 남편이 있는 여자임이라","그 밤에 하나님이 아비멜렉에게 현몽하시고 그에게 이르시되 네가 취한 이 여인을 인하여 네가 죽으리니 그가 남의 아내임이니라","그날 밤 하나님께서 꿈속에서 아비멜렉에게 나타나셔서 \"너는 죽어야 하리라. 네가 함부로 다른 이의 아내를 이렇게 데리고 와 잠자리를 같이 하다니. 이 여인은 이미 결혼한 몸이다.\" 하고 말씀하셨다.","But God came to Abimelech in a dream one night and said to him: You are about to die because of the woman you have taken, for she has a husband.","But God came to Abimelech in a dream by night, and said to him, Behold, thou art but a dead man, for the woman which thou hast taken; for she is a man's wife.","But God came to Abimelech in a dream one night and said to him, \"You are as good as dead  because of the woman you have taken; she is a married woman.\"","Venit autem Deus ad Abimelech per somnium nocte et ait illi:  “En morieris propter mulierem, quam tulisti; habet enim virum “.","ויבא אלהים אל אבימלך בחלום הלילה ויאמר לו הנך מת על האשה אשר לקחת והוא בעלת בעל׃"],["1","20","4","아비멜렉은 아직 그 여자를 가까이하지 않았으므로, 이렇게 아뢰었다. “주님, 당신께서는 죄 없는 백성도 죽이십니까?","아비멜렉은 아직 사라를 가까이하지 않았으므로 이렇게 말하였다. \"주여, 당신은 죄없는 사람도 죽이십니까?","아비멜렉이 그 여인을 가까이 하지 아니하였으므로 그가 대답하되 주여 주께서 의로운 백성도 멸하시나이까","아비멜렉이 그 여인을 가까이 아니한고로 그가 대답하되 주여 주께서 의로운 백성도 멸하시나이까","그러나 아비멜렉은 아직 사라와 잠자리를 같이하지 않았기 때문에 이렇게 말하였다. \"주님, 주께서는 아무런 잘못도 하지 않은 사람까지 죽이시렵니까?","Abimelech, who had not approached her, said: “O Lord, would you kill an innocent man?","But Abimelech had not come near her: and he said, LORD, wilt thou slay also a righteous nation?","Now Abimelech had not gone near her, so he said, \"Lord, will you destroy an innocent nation?","Abimelech vero non tetigerat eam. Et ait:  “Domine, num gentem etiam iustam interficies?","ואבימלך לא קרב אליה ויאמר אדני הגוי גם צדיק תהרג׃"],["1","20","5","아브라함 자신이 저에게 ‘이 여자는 제 누이입니다.’ 하였고, 그 여자 또한 스스로 ‘그는 제 오라비입니다.’ 하지 않았습니까? 저는 흠 없는 마음과 결백한 손으로 이 일을 하였습니다.”","그들은 분명히 서로 오누이라고 했습니다. 저는 조금도 마음에 걸리는 일은 하지 않았습니다. 제 손은 깨끗합니다.\"","그가 나에게 이는 내 누이라고 하지 아니하였나이까 그 여인도 그는 내 오라비라 하였사오니 나는 온전한 마음과 깨끗한 손으로 이렇게 하였나이다","그가 나더러 이는 내 누이라고 하지 아니하였나이까 그 여인도 그는 내 오라비라 하였사오니 나는 온전한 마음과 깨끗한 손으로 이렇게 하였나이다","아브라함이 분명히 말하였습니다. 이 여인이 자기 누이동생이라고 말입니다. 또 이 여인도 그랬습니다. 그 사람이 자기 오라비라고 말입니다. 무슨 나쁜 마음을 먹고 이렇게 한 것은 아닙니다. 정말입니다. 제겐 아무런 잘못이 없습니다\"","Was he not the one who told me, ‘She is my sister’? She herself also stated, ‘He is my brother.’ I acted with pure heart and with clean hands.”","Said he not unto me, She is my sister? and she, even she herself said, He is my brother: in the integrity of my heart and innocency of my hands have I done this.","Did he not say to me, 'She is my sister,' and didn't she also say, 'He is my brother'? I  have done this with a clear conscience and clean hands.\"","Nonne ipse dixit mihi:  “Soror mea est “, et ipsa quoque ait:  “Frater meus est “? In simplicitate cordis mei et munditia manuum mearum feci hoc “.","הלא הוא אמר לי אחתי הוא והיא גם הוא אמרה אחי הוא בתם לבבי ובנקין כפי עשיתי זאת׃"],["1","20","6","그러자 하느님께서 꿈에 다시 그에게 말씀하셨다. “나도 네가 흠 없는 마음으로 이 일을 한 줄 안다. 네가 나에게 죄를 짓지 않도록 막아 준 이가 바로 나다. 네가 그 여자를 건드리는 것을 내가 허락하지 않았다.","하느님께서 또 꿈에 그에게 말씀하셨다. \"네가 마음에 걸릴 일을 하지 않은 줄은 나도 안다. 그러나 나에게 죄를 짓지 못하게 너를 지켜준 이가 누군지 아느냐? 너로 하여금 그 여인을 건드리지 못하게 한 것은 바로 나다.","하나님이 꿈에 또 그에게 이르시되 네가 온전한 마음으로 이렇게 한 줄을 나도 알았으므로 너를 막아 내게 범죄하지 아니하게 하였나니 여인에게 가까이 하지 못하게 함이 이 때문이니라","하나님이 꿈에 또 그에게 이르시되 네가 온전한 마음으로 이렇게 한 줄을 나도 알았으므로 너를 막아 내게 범죄하지 않게 하였나니 여인에게 가까이 못하게 함이 이 까닭이니라","꿈속에서 하나님께서 계속해서 말씀하셨다. \"그래, 네가 나쁜 마음을 먹고 이런 것이 아니라는 것을 나도 잘 안다. 그래서 네가 죄짓지 않게 하려고 내가 이렇게 나선 것이 아니겠느냐? 네가 사라의 몸에 손을 대지 못하게 하려고 이렇게 나선 것이다.","God answered him in the dream: Yes, I know you did it with a pure heart. In fact, it was I who kept you from sinning against me; that is why I did not let you touch her.","And God said unto him in a dream, Yea, I know that thou didst this in the integrity of thy heart; for I also withheld thee from sinning against me: therefore suffered I thee not to touch her.","Then God said to him in the dream, \"Yes, I know you did this with a clear conscience, and so  I have kept you from sinning against me. That is why I did not let you touch her.","Dixitque ad eum Deus per somnium:  “Et ego scio quod simplici corde feceris; et ideo custodivi te, ne peccares in me, et non dimisi, ut tangeres eam.","ויאמר אליו האלהים בחלם גם אנכי ידעתי כי בתם לבבך עשית זאת ואחשך גם אנכי אותך מחטו לי על כן לא נתתיך לנגע אליה׃"],["1","20","7","이제 그 사람의 아내를 돌려보내라. 그 사람은 예언자이니, 그가 너를 위하여 기도하면 너는 살 것이다. 그러나 네가 만일 돌려보내지 않으면, 너와 너에게 딸린 자들이 모두 반드시 죽으리라는 것을 알아 두어라.”","그러니 그 여인을 곧 남편에게 돌려보내라. 그 남편은 예언자다. 그가 너를 위하여 기도해 주어야 네가 죽지 않으리라. 만일 그 여인을 돌려보내지 않으면 너는 물론 네 식구들도 다 죽으리라.\"","이제 그 사람의 아내를 돌려보내라 그는 선지자라 그가 너를 위하여 기도하리니 네가 살려니와 네가 돌려보내지 아니하면 너와 네게 속한 자가 다 반드시 죽을 줄 알지니라","이제 그 사람의 아내를 돌려 보내라 그는 선지자라 그가 너를 위하여 기도하리니 네가 살려니와 네가 돌려 보내지 않으면 너와 네게 속한 자가 다 정녕 죽을줄 알찌니라","자, 그러니 이제 이 여인을 그 남편에게 돌려보내라. 이 여인의 남편은 예언자라. 그가 너를 위해서 기도할 것이다. 그래서 네가 목숨을 잃지 않을 것이다. 하지만 이 여인을 남편에게 돌려보내지 않는다면, 내가 분명히 말한다만 너는 죽을 수밖에 없다. 너뿐만 아니라 네 식구들과 또 네게 딸려 있는 모든 사람들이 다 목숨을 잃을 것이다\"","So now, return the man’s wife so that he may intercede for you, since he is a prophet, that you may live. If you do not return her, you can be sure that you and all who are yours will die.","Now therefore restore the man his wife; for he is a prophet, and he shall pray for thee, and thou shalt live: and if thou restore her not, know thou that thou shalt surely die, thou, and all that are thine.","Now return the man's wife, for he is a prophet, and he will pray for you and you will live.  But if you do not return her, you may be sure that you and all yours will die.\"","Nunc igitur redde viro suo uxorem, quia propheta est; et orabit pro te, et vives. Si autem nolueris reddere, scito quod morte morieris tu et omnia, quae tua sunt “.","ועתה השב אשת האיש כי נביא הוא ויתפלל בעדך וחיה ואם אינך משיב דע כי מות תמות אתה וכל אשר לך׃"],["1","20","8","아비멜렉은 아침 일찍 일어나 자기 종들을 모두 불러 모으고서, 그들에게 이 일을 낱낱이 들려주었다. 그러자 그 사람들은 크게 두려워하였다.","아비멜렉은 아침 일찍이 일어나 종을 다 불러모으고 이 일을 그들에게 낱낱이 들려주었다. 이 말을 들은 사람들은 모두 두려움에 사로잡혔다.","아비멜렉이 그 날 아침에 일찍이 일어나 모든 종들을 불러 그 모든 일을 말하여 들려 주니 그들이 심히 두려워하였더라","아비멜렉이 그 아침에 일찌기 일어나 모든 신복을 불러 그 일을 다 말하여 들리매 그 사람들이 심히 두려워하였더라","그 다음날 아침 아비멜렉은 자기 신하들을 모두 불러들여 간밤에 꿈속에서 있었던 일을 자세히 말하였다. 그러자 그 말을 듣고 신하들은 모두 무서워 떨었다.","Early the next morning Abimelech called all his servants and informed them of everything that had happened, and the men were filled with fear.","Therefore Abimelech rose early in the morning, and called all his servants, and told all these things in their ears: and the men were sore afraid.","Early the next morning Abimelech summoned all his officials, and when he told them all that  had happened, they were very much afraid.","Statimque de nocte consurgens Abimelech vocavit omnes servos suos et locutus est universa verba haec in auribus eorum; timueruntque viri valde.",null],["1","20","9","아비멜렉은 아브라함을 불러 그에게 말하였다. “그대는 어째서 이런 짓을 하였소? 내가 그대에게 무슨 죄를 지었기에, 그대는 나와 내 왕국에 이렇게 큰 죄를 끌어들였소? 그대는 해서는 안 될 일을 나에게 저질렀소.”","아비멜렉이 아브라함을 불러들여 꾸짖었다. \"내가 너에게 무슨 못할 일을 했기에 너는 나와 내 나라에 이렇듯이 엄청난 죄를 뒤집어씌웠느냐? 너는 나에게 차마 못할 짓을 하였다.\"","아비멜렉이 아브라함을 불러서 그에게 이르되 네가 어찌하여 우리에게 이렇게 하느냐 내가 무슨 죄를 네게 범하였기에 네가 나와 내 나라가 큰 죄에 빠질 뻔하게 하였느냐 네가 합당하지 아니한 일을 내게 행하였도다 하고","아비멜렉이 아브라함을 불러서 그에게 이르되 네가 어찌하여 우리에게 이리 하느냐 내가 무슨 죄를 네게 범하였관대 네가 나와 내 나라로 큰 죄에 빠질뻔하게 하였느냐 네가 합당치 않은 일을 내게 행하였도다 하고","그런 뒤 아비멜렉은 아브라함을 불러들여 따졌다. \"네가 어쩌자고 우리에게 이런 일을 하였느냐? 내가 네게 무슨 잘못을 하였기에 네가 나와 내 나라에 재앙을 내리게 하느냐? 너는 나에게 못할 짓을 하였다. 그 어느 누구도 이런 일을 한 사람은 없었다.","Then Abimelech summoned Abraham and said to him: “What have you done to us! What wrong did I do to you that you would have brought such great guilt on me and my kingdom? You have treated me in an intolerable way.","Then Abimelech called Abraham, and said unto him, What hast thou done unto us? and what have I offended thee, that thou hast brought on me and on my kingdom a great sin? thou hast done deeds unto me that ought not to be done.","Then Abimelech called Abraham in and said, \"What have you done to us? How have I wronged you  that you have brought such great guilt upon me and my kingdom? You have done things to me that  should not be done.\"","Vocavit autem Abimelech etiam Abraham et dixit ei:  “Quid fecisti nobis? Quid peccavi in te, quia induxisti super me et super regnum meum peccatum grande? Quae non debuisti facere, fecisti mihi “.",null],["1","20","10","아비멜렉이 아브라함에게 다시 물었다. “그대는 도대체 어쩌자고 이런 일을 저질렀소?”","그리고 아비멜렉은 아브라함에게 다시 물었다. \"어쩌자고 그런 짓을 했느냐?\"","아비멜렉이 또 아브라함에게 이르되 네가 무슨 뜻으로 이렇게 하였느냐","아비멜렉이 또 아브라함에게 이르되 네가 무슨 의견으로 이렇게 하였느냐","네가 도대체 무슨 생각으로 이런 짓을 하였느냐?\"","What did you have in mind,” Abimelech asked him, “that you would do such a thing?”","And Abimelech said unto Abraham, What sawest thou, that thou hast done this thing?","And Abimelech asked Abraham, \"What was your reason for doing this?\"","Rursusque ait:  “Quid vidisti, ut hoc faceres? “.",null],["1","20","11","아브라함이 대답하였다. “‘이곳에는 하느님에 대한 경외심이라고는 도무지 없어서, 사람들이 내 아내 때문에 나를 죽일 것이다.’ 하고 내가 생각하였기 때문입니다.","아브라함이 대답하였다. \"이 곳에는 하느님 두려운 줄 아는 사람이 없는 줄 알았습니다. 그래서 나는 아내 때문에 맞아죽을 것 같아서 그랬습니다.","아브라함이 이르되 이 곳에서는 하나님을 두려워함이 없으니 내 아내로 말미암아 사람들이 나를 죽일까 생각하였음이요","아브라함이 가로되 이곳에서는 하나님을 두려워함이 없으니 내 아내를 인하여 사람이 나를 죽일까 생각하였음이요","아브라함이 대답하였다. \"이곳 사람들이 하나님을 모시고 살지 않는 까닭입니다. 그래서 내 아내가 무척 아리따운 것을 보고 사람들이 내 아내를 차지하려고 나를 죽이지 않을까 무서워서 그랬습니다.","Abraham answered, “I thought there would be no fear of God in this place, and so they would kill me on account of my wife.","And Abraham said, Because I thought, Surely the fear of God is not in this place; and they will slay me for my wife's sake.","Abraham replied, \"I said to myself, 'There is surely no fear of God in this place, and they  will kill me because of my wife.'","Respondit Abraham:  “Cogitavi mecum: Certe non est timor Dei in loco isto, et interficient me propter uxorem meam.",null],["1","20","12","더구나 그 여자는 정말 나의 누이입니다. 아버지는 같고 어머니가 달라서 내 아내가 되었습니다.","더구나 사라는 정말 내 누이이기도 합니다. 같은 아버지의 피를 받은 누이입니다. 어머니가 달라서 내 아내가 된 것입니다.","또 그는 정말로 나의 이복 누이로서 내 아내가 되었음이니라","또 그는 실로 나의 이복누이로서 내 처가 되었음이니라","또 내 아내는 사실 내 이복 누이이기도 합니다.","Besides, she really is my sister, but only my father’s daughter, not my mother’s; and so she became my wife.","And yet indeed she is my sister; she is the daughter of my father, but not the daughter of my mother; and she became my wife.","Besides, she really is my sister, the daughter of my father though not of my mother; and  she became my wife.","Alias autem et vere soror mea est, filia patris mei et non filia matris meae, et duxi eam in uxorem.",null],["1","20","13","하느님께서 내게 아버지 집을 떠나 떠돌아다니게 하셨을 때, 나는 그 여자에게 말하기를, ‘당신에게 당부하는데, 우리가 어느 곳으로 가든지 내가 당신의 오라비라고 말하시오.’ 하였습니다.”","집을 떠나라는 하느님의 분부를 받았을 때 나는 사라에게 나를 오라버니라고 부를 것을 당부해 두었던 것입니다.\"","하나님이 나를 내 아버지의 집을 떠나 두루 다니게 하실 때에 내가 아내에게 말하기를 이 후로 우리의 가는 곳마다 그대는 나를 그대의 오라비라 하라 이것이 그대가 내게 베풀 은혜라 하였었노라","하나님이 나로 내 아비 집을 떠나 두루 다니게 하실 때에 내가 아내에게 말하기를 이후로 우리의 가는 곳마다 그대는 나를 그대의 오라비라 하라 이것이 그대가 내게 베풀 은혜라 하였었노라","내가 섬기고 있는 하나님께서는 나를 집에서 떠나 이곳 저곳으로 돌아다니게 하셨습니다. 그래서 내가 아내에게 일러두었지요 \"사람들에게는 나를 당신 오라비라고 이르시오. 그래야 내가 목숨이라도 부지할 것이오\" 하고 말입니다.\"","When God sent me wandering from my father’s house, I asked her: ‘Would you do me this favor? In whatever place we come to, say: He is my brother.’”","And it came to pass, when God caused me to wander from my father's house, that I said unto her, This is thy kindness which thou shalt shew unto me; at every place whither we shall come, say of me, He is my brother.","And when God had me wander from my father's household, I said to her, 'This is how you can  show your love to me: Everywhere we go, say of me, \"He is my brother.\"'\"","Cum autem vagari me faceret Deus de domo patris mei, dixi ad eam: Hanc misericordiam facies mecum: in omni loco, ad quem ingrediemur, dices quod frater tuus sim “.",null],["1","20","14","그러자 아비멜렉은 양과 소, 남종과 여종들을 데려다 아브라함에게 주고, 그의 아내 사라도 돌려주었다.","아비멜렉은 아브라함에게 양떼와 소떼, 남종과 여종을 주면서 그의 아내 사라도 돌려주었다.","아비멜렉이 양과 소와 종들을 이끌어 아브라함에게 주고 그의 아내 사라도 그에게 돌려보내고","아비멜렉이 양과 소와 노비를 취하여 아브라함에게 주고 그 아내 사라도 그에게 돌려보내고","아비멜렉은 사라를 아브라함에게 되돌려 보내고 또한 양떼와 소떼뿐 아니라 종들도 여럿 딸려 보냈다.","Then Abimelech took flocks and herds and male and female slaves and gave them to Abraham; and he restored his wife Sarah to him.","And Abimelech took sheep, and oxen, and menservants, and womenservants, and gave them unto Abraham, and restored him Sarah his wife.","Then Abimelech brought sheep and cattle and male and female slaves and gave them to  Abraham, and he returned Sarah his wife to him.","Tulit igitur Abimelech oves et boves et servos et ancillas et dedit Abraham; reddiditque illi Saram uxorem suam",null],["1","20","15","그러고 나서 아비멜렉이 말하였다. “보시오, 내 땅이 그대 앞에 펼쳐져 있으니 그대 마음에 드는 곳에 자리를 잡으시오.”","그리고 나서 아비멜렉은 말하였다. \"보아라. 내 땅 어디든지 네 마음에 드는 곳에 가서 살아라.\"","아브라함에게 이르되 내 땅이 네 앞에 있으니 네가 보기에 좋은 대로 거주하라 하고","아브라함에게 이르되 내 땅이 네 앞에 있으니 너 보기에 좋은대로 거하라 하고","그러면서 아브라함에게 이런 말까지 하였다. \"이보게, 아브라함. 이곳이 모두 내 땅이니 아무 걱정 말고 살고 싶은 곳에 가서 살게\"","Then Abimelech said, “Here, my land is at your disposal; settle wherever you please.”","And Abimelech said, Behold, my land is before thee: dwell where it pleaseth thee.","And Abimelech said, \"My land is before you; live wherever you like.\"","et ait:  “Ecce terra mea coram te; ubicumque tibi placuerit, habita “.",null],["1","20","16","그리고 사라에게 말하였다. “나는 그대의 오라버니에게 은전 천 닢을 주었소. 보시오, 그것은 그대와 함께 있는 모든 이들 앞에서 그대의 명예를 회복시켜 줄 것이오. 이로써 그대는 모든 면에서 결백하다는 것이 입증되었소.”","그리고 사라를 돌아보며 말하였다. \"네 오라비에게 은전 천 닢을 주었다. 그 은전 천 닢은 너와 함께 있는 사람들에게 네가 아무 일도 없었다는 것을 보증해 주리라. 이로써 너는 모든 사람 앞에 결백하다는 것이 증명되는 것이다.\"","사라에게 이르되 내가 은 천 개를 네 오라비에게 주어서 그것으로 너와 함께 한 여러 사람 앞에서 네 수치를 가리게 하였노니 네 일이 다 해결되었느니라","사라에게 이르되 내가 은 천개를 네 오라비에게 주어서 그것으로 너와 함께한 여러 사람 앞에서 네 1)수치를 풀게 하였노니 네 일이 다 선히 해결되었느니라 히, 눈을 가리우게","그리고 사라에게는 \"내가 은 1천 개를 네 오라비에게 주었다. 그 은전을 주는 것은 네 일행들에게 네게 아무런 일도 없었다는 사실을 분명히 보증하려는 것이다. 네 일행들은 이것을 보고 네게 아무 일도 없었다는 것을 알게 될 것이다\"","To Sarah he said: “I hereby give your brother a thousand shekels of silver. This will preserve your honor before all who are with you and will exonerate you before everyone.”","And unto Sarah he said, Behold, I have given thy brother a thousand pieces of silver: behold, he is to thee a covering of the eyes, unto all that are with thee, and with all other: thus she was reproved.","To Sarah he said, \"I am giving your brother a thousand shekels of silver. This is to cover  the offense against you before all who are with you; you are completely vindicated.\"","Sarae autem dixit:  “Ecce mille argenteos dedi fratri tuo; ecce hoc erit tibi in velamen oculorum ad omnes, qui tecum sunt, et apud omnes iustificaberis “.",null],["1","20","17","이에 아브라함이 하느님께 기도하자, 하느님께서는 아비멜렉과 그의 아내와 그의 여종들의 병을 고쳐 주셨다. 그래서 그들은 다시 아이를 낳을 수 있게 되었다.","아브라함이 하느님께 기도하니 하느님께서 아비멜렉과 그의 아내와 여종들의 병을 고쳐주셨다. 그래서 그들은 다시 아기를 낳을 수 있게 되었다.","아브라함이 하나님께 기도하매 하나님이 아비멜렉과 그의 아내와 여종을 치료하사 출산하게 하셨으니","아브라함이 하나님께 기도하매 하나님이 아비멜렉과 그 아내와 여종을 치료하사 생산케 하셨으니","아비멜렉이 아브라함의 아내 사라를 취하려고 하였던 일 때문에 여호와께서는 아비멜렉 집안의 모든 여자들이 아이를 낳지 못하게 하셨다. 그러나 아브라함이 아비멜렉을 위하여 하나님께 기도드리자 하나님께서는 아비멜렉과 그의 아내와 여종들을 다시 건강하게 하셔서 아이를 낳게 하셨다.","Abraham then interceded with God, and God restored health to Abimelech, to his wife, and his maidservants, so that they bore children;","So Abraham prayed unto God: and God healed Abimelech, and his wife, and his maidservants; and they bare children.","Then Abraham prayed to God, and God healed Abimelech, his wife and his slave girls so they  could have children again,","Orante autem Abraham, sanavit Deus Abimelech et uxorem ancillasque eius et pepererunt;",null],["1","20","18","주님께서 아브라함의 아내 사라 때문에 아비멜렉 집안의 모든 태를 닫아 버리셨던 것이다.","아브라함의 아내 사라 때문에 야훼께서는 아비멜렉의 집에 있는 모든 여자의 태를 닫으셨던 것이다.","여호와께서 이왕에 아브라함의 아내 사라의 일로 아비멜렉의 집의 모든 태를 닫으셨음이더라","여호와께서 이왕에 아브라함의 아내 사라의 연고로 아비멜렉의 집 모든 태를 닫히셨음이더라","(17절에 포함되어 있음)","for the LORD had closed every womb in Abimelech’s household on account of Abraham’s wife Sarah.","For the LORD had fast closed up all the wombs of the house of Abimelech, because of Sarah Abraham's wife.","for the LORD had closed up every womb in Abimelech's household because of Abraham's wife  Sarah.","concluserat enim Dominus omnem vulvam domus Abimelech propter Saram uxorem Abraham.",null],["1","21","1","주님께서는 말씀하신 대로 사라를 돌보셨다. 주님께서 말씀하신 대로 사라에게 해 주시니,","야훼께서는 약속대로 사라를 돌보셨다. 사라에게 하신 약속을 이루어주시니,","여호와께서 말씀하신 대로 사라를 돌보셨고 여호와께서 말씀하신 대로 사라에게 행하셨으므로","여호와께서 그 말씀대로 사라를 권고하셨고 여호와께서 그 말씀대로 사라에게 행하셨으므로","여호와께서는 당신께서 말씀하신 대로 사라를 잊지 않고 돌보아주셨다.","The LORD took note of Sarah as he had said he would; the LORD did for her as he had promised.","And the LORD visited Sarah as he had said, and the LORD did unto Sarah as he had spoken.","Now the LORD was gracious to Sarah as he had said, and the LORD did for Sarah what he had  promised.","Visitavit autem Dominus Saram, sicut promiserat, et implevit Sarae, quae locutus est;","ויהוה פקד את שרה כאשר אמר ויעש יהוה לשרה כאשר דבר׃"],["1","21","2","사라가 임신하여, 하느님께서 아브라함에게 일러 주신 바로 그때에 늙은 아브라함에게 아들을 낳아 주었다.","사라가 임신하여 하느님께서 약속하신 바로 그 때에 늙은 아브라함에게 아들을 낳아주었다.","사라가 임신하고 하나님이 말씀하신 시기가 되어 노년의 아브라함에게 아들을 낳으니","사라가 잉태하고 하나님의 말씀하신 기한에 미쳐 늙은 아브라함에게 아들을 낳으니","아브라함이 늙었는데도 사라는 아이를 가져 아들을 낳았다. 하나님께서 아브라함에게 말씀하시던 바로 그때에 사라가 아들을 낳은 것이다.","Sarah became pregnant and bore Abraham a son in his old age, at the set time that God had stated.","For Sarah conceived, and bare Abraham a son in his old age, at the set time of which God had spoken to him.","Sarah became pregnant and bore a son to Abraham in his old age, at the very time God had  promised him.","concepitque et peperit Abrahae filium in senectute eius tempore, quo praedixerat ei Deus.","ותהר ותלד שרה לאברהם בן לזקניו למועד אשר דבר אתו אלהים׃"],["1","21","3","아브라함은 사라가 자기에게 낳아 준 아들의 이름을 이사악이라 하였다.","아브라함은 사라가 낳아준 아들을 이사악이라 이름지어 불렀다.","아브라함이 그에게 태어난 아들 곧 사라가 자기에게 낳은 아들을 이름하여 이삭이라 하였고","아브라함이 그 낳은 아들 곧 사라가 자기에게 낳은 아들을 이름하여 이삭이라 하였고","아브라함은 사라가 낳은 아들의 이름을 이삭이라 지어 불렀다.","Abraham gave the name Isaac to this son of his whom Sarah bore him.","And Abraham called the name of his son that was born unto him, whom Sarah bare to him, Isaac.","Abraham gave the name Isaac to the son Sarah bore him.","Vocavitque Abraham nomen filii sui, quem genuit ei Sara, Isaac","ויקרא אברהם את שם בנו הנולד לו אשר ילדה לו שרה יצחק׃"],["1","21","4","아브라함은 하느님께서 자기에게 명령하신 대로, 자기 아들 이사악이 태어난 지 여드레 만에 할례를 베풀었다.","하느님의 분부를 따라 아브라함은 아들 이사악이 태어난 지 팔 일 만에 할례를 베풀었다.","그 아들 이삭이 난 지 팔 일 만에 그가 하나님이 명령하신 대로 할례를 행하였더라","그 아들 이삭이 난지 팔일만에 그가 하나님의 명대로 할례를 행하였더라","아브라함은 하나님께서 명령하신 대로 이삭이 태어난지 8일째가 되는 날 이삭에게 할례를 베풀었다.","When his son Isaac was eight days old, Abraham circumcised him, as God had commanded.","And Abraham circumcised his son Isaac being eight days old, as God had commanded him.","When his son Isaac was eight days old, Abraham circumcised him, as God commanded him.","et circumcidit eum octavo die, sicut praeceperat ei Deus.","וימל אברהם את יצחק בנו בן שמנת ימים כאשר צוה אתו אלהים׃"],["1","21","5","아브라함에게서 아들 이사악이 태어났을 때, 그의 나이는 백 살이었다.","아브라함이 아들 이사악을 얻은 것은 백 살이 되던 해였다.","아브라함이 그의 아들 이삭이 그에게 태어날 때에 백 세라","아브라함이 그 아들 이삭을 낳을 때에 백세라","이삭이 태어날 때 아브라함의 나이는 100세 였다.","Abraham was a hundred years old when his son Isaac was born to him.","And Abraham was an hundred years old, when his son Isaac was born unto him.","Abraham was a hundred years old when his son Isaac was born to him.","Cum Abraham centum esset annorum, natus est ei Isaac filius eius.","ואברהם בן מאת שנה בהולד לו את יצחק בנו׃"],["1","21","6","사라가 말하였다. “하느님께서 나에게 웃음을 가져다주셨구나. 이 소식을 듣는 이마다 나한테 기쁘게 웃어 주겠지.”","사라가 말하였다. \"하느님께서 나에게 웃음을 주셨구나. 내가 아들을 낳았다고 모두들 나와 함께 기뻐하게 되었구나.","사라가 이르되 하나님이 나를 웃게 하시니 듣는 자가 다 나와 함께 웃으리로다","사라가 가로되 하나님이 나로 웃게 하시니 듣는 자가 다 나와 함께 웃으리로다","사라는 아들을 낳은 것이 자랑스러워서 \"하나님께서 이토록 나를 기쁘게 하시는구나. 내가 아들을 낳았다는 소리를 듣는 사람마다 나와 함께 모두 웃겠지.","Sarah then said, “God has given me cause to laugh, and all who hear of it will laugh with me.","And Sarah said, God hath made me to laugh, so that all that hear will laugh with me.","Sarah said, \"God has brought me laughter, and everyone who hears about this will laugh with  me.\"","Dixitque Sara:  “Risum fecit mihi Deus; quicumque audierit, corridebit mihi?.","ותאמר שרה צחק עשה לי אלהים כל השמע יצחק לי׃"],["1","21","7","그리고 또 말하였다. “사라가 자식들에게 젖을 먹이리라고 누가 아브라함에게 감히 말할 수 있었으랴? 그렇지만 내가 늙은 그에게 아들을 낳아 주지 않았는가!”","누가 아브라함에게 사라가 아기에게 젖을 물리리라고 말할 꿈이나 꾸었더냐? 그런데 그 노령에 아들을 얻으셨구나.\"","또 이르되 사라가 자식들을 젖먹이겠다고 누가 아브라함에게 말하였으리요마는 아브라함의 노경에 내가 아들을 낳았도다 하니라","또 가로되 사라가 자식들을 젖 먹이겠다고 누가 아브라함에게 말하였으리요 마는 아브라함 노경에 내가 아들을 낳았도다 하니라","사라가 자식에게 젖이나 빨려 보겠느냐고 누가 내 남편 아브라함에게 빈정댔던가! 그러나 아브라함 늘그막에 내가 이렇게 아들을 낳지 않았는가!\" 하였다.","Who would ever have told Abraham,” she added, “that Sarah would nurse children! Yet I have borne him a son in his old age.”","And she said, Who would have said unto Abraham, that Sarah should have given children suck? for I have born him a son in his old age.","And she added, \"Who would have said to Abraham that Sarah would nurse children? Yet I have  borne him a son in his old age.\"","Rursumque ait: Quis auditurum crederet Abraham quod Sara lactaret filios, quia peperit ei filium iam seni? “.","ותאמר מי מלל לאברהם היניקה בנים שרה כי ילדתי בן לזקניו׃"],["1","21","8","아기가 자라서 젖을 떼게 되었다. 이사악이 젖을 떼던 날 아브라함은 큰 잔치를 베풀었다.","아기가 자라나 젖을 뗄 때가 되었다. 이사악이 젖을 떼던 날, 아브라함은 큰 잔치를 베풀었다.","아이가 자라매 젖을 떼고 이삭이 젖을 떼는 날에 아브라함이 큰 잔치를 베풀었더라","아이가 자라매 젖을 떼고 이삭의 젖을 떼는 날에 아브라함이 대연을 배설하였더라","아이는 점점 자라 젖을 뗄 때가 되었다. 그러자 아브라함은 아이가 젖떼던 날 큰 잔치를 베풀었다.","The child grew and was weaned, and Abraham held a great banquet on the day of the child’s weaning.","And the child grew, and was weaned: and Abraham made a great feast the same day that Isaac was weaned.","The child grew and was weaned, and on the day Isaac was weaned Abraham held a great feast.","Crevit igitur puer et ablactatus est. Fecitque Abraham grande convivium in die ablactationis eius.","ויגדל הילד ויגמל ויעש אברהם משתה גדול ביום הגמל את יצחק׃"],["1","21","9","그런데 사라는 이집트 여자 하가르가 아브라함에게 낳아 준 아들이 자기 아들 이사악과 함께 노는 것을 보고,","그런데 사라는 이집트 여자 하갈이 아브라함에게 낳아준 아들이 자기 아들 이사악과 함께 노는 것을 보고","사라가 본즉 아브라함의 아들 애굽 여인 하갈의 아들이 이삭을 놀리는지라","사라가 본즉 아브라함의 아들 애굽 여인 하갈의 소생이 이삭을 희롱하는지라","어느 날 사라는 애굽 여인 하갈이 낳은 이스마엘이 자기 아들 이삭을 데리고 희롱하면서 노는 것을 보았다.","Sarah noticed the son whom Hagar the Egyptian had borne to Abraham playing with her son Isaac;","And Sarah saw the son of Hagar the Egyptian, which she had born unto Abraham, mocking.","But Sarah saw that the son whom Hagar the Egyptian had borne to Abraham was mocking,","Cumque vidisset Sara filium Agar Aegyptiae iocantem cum Isaac filio suo, dixit ad Abraham:","ותרא שרה את בן הגר המצרית אשר ילדה לאברהם מצחק׃"],["1","21","10","아브라함에게 말하였다. “저 여종과 그 아들을 내쫓으세요. 저 여종의 아들이 내 아들 이사악과 함께 상속을 받을 수는 없어요.”","아브라함에게 말하였다. \"그 계집종과 아들을 내쫓아 주십시오. 그 계집종의 아들이 내 아들 이사악과 함께 상속자가 될 수는 없습니다.\"","그가 아브라함에게 이르되 이 여종과 그 아들을 내쫓으라 이 종의 아들은 내 아들 이삭과 함께 기업을 얻지 못하리라 하므로","그가 아브라함에게 이르되 이 여종과 그 아들을 내어쫓으라 이 종의 아들은 내 아들 이삭과 함께 기업을 얻지 못하리라 하매","그래서 남편 아브라함에게 이렇게 말하였다. \"여보, 저 계집종과 그 아들 녀석을 내보내세요. 내 아들 이삭이 차지해야 할 유산을 그 계집종의 자식과 나누어 가지게 할 수는 없어요\"","so she demanded of Abraham: “Drive out that slave and her son! No son of that slave is going to share the inheritance with my son Isaac!”","Wherefore she said unto Abraham, Cast out this bondwoman and her son: for the son of this bondwoman shall not be heir with my son, even with Isaac.","and she said to Abraham, \"Get rid of that slave woman and her son, for that slave woman's  son will never share in the inheritance with my son Isaac.\"","Eice ancillam hanc et filium eius; non enim erit heres filius ancillae cum filio meo Isaac.","ותאמר לאברהם גרש האמה הזאת ואת בנה כי לא יירש בן האמה הזאת עם בני עם יצחק׃"],["1","21","11","그 아들도 자기 아들이므로 아브라함에게는 이 일이 무척이나 언짢았다.","이 말을 듣고 아브라함은 마음이 몹시 괴로웠다. 이스마엘도 자기 혈육이었기 때문이다.","아브라함이 그의 아들로 말미암아 그 일이 매우 근심이 되었더니","아브라함이 그 아들을 위하여 그 일이 깊이 근심이 되었더니","이 말을 들은 아브라함은 무척 괴로웠다. 하갈이 낳은 아들도 자기 자식이었기 때문이다.","Abraham was greatly distressed because it concerned a son of his.","And the thing was very grievous in Abraham's sight because of his son.","The matter distressed Abraham greatly because it concerned his son.","Dure accepit hoc Abraham propter filium suum.","וירע הדבר מאד בעיני אברהם על אודת בנו׃"],["1","21","12","그러나 하느님께서는 아브라함에게 말씀하셨다. “그 아이와 네 여종 때문에 언짢아하지 마라. 사라가 너에게 말하는 대로 다 들어 주어라. 이사악을 통하여 후손들이 너의 이름을 물려받을 것이다.","그러자 하느님께서 아브라함에게 말씀하셨다. \"그 애와 네 계집종을 걱정하여 마음 아파하지 마라. 사라가 하는 말을 다 들어주어라. 이사악에게서 난 자식이라야 네 혈통을 이을 것이다.","하나님이 아브라함에게 이르시되 네 아이나 네 여종으로 말미암아 근심하지 말고 사라가 네게 이른 말을 다 들으라 이삭에게서 나는 자라야 네 씨라 부를 것임이니라","하나님이 아브라함에게 이르시되 네 아이나 네 여종을 위하여 근심치 말고 사라가 네게 이른 말을 다 들으라 이삭에게서 나는 자라야 네 씨라 칭할 것임이니라","그러자 하나님께서 아브라함에게 이르셨다. \"아브라함아, 저 아이와 계집종 하갈때문에 그렇게 괴로워하지 말아라. 사라가 네게 말한 대로 다 하여라. 내가 너에게 네 후손들이 엄청나게 불어나리라고 약속한 것은 바로 이삭을 통해서 그렇게 된다는 말이다.","But God said to Abraham: Do not be distressed about the boy or about your slave woman. Obey Sarah, no matter what she asks of you; for it is through Isaac that descendants will bear your name.","And God said unto Abraham, Let it not be grievous in thy sight because of the lad, and because of thy bondwoman; in all that Sarah hath said unto thee, hearken unto her voice; for in Isaac shall thy seed be called.","But God said to him, \"Do not be so distressed about the boy and your maidservant. Listen to  whatever Sarah tells you, because it is through Isaac that your offspring will be reckoned.","Cui dixit Deus:  “Non tibi videatur asperum super puero et super ancilla tua; omnia, quae dixerit tibi Sara, audi vocem eius, quia in Isaac vocabitur tibi semen.","ויאמר אלהים אל אברהם אל ירע בעיניך על הנער ועל אמתך כל אשר תאמר אליך שרה שמע בקלה כי ביצחק יקרא לך זרע׃"],["1","21","13","그러나 그 여종의 아들도 네 자식이니, 내가 그도 한 민족이 되게 하겠다.”","그러나 이 계집종의 아들도 네 자식이니 내가 그도 큰 민족을 이루게 하리라.\"","그러나 여종의 아들도 네 씨니 내가 그로 한 민족을 이루게 하리라 하신지라","그러나 여종의 아들도 네 씨니 내가 그로 한 민족을 이루게 하리라 하신지라","그러나 하갈이 낳은 이스마엘도 네 자식이니 내가 그의 후손도 많이 불어나게 하여 큰 나라를 이루도록 할 것이다.\"","As for the son of the slave woman, I will make a nation of him also, since he too is your offspring.","And also of the son of the bondwoman will I make a nation, because he is thy seed.","I will make the son of the maidservant into a nation also, because he is your offspring.\"","Sed et filium ancillae faciam in gentem magnam, quia semen tuum est “.","וגם את בן האמה לגוי אשימנו כי זרעך הוא׃"],["1","21","14","아브라함은 아침 일찍 일어나 빵과 물 한 가죽 부대를 가져다 하가르에게 주어 어깨에 메게 하고는, 그를 아기와 함께 내보냈다. 길을 나선 하가르는 브에르 세바 광야에서 헤매게 되었다.","아브라함은 아침 일찍 일어나 양식 얼마와 물 한 부대를 하갈에게 메어주며 아이를 데리고 나가게 하였다. 하갈은 길을 떠나 얼마쯤 가다가 브엘세바 빈들을 헤매게 되었다.","아브라함이 아침에 일찍이 일어나 떡과 물 한 가죽부대를 가져다가 하갈의 어깨에 메워 주고 그 아이를 데리고 가게 하니 하갈이 나가서 브엘세바 광야에서 방황하더니","아브라함이 아침에 일찌기 일어나 떡과 물 한 가죽부대를 취하여 하갈의 어깨에 메워 주고 그 자식을 이끌고 가게 하매 하갈이 나가서 브엘세바 들에서 방황하더니","다음날 아침 아브라함은 먹을 떡과 물이 든 가죽부대를 하갈의 어깨에 메어 주고는 아들 이스마엘과 함께 집을 떠나게 하였다. 하갈은 아들과 함께 집을 떠나 브엘세바 들녘을 헤매었다.","Early the next morning Abraham got some bread and a skin of water and gave them to Hagar. Then, placing the child on her back, he sent her away. As she roamed aimlessly in the wilderness of Beer-sheba,","And Abraham rose up early in the morning, and took bread, and a bottle of water, and gave it unto Hagar, putting it on her shoulder, and the child, and sent her away: and she departed, and wandered in the wilderness of Beersheba.","Early the next morning Abraham took some food and a skin of water and gave them to Hagar.  He set them on her shoulders and then sent her off with the boy. She went on her way and wandered  in the desert of Beersheba.","Surrexit itaque Abraham mane et tollens panem et utrem aquae imposuit scapulae eius tradiditque puerum et dimisit eam. Quae cum abisset, errabat in deserto Bersabee.","וישכם אברהם בבקר ויקח לחם וחמת מים ויתן אל הגר שם על שכמה ואת הילד וישלחה ותלך ותתע במדבר באר שבע׃"],["1","21","15","가죽 부대의 물이 떨어지자 그 여자는 아기를 덤불 밑으로 내던져 버리고는,","부대의 물이 떨어지자 하갈은 덤불 한 구석에 아들을 내려놓고","가죽부대의 물이 떨어진지라 그 자식을 관목덤불 아래에 두고","가죽부대의 물이 다한지라 그 자식을 떨기나무 아래 두며","가죽부대에 들어 있던 물이 다 떨어지자 하갈은 가시덤불 아래에 자식을 놔두고는","the water in the skin was used up. So she put the child down under one of the bushes,","And the water was spent in the bottle, and she cast the child under one of the shrubs.","When the water in the skin was gone, she put the boy under one of the bushes.","Cumque consumpta esset aqua in utre, abiecit puerum subter unum arbustum","ויכלו המים מן החמת ותשלך את הילד תחת אחד השיחם׃"],["1","21","16","활 한 바탕 거리만큼 걸어가서 아기를 마주하고 주저앉았다. ‘아기가 죽어 가는 꼴을 어찌 보랴!’ 하고 생각하였던 것이다. 이렇게 그는 아기를 마주하고 주저앉아 목 놓아 울었다.","\"자식이 죽는 것을 어찌 눈 뜨고 보랴.\" 하고 탄식하며 화살이 날아가는 거리만큼 떨어져서 주저앉아 이스마엘을 바라보았다. 하갈은 이스마엘이 소리내어 우는데도 주저앉아 그저 바라만 보았다.","이르되 아이가 죽는 것을 차마 보지 못하겠다 하고 화살 한 바탕 거리 떨어져 마주 앉아 바라보며 소리 내어 우니","가로되 자식의 죽는 것을 참아 보지 못하겠다 하고 살 한 바탕쯤 가서 마주 앉아 바라보며 방성대곡하니","혼자 화살이 날아가는 거리만큼 떨어져 앉아서 \"아들이 저렇게 죽는 꼴을 차마 볼 수가 없구나\" 하면서 목놓아 울었다.","and then went and sat down opposite him, about a bowshot away; for she said to herself, “I cannot watch the child die.” As she sat opposite him, she wept aloud.","And she went, and sat her down over against him a good way off, as it were a bow shot: for she said, Let me not see the death of the child. And she sat over against him, and lift up her voice, and wept.","Then she went off and sat down nearby, about a bowshot away, for she thought, \"I cannot  watch the boy die.\" And as she sat there nearby, she began to sob.","et abiit; seditque e regione procul, quantum potest arcus iacere. Dixit enim:  “Non videbo morientem puerum “. Et sedens contra levavit vocem suam et flevit.","ותלך ותשב לה מנגד הרחק כמטחוי קשת כי אמרה אל אראה במות הילד ותשב מנגד ותשא את קלה ותבך׃"],["1","21","17","하느님께서 아이의 목소리를 들으셨다. 그래서 하느님의 천사가 하늘에서 하가르를 부르며 말하였다. “하가르야, 어찌 된 일이냐? 두려워하지 마라. 하느님께서 저기에 있는 아이의 목소리를 들으셨다.","하느님께서 그 아이의 울음 소리를 들으시고 당신의 천사를 시켜 하늘에서 하갈을 불러 이르셨다. \"하갈아, 어찌 된 일이냐? 걱정하지 마라. 하느님께서 저기서 네 아들의 울부짖는 소리를 들으셨다.","하나님이 그 어린 아이의 소리를 들으셨으므로 하나님의 사자가 하늘에서부터 하갈을 불러 이르시되 하갈아 무슨 일이냐 두려워하지 말라 하나님이 저기 있는 아이의 소리를 들으셨나니","하나님이 그 아이의 소리를 들으시므로 하나님의 사자가 하늘에서부터 하갈을 불러 가라사대 하갈아 무슨 일이냐 두려워 말라 하나님이 저기 있는 아이의 소리를 들으셨나니","하나님께서는 그 아이가 우는 소리를 들으시고 심부름꾼을 통해 하늘에서 하갈에게 이르셨다. \"하갈아, 무슨 일이냐? 어째서 여기서 이렇게 울고 있느냐? 무서워하지 말아라. 하나님께서 다 들으셨다. 하나님께서 네 자식이 우는 소리를 들으셨단다.","God heard the boy’s voice, and God’s angel called to Hagar from heaven: “What is the matter, Hagar? Do not fear; God has heard the boy’s voice in this plight of his.","And God heard the voice of the lad; and the angel of God called to Hagar out of heaven, and said unto her, What aileth thee, Hagar? fear not; for God hath heard the voice of the lad where he is.","God heard the boy crying, and the angel of God called to Hagar from heaven and said to her,  \"What is the matter, Hagar? Do not be afraid; God has heard the boy crying as he lies there.","Exaudivit autem Deus vocem pueri; vocavitque angelus Dei Agar de caelo dicens:  “Quid tibi, Agar? Noli timere; exaudivit enim Deus vocem pueri de loco, in quo est.","וישמע אלהים את קול הנער ויקרא מלאך אלהים אל הגר מן השמים ויאמר לה מה לך הגר אל תיראי כי שמע אלהים אל קול הנער באשר הוא שם׃"],["1","21","18","일어나 가서 아이를 들어 올려 네 손으로 꼭 붙들어라. 내가 그를 큰 민족으로 만들어 주겠다.”","어서 가서 아이를 안아 일으켜주어라. 내가 그를 큰 민족이 되게 하리라.\"","일어나 아이를 일으켜 네 손으로 붙들라 그가 큰 민족을 이루게 하리라 하시니라","일어나 아이를 일으켜 네 손으로 붙들라 그로 큰 민족을 이루게 하리라 하시니라","어서 일어나 가서 아이를 일으켜 세우거라. 그 아이를 다독거려 주어라. 네 아들의 후손들이 큰 민족을 이루게 하리라.\"","Get up, lift up the boy and hold him by the hand; for I will make of him a great nation.”","Arise, lift up the lad, and hold him in thine hand; for I will make him a great nation.","Lift the boy up and take him by the hand, for I will make him into a great nation.\"","Surge, tolle puerum et tene illum manu tua, quia in gentem magnam faciam eum “.","קומי שאי את הנער והחזיקי את ידך בו כי לגוי גדול אשימנו׃"],["1","21","19","그런 다음 하느님께서 하가르의 눈을 열어 주시니, 그가 우물을 보게 되었다. 그는 가서 가죽 부대에 물을 채우고 아이에게 물을 먹였다.","하느님께서 하갈의 눈을 열어주시니, 그의 눈에 샘이 보였다. 하갈은 큰 부대에 물을 채워다가 아이에게 먹였다.","하나님이 하갈의 눈을 밝히셨으므로 샘물을 보고 가서 가죽부대에 물을 채워다가 그 아이에게 마시게 하였더라","하나님이 하갈의 눈을 밝히시매 샘물을 보고 가서 가죽부대에 물을 채워다가 그 아이에게 마시웠더라","하나님께서 하갈의 눈을 밝게 하셨다. 그래서 하갈은 샘 하나를 발견하게 되었다. 하갈은 달려가 가죽부대에 물을 가득 담아 가지고 돌아와서 이스마엘에게 먹였다.","Then God opened her eyes, and she saw a well of water. She went and filled the skin with water, and then let the boy drink.","And God opened her eyes, and she saw a well of water; and she went, and filled the bottle with water, and gave the lad drink.","Then God opened her eyes and she saw a well of water. So she went and filled the skin with  water and gave the boy a drink.","Aperuitque Deus oculos eius; quae videns puteum aquae abiit et implevit utrem deditque puero bibere.","ויפקח אלהים את עיניה ותרא באר מים ותלך ותמלא את החמת מים ותשק את הנער׃"],["1","21","20","하느님께서는 그 아이와 함께 계셨다. 그는 자라서 광야에 살며 활잡이가 되었다.","하느님께서 그와 함께 해주셨다. 그는 자라서 사막에서 살며 활을 쏘는 사냥꾼이 되었다.","하나님이 그 아이와 함께 계시매 그가 장성하여 광야에서 거주하며 활 쏘는 자가 되었더니","하나님이 그 아이와 함께 계시매 그가 장성하여 광야에 거하며 활 쏘는 자가 되었더니","그 아이가 자라날 때 하나님께서 그와 함께 하셨다. 이스마엘은 바란 광야에서 살았다. 커서는 재주가 뛰어난 사냥꾼이 되었다.","God was with the boy as he grew up. He lived in the wilderness and became an expert bowman.","And God was with the lad; and he grew, and dwelt in the wilderness, and became an archer.","God was with the boy as he grew up. He lived in the desert and became an archer.","Et fuit Deus cum eo; qui crevit et moratus est in solitudine factusque est iuvenis sagittarius.","ויהי אלהים את הנער ויגדל וישב במדבר ויהי רבה קשת׃"],["1","21","21","그는 파란 광야에서 살았는데, 그의 어머니가 그에게 이집트 땅에서 아내를 얻어 주었다.","그는 바란 사막에서 살았는데 그의 어머니는 며느릿감을 이집트 땅에서 골라 맞아들였다.","그가 바란 광야에 거주할 때에 그의 어머니가 그를 위하여 애굽 땅에서 아내를 얻어 주었더라","그가 바란 광야에 거할 때에 그 어미가 그를 위하여 애굽 땅 여인을 취하여 아내를 삼게 하였더라","그의 어머니 하갈은 이스마엘의 색시감으로 애굽 처녀를 맞아들였다.","He lived in the wilderness of Paran. His mother got a wife for him from the land of Egypt.","And he dwelt in the wilderness of Paran: and his mother took him a wife out of the land of Egypt.","While he was living in the Desert of Paran, his mother got a wife for him from Egypt.","Habitavitque in deserto Pharan; et accepit illi mater sua uxorem de terra Aegypti.","וישב במדבר פארן ותקח לו אמו אשה מארץ מצרים׃"],["1","21","22","그때 아비멜렉과 그의 군대 장수인 피콜이 아브라함에게 말하였다. “하느님께서는 그대가 무슨 일을 하든지 함께 계시는구려.","그 때 아비멜렉이 군사령관 비골을 데리고 아브라함을 찾아와 제안하였다. \"당신이 무슨 일을 하든지 하느님께서는 함께 해주십니다.","그 때에 아비멜렉과 그 군대 장관 비골이 아브라함에게 말하여 이르되 네가 무슨 일을 하든지 하나님이 너와 함께 계시도다","때에 아비멜렉과 그 군대 장관 비골이 아브라함에게 말하여 가로되 네가 무슨 일을 하든지 하나님이 너와 함께 계시도다","그때에 아비멜렉이 그의 군대 사령관 비골과 함께 아브라함을 찾아와 말하였다. \"그대가 하는 일마다 하나님께서 함께 하신다는 사실을 내가 잘 알고 있소.","At that time Abimelech, accompanied by Phicol, the commander of his army, said to Abraham: “God is with you in everything you do.","And it came to pass at that time, that Abimelech and Phichol the chief captain of his host spake unto Abraham, saying, God is with thee in all that thou doest:","At that time Abimelech and Phicol the commander of his forces said to Abraham, \"God is with  you in everything you do.","Eodem tempore dixit Abimelech et Phicol princeps exercitus eius ad Abraham:  “Deus tecum est in universis, quae agis.","ויהי בעת ההוא ויאמר אבימלך ופיכל שר צבאו אל אברהם לאמר אלהים עמך בכל אשר אתה עשה׃"],["1","21","23","그러니 이제 그대는 나와 내 자식들과 내 후손들을 속이지 않고, 오히려 내가 그대에게 호의를 베푼 것처럼, 나와 그리고 그대가 나그네살이하는 이 땅을 그렇게 대해 줄 것을 여기에서 하느님을 두고 나에게 맹세해 주시오.”","그러니 이 자리에서 하느님을 증인으로 삼고 맹세해 주십시오. 나와 내 혈육 일족을 배신하지 않겠다고 말이오. 내가 당신에게 신의를 지켰듯이 당신도 당신이 정착해 사는 이 곳 사람들과 나에게 신의를 지키겠다고 하여주십시오.\"","그런즉 너는 나와 내 아들과 내 손자에게 거짓되이 행하지 아니하기를 이제 여기서 하나님을 가리켜 내게 맹세하라 내가 네게 후대한 대로 너도 나와 네가 머무는 이 땅에 행할 것이니라","그런즉 너는 나와 내 아들과 내 손자에게 거짓되이 행치 않기를 이제 여기서 하나님을 가리켜 내게 맹세하라 내가 네게 후대한대로 너도 나와 너의 머무는 이 땅에 행할 것이니라","자, 그러니 이제 하나님 앞에서 맹세하시오. 그대가 나와 내 아들과 내 후손들에게 거짓되이 행동하지 않겠노라고 말이오. 나는 지금까지 그대에게 잘해 주었다고 생각하고 있소. 서운하게 대해 주었다고는 생각지 않소. 그러니 그대도 나에게 잘해 주겠다고 약속해 주었으면 하오. 또한 그대가 살고 있는 이 지방 사람들에게도 잘해주겠다고 약속해 주시오\"","So now, swear to me by God at this place that you will not deal falsely with me or with my progeny and posterity, but will act as loyally toward me and the land in which you reside as I have acted toward you.”","Now therefore swear unto me here by God that thou wilt not deal falsely with me, nor with my son, nor with my son's son: but according to the kindness that I have done unto thee, thou shalt do unto me, and to the land wherein thou hast sojourned.","Now swear to me here before God that you will not deal falsely with me or my children or my  descendants. Show to me and the country where you are living as an alien the same kindness I have  shown to you.\"","Iura ergo per Deum, ne noceas mihi et posteris meis stirpique meae; sed iuxta fidem, quam feci tibi, facies mihi et terrae, in qua versatus es advena “.","ועתה השבעה לי באלהים הנה אם תשקר לי ולניני ולנכדי כחסד אשר עשיתי עמך תעשה עמדי ועם הארץ אשר גרתה בה׃"],["1","21","24","아브라함은 “맹세합니다.” 하고 말하였다.","\"예, 맹세하지요.\" 하고 승낙하고 나서 아브라함은","아브라함이 이르되 내가 맹세하리라 하고","아브라함이 가로되 내가 맹세하리라 하고","\"내, 그리하리다\" 하고 아브라함이 대답하였다.","Abraham replied, “I so swear.”","And Abraham said, I will swear.","Abraham said, \"I swear it.\"","Dixitque Abraham:  “Ego iurabo “.","ויאמר אברהם אנכי אשבע׃"],["1","21","25","그러고 나서 아브라함은 아비멜렉의 종들이 빼앗은 우물 때문에 아비멜렉에게 따졌다.","아비멜렉의 종들이 자기의 우물을 빼앗은 일을 따졌다.","아비멜렉의 종들이 아브라함의 우물을 빼앗은 일에 관하여 아브라함이 아비멜렉을 책망하매","아비멜렉의 종들이 아브라함의 우물을 늑탈한 일에 대하여 아브라함이 아비멜렉을 책망하매","그러나 아브라함은 아비멜렉의 종들이 자기의 우물을 빼앗아 사용하지 못하도록 하였다는 이야기를 하며 불평하였다.","Abraham, however, reproached Abimelech about a well that Abimelech’s servants had seized by force.","And Abraham reproved Abimelech because of a well of water, which Abimelech's servants had violently taken away.","Then Abraham complained to Abimelech about a well of water that Abimelech's servants had  seized.","Et increpavit Abraham Abimelech propter puteum aquae, quem vi abstulerant servi eius.","והוכח אברהם את אבימלך על אדות באר המים אשר גזלו עבדי אבימלך׃"],["1","21","26","아비멜렉이 대답하였다. “누가 그런 짓을 하였는지 나는 모르오. 그대도 나에게 말해 준 적이 없지 않소? 나는 오늘까지 그런 말을 들어 보지 못하였소.”","그러자 아비멜렉은 \"누가 그런 짓을 했는지 나는 모르오. 당신도 말씀해 주신 적이 없었고 오늘날까지 그런 말을 들어본 일도 없습니다.\" 하고 대답하였다.","아비멜렉이 이르되 누가 그리하였는지 내가 알지 못하노라 너도 내게 알리지 아니하였고 나도 듣지 못하였더니 오늘에야 들었노라","아비멜렉이 가로되 누가 그리하였는지 내가 알지 못하노라 너도 내게 고하지 아니하였고 나도 듣지 못하였더니 오늘이야 들었노라","\"아, 그런 일이 있었소? 그 얘긴 내가 처음 듣는 얘기요 도대체 어느 녀석이 그런 짓을 했었는지 알 수가 없구먼. 그런 일이 있었다고 그대도 나에게 말한 적이 없지 않소? 나 역시 종들한테 그런 일이 있었던 일을 듣지 못하였소. 참으로 미안하게 생각하오. 그런 일이 앞으로는 일어나지 않도록 하겠소\"","“I have no idea who did that,” Abimelech replied. “In fact, you never told me about it, nor did I ever hear of it until now.”","And Abimelech said, I wot not who hath done this thing; neither didst thou tell me, neither yet heard I of it, but to day.","But Abimelech said, \"I don't know who has done this. You did not tell me, and I heard about  it only today.\"","Responditque Abimelech:  “Nescivi quis fecerit hanc rem; sed et tu non indicasti mihi, et ego non audivi praeter hodie “.","ויאמר אבימלך לא ידעתי מי עשה את הדבר הזה וגם אתה לא הגדת לי וגם אנכי לא שמעתי בלתי היום׃"],["1","21","27","그래서 아브라함이 소들과 양들을 데려다 아비멜렉에게 주고, 두 사람은 계약을 맺었다.","아브라함은 양과 소를 끌어다가 아비멜렉에게 주었고, 두 사람은 계약을 맺었다.","아브라함이 양과 소를 가져다가 아비멜렉에게 주고 두 사람이 서로 언약을 세우니라","아브라함이 양과 소를 취하여 아비멜렉에게 주고 두 사람이 서로 언약을 세우니라","아브라함은 양과 소 몇 마리를 끌고 와 아비멜렉에게 주었다. 두 사람은 이렇게 서로 가까이 지내자는 뜻으로 계약을 맺었다.","Then Abraham took sheep and cattle and gave them to Abimelech and the two made a covenant.","And Abraham took sheep and oxen, and gave them unto Abimelech; and both of them made a covenant.","So Abraham brought sheep and cattle and gave them to Abimelech, and the two men made a  treaty.","Tulit itaque Abraham oves et boves et dedit Abimelech; percusseruntque ambo foedus.","ויקח אברהם צאן ובקר ויתן לאבימלך ויכרתו שניהם ברית׃"],["1","21","28","아브라함이 양 떼에서 어린 암양 일곱 마리를 따로 떼어 놓자,","그리고 아브라함이 어린 암양 일곱 마리를 가려내자","아브라함이 일곱 암양 새끼를 따로 놓으니","아브라함이 일곱 암양 새끼를 따로 놓으니","또 아브라함은 자기 가축 떼에서 새끼 암양 일곱 마리를 따로 떼어 놓았다.","Abraham also set apart seven ewe lambs of the flock,","And Abraham set seven ewe lambs of the flock by themselves.","Abraham set apart seven ewe lambs from the flock,","Et statuit Abraham septem agnas gregis seorsum.","ויצב אברהם את שבע כבשת הצאן לבדהן׃"],["1","21","29","아비멜렉이 아브라함에게 물었다. “어린 암양 일곱 마리를 따로 떼어 놓은 까닭이 무엇이오?”","아비멜렉이 아브라함에게 물었다. \"어린 암양 일곱 마리를 무엇하러 따로 골라내시오?\"","아비멜렉이 아브라함에게 이르되 이 일곱 암양 새끼를 따로 놓음은 어찜이냐","아비멜렉이 아브라함에게 이르되 이 일곱 암양 새끼를 따로 놓음은 어찜이뇨","아비멜렉이 \"어쩐 일로 새끼 암양 일곱 마리를 따로 떼어놓소?\" 하고 묻자","and Abimelech asked him, “What is the purpose of these seven ewe lambs that you have set apart?”","And Abimelech said unto Abraham, What mean these seven ewe lambs which thou hast set by themselves?","and Abimelech asked Abraham, \"What is the meaning of these seven ewe lambs you have set  apart by themselves?\"","Cui dixit Abimelech:  “Quid sibi volunt septem agnae istae, quas stare fecisti seorsum? “.","ויאמר אבימלך אל אברהם מה הנה שבע כבשת האלה אשר הצבת לבדנה׃"],["1","21","30","아브라함이 대답하였다. “이 어린 암양 일곱 마리를 내 손에서 받으시고, 내가 이 우물을 팠다는 사실에 대하여 증인이 되어 달라는 것입니다.”","그는 \"이 어린 암양 일곱을 받으시고 이 우물은 내가 팠다는 것을 인정해 달라는 것이오.\" 하고 대답하였다.","아브라함이 이르되 너는 내 손에서 이 암양 새끼 일곱을 받아 내가 이 우물 판 증거를 삼으라 하고","아브라함이 가로되 너는 내 손에서 이 암양 새끼 일곱을 받아 내가 이 우물 판 증거를 삼으라 하고","아브라함이 대답하였다. \"이 암양 일곱 마리를 받아 주시오. 그리고 내가 이 우물을 판 사람이란 것을 분명히 해 주시오. 이 암양 일곱 마리는 그 사실을 분명히 하는 증거가 되는 셈이오\"","Abraham answered, “The seven ewe lambs you shall accept from me that you may be my witness that I dug this well.”","And he said, For these seven ewe lambs shalt thou take of my hand, that they may be a witness unto me, that I have digged this well.","He replied, \"Accept these seven lambs from my hand as a witness that I dug this well.\"","At ille:  “Septem, inquit, agnas accipies de manu mea, ut sint in testimonium mihi, quoniam ego fodi puteum istum “.","ויאמר כי את שבע כבשת תקח מידי בעבור תהיה לי לעדה כי חפרתי את הבאר הזאת׃"],["1","21","31","이렇게 그 두 사람이 거기에서 맹세를 했다고 하여, 그곳을 브에르 세바라 하였다.","이렇게 두 사람이 거기에서 서로 맹세했다고 해서 그 곳을 브엘세바라고 하였다.","두 사람이 거기서 서로 맹세하였으므로 그 곳을 브엘세바라 이름하였더라","두 사람이 거기서 서로 맹세하였으므로 그곳을 1)브엘세바라 이름하였더라 맹세의 우물","그래서 그곳 이름이 ㄱ) 브엘세바가 되었다. (ㄱ. \"맹세를 맺은 우물\" 또는 \"일곱 우물\"이라는 뜻이다)","This is why the place is called Beer-sheba; the two of them took an oath there.","Wherefore he called that place Beersheba; because there they sware both of them.","So that place was called Beersheba, because the two men swore an oath there.","Idcirco vocatus est locus ille Bersabee, quia ibi uterque iuraverunt.","על כן קרא למקום ההוא באר שבע כי שם נשבעו שניהם׃"],["1","21","32","그들이 이렇게 브에르 세바에서 계약을 맺은 다음, 아비멜렉과 그의 군대 장수인 피콜은 일어나 필리스티아인들의 땅으로 돌아갔다.","브엘세바에서 계약을 맺은 다음 아비멜렉은 군사령관 비골을 데리고 불레셋 땅으로 돌아갔다.","그들이 브엘세바에서 언약을 세우매 아비멜렉과 그 군대 장관 비골은 떠나 블레셋 사람의 땅으로 돌아갔고","그들이 브엘세바에서 언약을 세우매 아비멜렉과 그 군대장관 비골은 떠나 블레셋 족속의 땅으로 돌아갔고","그들이 브엘세바에서 이렇게 계약을 맺고 나서 아비멜렉과 그의 군대 사령관 비골은 블레셋 사람이 사는 땅으로 돌아갔다.","When they had thus made the covenant in Beer-sheba, Abimelech, along with Phicol, the commander of his army, left to return to the land of the Philistines.","Thus they made a covenant at Beersheba: then Abimelech rose up, and Phichol the chief captain of his host, and they returned into the land of the Philistines.","After the treaty had been made at Beersheba, Abimelech and Phicol the commander of his  forces returned to the land of the Philistines.","Et inierunt foedus in Bersabee.","ויכרתו ברית בבאר שבע ויקם אבימלך ופיכל שר צבאו וישבו אל ארץ פלשתים׃"],["1","21","33","아브라함은 브에르 세바에 에셀 나무를 심고, 그곳에서 영원한 하느님이신 주님의 이름을 받들어 불렀다.","아브라함은 브엘세바에 에셀 나무를 심고 그 곳에서 영원하신 하느님 야훼의 이름을 불러 예배하였다.","아브라함은 브엘세바에 에셀 나무를 심고 거기서 영원하신 여호와의 이름을 불렀으며","아브라함은 브엘세바에 에셀나무를 심고 거기서 영생하시는 하나님 여호와의 이름을 불렀으며","아브라함은 그곳 브엘세바에 에셀나무를 심고는 거기서 영원히 살아 계시는 하나님 여호와께 제사를 드렸다.","Abraham planted a tamarisk at Beer-sheba, and there he invoked by name the LORD, God the Eternal.","And Abraham planted a grove in Beersheba, and called there on the name of the LORD, the everlasting God.","Abraham planted a tamarisk tree in Beersheba, and there he called upon the name of the  LORD, the Eternal God.","Surrexit autem Abimelech et Phicol princeps militiae eius reversique sunt in terram Philisthim. Abraham vero plantavit nemus in Bersabee et invocavit ibi nomen Domini, Dei aeterni.","ויטע אשל בבאר שבע ויקרא שם בשם יהוה אל עולם׃"],["1","21","34","아브라함은 오랫동안 필리스티아인들의 땅에서 나그네살이하였다.","아브라함은 불레셋 땅에 오랫동안 머물렀다.","그가 블레셋 사람의 땅에서 여러 날을 지냈더라","그가 블레셋 족속의 땅에서 여러날을 지내었더라","아브라함은 한동안 블레셋 사람의 땅에서 살았다.","Abraham resided in the land of the Philistines for a long time.","And Abraham sojourned in the Philistines' land many days.","And Abraham stayed in the land of the Philistines for a long time.","Et fuit colonus in terra Philisthim diebus multis.","ויגר אברהם בארץ פלשתים ימים רבים׃"],["1","22","1","이런 일들이 있은 뒤, 하느님께서 아브라함을 시험해 보시려고 “아브라함아!” 하고 부르시자, 그가 “예, 여기 있습니다.” 하고 대답하였다.","이런 일들이 있은 뒤에 하느님께서 아브라함을 시험해 보시려고 \"아브라함아!\" 하고 부르셨다. \"어서 말씀하십시오.\" 하고 아브라함이 대답하자","그 일 후에 하나님이 아브라함을 시험하시려고 그를 부르시되 아브라함아 하시니 그가 이르되 내가 여기 있나이다","그 일 후에 하나님이 아브라함을 시험하시려고 그를 부르시되 아브라함아 하시니 그가 가로되 내가 여기 있나이다","이삭이 점점 자라나자 하나님께서는 아브라함을 시험해 보기로 하셨다. \"아브라함아\" 하고 하나님께서 아브라함을 부르셨다. \"예, 여기 있습니다\" 하고 그가 대답하였다.","Some time afterward, God put Abraham to the test and said to him: Abraham! “Here I am!” he replied.","And it came to pass after these things, that God did tempt Abraham, and said unto him, Abraham: and he said, Behold, here I am.","Some time later God tested Abraham. He said to him, \"Abraham!\" \"Here I am,\" he replied.","Quae postquam gesta sunt, tentavit Deus Abraham et di xit ad eum:  “Abraham “. Ille respondit:  “Adsum “.","ויהי אחר הדברים האלה והאלהים נסה את אברהם ויאמר אליו אברהם ויאמר הנני׃"],["1","22","2","그분께서 말씀하셨다. “너의 아들, 네가 사랑하는 외아들 이사악을 데리고 모리야 땅으로 가거라. 그곳, 내가 너에게 일러 주는 산에서 그를 나에게 번제물로 바쳐라.”","하느님께서는 이렇게 분부하셨다. \"사랑하는 네 외아들 이사악을 데리고 모리야 땅으로 가거라. 거기에서 내가 일러주는 산에 올라가, 그를 번제물로 나에게 바쳐라.\"","여호와께서 이르시되 네 아들 네 사랑하는 독자 이삭을 데리고 모리아 땅으로 가서 내가 네게 일러 준 한 산 거기서 그를 번제로 드리라","여호와께서 가라사대 네 아들 네 사랑하는 독자 이삭을 데리고 모리아 땅으로 가서 내가 네게 지시하는 한 산 거기서 그를 번제로 드리라","\"네가 무척 아끼는 외아들 이삭이 있지 않느냐? 이삭을 데리고 모리아 땅으로 가거라. 그리로 가면 내가 네게 산 하나를 일러 줄 터인데 그 산으로 올라가거라. 거기서 네 아들을 내게 번제물로 바치거라\"","Then God said: Take your son Isaac, your only one, whom you love, and go to the land of Moriah. There offer him up as a burnt offering on one of the heights that I will point out to you.","And he said, Take now thy son, thine only son Isaac, whom thou lovest, and get thee into the land of Moriah; and offer him there for a burnt offering upon one of the mountains which I will tell thee of.","Then God said, \"Take your son, your only son, Isaac, whom you love, and go to the region of  Moriah. Sacrifice him there as a burnt offering on one of the mountains I will tell you about.\"","Ait:  “Tolle filium tuum unigenitum, quem diligis, Isaac et vade in terram Moria; atque offer eum ibi in holocaustum super unum montium, quem monstravero tibi “.","ויאמר קח נא את בנך את יחידך אשר אהבת את יצחק ולך לך אל ארץ המריה והעלהו שם לעלה על אחד ההרים אשר אמר אליך׃"],["1","22","3","아브라함은 아침 일찍 일어나 나귀에 안장을 얹고 두 하인과 아들 이사악을 데리고서는, 번제물을 사를 장작을 팬 뒤 하느님께서 자기에게 말씀하신 곳으로 길을 떠났다.","아브라함은 아침 일찍 일어나 나귀에 안장을 얹고 두 종과 아들 이사악을 데리고 제물을 사를 장작을 쪼개가지고 하느님께서 일러주신 곳으로 서둘러 떠났다.","아브라함이 아침에 일찍이 일어나 나귀에 안장을 지우고 두 종과 그의 아들 이삭을 데리고 번제에 쓸 나무를 쪼개어 가지고 떠나 하나님이 자기에게 일러 주신 곳으로 가더니","아브라함이 아침에 일찌기 일어나 나귀에 안장을 지우고 두 사환과 그 아들 이삭을 데리고 번제에 쓸 나무를 쪼개어 가지고 떠나 하나님의 자기에게 지시하시는 곳으로 가더니","아브라함은 다음날 아침 일찍 나귀에 안장을 얹어 놓고 제사를 드리는 데 쓸 장작을 준비하여 아들과 두 종을 데리고 모리아 땅으로 길을 떠났다.","Early the next morning Abraham saddled his donkey, took with him two of his servants and his son Isaac, and after cutting the wood for the burnt offering, set out for the place of which God had told him.","And Abraham rose up early in the morning, and saddled his ass, and took two of his young men with him, and Isaac his son, and clave the wood for the burnt offering, and rose up, and went unto the place of which God had told him.","Early the next morning Abraham got up and saddled his donkey. He took with him two of his  servants and his son Isaac. When he had cut enough wood for the burnt offering, he set out for  the place God had told him about.","Igitur Abraham de nocte consurgens stravit asinum suum ducens secum duos iuvenes suos et Isaac filium suum. Cumque concidisset ligna in holocaustum, surrexit et abiit ad locum, quem praeceperat ei Deus.","וישכם אברהם בבקר ויחבש את חמרו ויקח את שני נעריו אתו ואת יצחק בנו ויבקע עצי עלה ויקם וילך אל המקום אשר אמר לו האלהים׃"],["1","22","4","사흘째 되는 날에 아브라함이 눈을 들자, 멀리 있는 그곳을 볼 수 있었다.","길을 떠난 지 사흘 만에 아브라함은 그 산이 멀리 바라보이는 곳에 다다랐다.","제삼일에 아브라함이 눈을 들어 그 곳을 멀리 바라본지라","제 삼일에 아브라함이 눈을 들어 그곳을 멀리 바라본지라","아브라함이 길을 떠난지 사흘 만에 하나님께서 가라고 하셨던 그 산이 멀리서 눈에 들어왔다.","On the third day Abraham caught sight of the place from a distance.","Then on the third day Abraham lifted up his eyes, and saw the place afar off.","On the third day Abraham looked up and saw the place in the distance.","Die autem tertio, elevatis oculis, vidit locum procul","ביום השלישי וישא אברהם את עיניו וירא את המקום מרחק׃"],["1","22","5","아브라함이 하인들에게 말하였다. “너희는 나귀와 함께 여기에 머물러 있어라. 나와 이 아이는 저리로 가서 경배하고 너희에게 돌아오겠다.”","아브라함은 종들에게 \"너희는 나귀와 함께 여기에 머물러 있거라. 나는 이 아이를 데리고 저리로 가서 예배 드리고 오겠다.\" 하고 나서","이에 아브라함이 종들에게 이르되 너희는 나귀와 함께 여기서 기다리라 내가 아이와 함께 저기 가서 예배하고 우리가 너희에게로 돌아오리라 하고","이에 아브라함이 사환에게 이르되 너희는 나귀와 함께 여기서 기다리라 내가 아이와 함께 저기 가서 경배하고 너희에게로 돌아오리라 하고","아브라함은 종들에게 \"너희는 여기서 나귀와 함께 잠시 기다려라. 내가 이삭과 함께 저리로 올라가서 하나님께 경배를 드리고 오마\"","Abraham said to his servants: “Stay here with the donkey, while the boy and I go on over there. We will worship and then come back to you.”","And Abraham said unto his young men, Abide ye here with the ass; and I and the lad will go yonder and worship, and come again to you.","He said to his servants, \"Stay here with the donkey while I and the boy go over there. We  will worship and then we will come back to you.\"","dixitque ad pueros suos:  “Exspectate hic cum asino. Ego et puer illuc usque properantes, postquam adoraverimus, revertemur ad vos “.","ויאמר אברהם אל נעריו שבו לכם פה עם החמור ואני והנער נלכה עד כה ונשתחוה ונשובה אליכם׃"],["1","22","6","그러고 나서 아브라함은 번제물을 사를 장작을 가져다 아들 이사악에게 지우고, 자기는 손에 불과 칼을 들었다. 그렇게 둘은 함께 걸어갔다.","번제물을 사를 장작을 아들 이사악에게 지우고 자기는 불씨와 칼을 챙겨 들었다. 그리고 둘이서 길을 떠나려고 하는데,","아브라함이 이에 번제 나무를 가져다가 그의 아들 이삭에게 지우고 자기는 불과 칼을 손에 들고 두 사람이 동행하더니","아브라함이 이에 번제 나무를 취하여 그 아들 이삭에게 지우고 자기는 불과 칼을 손에 들고 두 사람이 동행하더니","아브라함은 번제에 쓰일 장작을 이삭에게 지게 하고 자신은 칼과 번제물에 불을 붙일 불씨만 들고 함께 산으로 올라갔다.","So Abraham took the wood for the burnt offering and laid it on his son Isaac, while he himself carried the fire and the knife. As the two walked on together,","And Abraham took the wood of the burnt offering, and laid it upon Isaac his son; and he took the fire in his hand, and a knife; and they went both of them together.","Abraham took the wood for the burnt offering and placed it on his son Isaac, and he himself  carried the fire and the knife. As the two of them went on together,","Tulit quoque ligna holocausti et imposuit super Isaac filium suum; ipse vero portabat in manibus ignem et cultrum. Cumque duo pergerent simul,","ויקח אברהם את עצי העלה וישם על יצחק בנו ויקח בידו את האש ואת המאכלת וילכו שניהם יחדו׃"],["1","22","7","이사악이 아버지 아브라함에게 “아버지!” 하고 부르자, 그가 “얘야, 왜 그러느냐?” 하고 대답하였다. 이사악이 “불과 장작은 여기 있는데, 번제물로 바칠 양은 어디 있습니까?” 하고 묻자,","이사악이 아버지 아브라함을 불렀다. \"아버지!\" \"얘야! 내가 듣고 있다.\" \"아버지! 불씨도 있고 장작도 있는데, 번제물로 드릴 어린 양은 어디 있습니까?\"","이삭이 그 아버지 아브라함에게 말하여 이르되 내 아버지여 하니 그가 이르되 내 아들아 내가 여기 있노라 이삭이 이르되 불과 나무는 있거니와 번제할 어린 양은 어디 있나이까","이삭이 그 아비 아브라함에게 말하여 가로되 내 아버지여 하니 그가 가로되 내 아들아 내가 여기 있노라 이삭이 가로되 불과 나무는 있거니와 번제할 어린 양은 어디 있나이까","올라가는 도중에 이삭은 아버지 아브라함에게 여쭈었다. \"아버지! 아버지께서는 지금 손에 희생제물을 잡을 칼하고 불씨만 들고 가시지 않아요? 그런데 제물로 바칠 짐승은 어디 있지요?\"","Isaac spoke to his father Abraham. “Father!” he said. “Here I am,” he replied. Isaac continued, “Here are the fire and the wood, but where is the sheep for the burnt offering?”","And Isaac spake unto Abraham his father, and said, My father: and he said, Here am I, my son. And he said, Behold the fire and the wood: but where is the lamb for a burnt offering?","Isaac spoke up and said to his father Abraham, \"Father?\" \"Yes, my son?\" Abraham replied.  \"The fire and wood are here,\" Isaac said, \"but where is the lamb for the burnt offering?\"","dixit Isaac Abrahae patri suo:  “Pater mi “. Ille respondit:  “Quid vis, fili? “.  “Ecce, inquit, ignis et ligna; ubi est victima holocausti? “.","ויאמר יצחק אל אברהם אביו ויאמר אבי ויאמר הנני בני ויאמר הנה האש והעצים ואיה השה לעלה׃"],["1","22","8","아브라함이 “얘야, 번제물로 바칠 양은 하느님께서 손수 마련하실 거란다.” 하고 대답하였다. 둘은 계속 함께 걸어갔다.","\"얘야! 번제물로 드릴 어린 양은 하느님께서 손수 마련하신단다.\" 말을 마치고 두 사람은 함께 길을 떠나,","아브라함이 이르되 내 아들아 번제할 어린 양은 하나님이 자기를 위하여 친히 준비하시리라 하고 두 사람이 함께 나아가서","아브라함이 가로되 아들아 번제할 어린 양은 하나님이 자기를 위하여 친히 준비하시리라 하고 두 사람이 함께 나아가서","아브라함이 대답하였다 \"응, 걱정 말아라. 하나님께서 마련해 주실 것이다.\" 두 사람은 이런 얘기를 주고 받으면서 계속해서 산으로 올라갔다.","“My son,” Abraham answered, “God will provide the sheep for the burnt offering.” Then the two walked on together.","And Abraham said, My son, God will provide himself a lamb for a burnt offering: so they went both of them together.","Abraham answered, \"God himself will provide the lamb for the burnt offering, my son.\" And  the two of them went on together.","Dixit Abraham:  “Deus providebit sibi victimam holocausti, fili mi “. Pergebant ambo pariter;","ויאמר אברהם אלהים יראה לו השה לעלה בני וילכו שניהם יחדו׃"],["1","22","9","그들이 하느님께서 아브라함에게 말씀하신 곳에 다다르자, 아브라함은 그곳에 제단을 쌓고 장작을 얹어 놓았다. 그러고 나서 아들 이사악을 묶어 제단 장작 위에 올려놓았다.","하느님께서 일러주신 곳에 이르렀다. 아브라함은 거기에 제단을 쌓고 장작을 얹어놓은 다음, 아들 이사악을 묶어 제단 장작더미 위에 올려놓았다.","하나님이 그에게 일러 주신 곳에 이른지라 이에 아브라함이 그 곳에 제단을 쌓고 나무를 벌여 놓고 그의 아들 이삭을 결박하여 제단 나무 위에 놓고","하나님이 그에게 지시하신 곳에 이른지라 이에 아브라함이 그곳에 단을 쌓고 나무를 벌여놓고 그 아들 이삭을 결박하여 단 나무 위에 놓고","이제 두 사람은 하나님께서 가라고 한 곳까지 다다랐다. 아브라함은 거기에다 제단을 쌓아 올리고 그 제단 위에 장작을 포개 놓았다. 그러고 나서 아들 이삭을 꽁꽁 묶어서는 제단 위에 차곡차곡 쌓아 놓은 장작더미 위에 올려놓았다.","When they came to the place of which God had told him, Abraham built an altar there and arranged the wood on it. Next he bound his son Isaac, and put him on top of the wood on the altar.","And they came to the place which God had told him of; and Abraham built an altar there, and laid the wood in order, and bound Isaac his son, and laid him on the altar upon the wood.","When they reached the place God had told him about, Abraham built an altar there and  arranged the wood on it. He bound his son Isaac and laid him on the altar, on top of the wood.","et venerunt ad locum, quem ostenderat ei Deus, in quo aedificavit Abraham altare et desuper ligna composuit. Cumque colligasset Isaac filium suum, posuit eum in altari super struem lignorum","ויבאו אל המקום אשר אמר לו האלהים ויבן שם אברהם את המזבח ויערך את העצים ויעקד את יצחק בנו וישם אתו על המזבח ממעל לעצים׃"],["1","22","10","아브라함이 손을 뻗쳐 칼을 잡고 자기 아들을 죽이려 하였다.","아브라함이 손에 칼을 잡고 아들을 막 찌르려고 할 때,","손을 내밀어 칼을 잡고 그 아들을 잡으려 하니","손을 내밀어 칼을 잡고 그 아들을 잡으려 하더니","그리고 칼을 들어 아들을 제물로 잡으려고 하는 순간","Then Abraham reached out and took the knife to slaughter his son.","And Abraham stretched forth his hand, and took the knife to slay his son.","Then he reached out his hand and took the knife to slay his son.","extenditque Abraham manum et arripuit cultrum, ut immolaret filium suum.","וישלח אברהם את ידו ויקח את המאכלת לשחט את בנו׃"],["1","22","11","그때, 주님의 천사가 하늘에서 “아브라함아, 아브라함아!” 하고 그를 불렀다. 그가 “예, 여기 있습니다.” 하고 대답하자","야훼의 천사가 하늘에서 큰소리로 불렀다. \"아브라함아, 아브라함아!\" \"어서 말씀하십시오.\" 아브라함이 대답하자 야훼의 천사가 이렇게 말하였다.","여호와의 사자가 하늘에서부터 그를 불러 이르시되 아브라함아 아브라함아 하시는지라 아브라함이 이르되 내가 여기 있나이다 하매","여호와의 사자가 하늘에서부터 그를 불러 가라사대 아브라함아 아브라함아 하시는지라 아브라함이 가로되 내가 여기 있나이다 하매","\"아브라함아, 아브라함아\" 하는 소리가 하늘에서 들려 왔다. 하나님의 심부름꾼이 아브라함을 급히 부르는 것이었다. \"예, 듣고 있습니다.\" 하고 아브라함이 대답하였다.","But the angel of the LORD called to him from heaven, “Abraham, Abraham!” “Here I am,” he answered.","And the angel of the LORD called unto him out of heaven, and said, Abraham, Abraham: and he said, Here am I.","But the angel of the LORD called out to him from heaven, \"Abraham! Abraham!\" \"Here I am,\"  he replied.","Et ecce angelus Domini de caelo clamavit:  “Abraham, Abraham “. Qui respondit:  “Adsum “.","ויקרא אליו מלאך יהוה מן השמים ויאמר אברהם אברהם ויאמר הנני׃"],["1","22","12","천사가 말하였다. “그 아이에게 손대지 마라. 그에게 아무 해도 입히지 마라. 네가 너의 아들, 너의 외아들까지 나를 위하여 아끼지 않았으니, 네가 하느님을 경외하는 줄을 이제 내가 알았다.”","\"그 아이에게 손을 대지 말아라. 머리털 하나라도 상하게 하지 말아라. 나는 네가 얼마나 나를 공경하는지 알았다. 너는 하나밖에 없는 아들마저도 서슴지 않고 나에게 바쳤다.\"","사자가 이르시되 그 아이에게 네 손을 대지 말라 그에게 아무 일도 하지 말라 네가 네 아들 네 독자까지도 내게 아끼지 아니하였으니 내가 이제야 네가 하나님을 경외하는 줄을 아노라","사자가 가라사대 그 아이에게 네 손을 대지 말라 아무 일도 그에게 하지 말라 네가 네 아들 네 독자라도 내게 아끼지 아니하였으니 내가 이제야 네가 하나님을 경외하는 줄을 아노라","\"멈추어라. 그 아이에게 손을 대지 말아라. 그 아이에게 어떤 짓도 해서는 안 된다. 이제 내가 분명히 알았다. 네가 그렇게도 아끼는 외아들까지도 주저하지 않고 내게 바치는 걸 보니 네가 얼마만큼 나 하나님을 생각하고 있는지, 또 네가 얼마나 나를 신뢰하고 섬기는지 내가 잘 알게 되었다.\"","“Do not lay your hand on the boy,” said the angel. “Do not do the least thing to him. For now I know that you fear God, since you did not withhold from me your son, your only one.”","And he said, Lay not thine hand upon the lad, neither do thou any thing unto him: for now I know that thou fearest God, seeing thou hast not withheld thy son, thine only son from me.","\"Do not lay a hand on the boy,\" he said. \"Do not do anything to him. Now I know that you  fear God, because you have not withheld from me your son, your only son.\"","Dixitque:  “Non extendas manum tuam super puerum neque facias illi quidquam. Nunc cognovi quod times Deum et non pepercisti filio tuo unigenito propter me “.","ויאמר אל תשלח ידך אל הנער ואל תעש לו מאומה כי עתה ידעתי כי ירא אלהים אתה ולא חשכת את בנך את יחידך ממני׃"],["1","22","13","아브라함이 눈을 들어 보니, 덤불에 뿔이 걸린 숫양 한 마리가 있었다. 아브라함은 가서 그 숫양을 끌어와 아들 대신 번제물로 바쳤다.","아브라함이 이 말을 듣고 고개를 들어보니 뿔이 덤불에 걸려 허우적거리는 숫양 한 마리가 눈에 띄었다. 아브라함은 곧 가서 그 숫양을 잡아 아들 대신 번제물로 드렸다.","아브라함이 눈을 들어 살펴본즉 한 숫양이 뒤에 있는데 뿔이 수풀에 걸려 있는지라 아브라함이 가서 그 숫양을 가져다가 아들을 대신하여 번제로 드렸더라","아브라함이 눈을 들어 살펴본즉 한 수양이 뒤에 있는데 뿔이 수풀에 걸렸는지라 아브라함이 가서 그 수양을 가져다가 아들을 대신하여 번제로 드렸더라","아브라함은 주위를 둘러보았다. 아, 그런데 숫양 한 마리가 가시덤불에 뿔이 걸려 꼼짝달싹도 하지 못하고 있는 게 아닌가! 아브라함은 그곳으로 가서 숫양을 끌고 와서는 이삭 대신에 그 숫양을 번제물로 잡아 드렸다.","Abraham looked up and saw a single ram caught by its horns in the thicket. So Abraham went and took the ram and offered it up as a burnt offering in place of his son.","And Abraham lifted up his eyes, and looked, and behold behind him a ram caught in a thicket by his horns: and Abraham went and took the ram, and offered him up for a burnt offering in the stead of his son.","Abraham looked up and there in a thicket he saw a ram caught by its horns. He went over and  took the ram and sacrificed it as a burnt offering instead of his son.","Levavit Abraham oculos suos viditque arietem unum inter vepres haerentem cornibus; quem assumens obtulit holocaustum pro filio.","וישא אברהם את עיניו וירא והנה איל אחר נאחז בסבך בקרניו וילך אברהם ויקח את האיל ויעלהו לעלה תחת בנו׃"],["1","22","14","아브라함은 그곳의 이름을 ‘야훼 이레’라 하였다. 그래서 오늘도 사람들은 ‘주님의 산에서 마련된다.’고들 한다.","아브라함은 그 곳을 야훼 이레라고 이름 붙였다. 그래서 오늘도 사람들은 \"1)야훼께서 이 산에서 마련해 주신다.\" 하고 말한다. 칠십인역을 따랐다. 히브리어 본문은 \"야훼의 산에 장만되어 있다.\" 혹은 \"야훼의 산에서 그가 나타나신다.\"라고 번역할 수 있다.","아브라함이 그 땅 이름을 여호와 이레라 하였으므로 오늘날까지 사람들이 이르기를 여호와의 산에서 준비되리라 하더라","아브라함이 그 땅 이름을 1)여호와이레라 하였으므로 오늘까지 사람들이 이르기를 여호와의 산에서 준비되리라 하더라 여호와께서 준비하심","그래서 아브라함은 \"여호와께서 미리 준비해 주신다\"는 뜻으로 그곳 이름을 여호와이레라고 하였다. 이러한 까닭에 사람들은 오늘날까지도 \"여호와께서는 여호와의 산에서 모든 것을 미리 준비해 주신다\"고 말하게 되었다.","Abraham named that place Yahweh-yireh; hence people today say, “On the mountain the LORD will provide.”","And Abraham called the name of that place Jehovahjireh: as it is said to this day, In the mount of the LORD it shall be seen.","So Abraham called that place The LORD Will Provide. And to this day it is said, \"On the  mountain of the LORD it will be provided.\"","Appellavitque nomen loci illius:  “Dominus videt “. Unde usque hodie dicitur:  “In monte Dominus videtur “.","ויקרא אברהם שם המקום ההוא יהוה יראה אשר יאמר היום בהר יהוה יראה׃"],["1","22","15","주님의 천사가 하늘에서 두 번째로 아브라함을 불러","야훼의 천사가 또다시 큰소리로 아브라함에게 말하였다.","여호와의 사자가 하늘에서부터 두 번째 아브라함을 불러","여호와의 사자가 하늘에서부터 두번째 아브라함을 불러","여호와의 심부름꾼이 두번째로 하늘에서 아브라함에게 이르셨다.","A second time the angel of the LORD called to Abraham from heaven","And the angel of the LORD called unto Abraham out of heaven the second time,","The angel of the LORD called to Abraham from heaven a second time","Vocavit autem angelus Domini Abraham secundo de caelo et dixit:","ויקרא מלאך יהוה אל אברהם שנית מן השמים׃"],["1","22","16","말하였다. “나는 나 자신을 걸고 맹세한다. 주님의 말씀이다. 네가 이 일을 하였으니, 곧 너의 아들, 너의 외아들까지 아끼지 않았으니,","\"네가 네 아들, 네 외아들마저 서슴지 않고 바쳐 충성을 다하였으니, 나는 나의 이름을 걸고 맹세한다. 이는 내 말이라, 어김이 없다.","이르시되 여호와께서 이르시기를 내가 나를 가리켜 맹세하노니 네가 이같이 행하여 네 아들 네 독자도 아끼지 아니하였은즉","가라사대 여호와께서 이르시기를 내가 나를 가리켜 맹세하노니 네가 이같이 행하여 네 아들 네 독자를 아끼지 아니하였은즉","\"나 여호와가 말한다. 내가 이렇게 버젓이 살아 있다는 사실을 두고 분명히 맹세하노라. 네가 그토록 애지중지하는 외아들까지도 아끼지 않고 내게 바쳤으니","and said: “I swear by my very self—oracle of the LORD—that because you acted as you did in not withholding from me your son, your only one,","And said, By myself have I sworn, saith the LORD, for because thou hast done this thing, and hast not withheld thy son, thine only son:","and said, \"I swear by myself, declares the LORD, that because you have done this and have  not withheld your son, your only son,","Per memetipsum iuravi, dicit Dominus: quia fecisti hanc rem et non pepercisti filio tuo unigenito,","ויאמר בי נשבעתי נאם יהוה כי יען אשר עשית את הדבר הזה ולא חשכת את בנך את יחידך׃"],["1","22","17","나는 너에게 한껏 복을 내리고, 네 후손이 하늘의 별처럼, 바닷가의 모래처럼 한껏 번성하게 해 주겠다. 너의 후손은 원수들의 성문을 차지할 것이다.","나는 너에게 더욱 복을 주어 네 자손이 하늘의 별과 바닷가의 모래같이 불어나게 하리라. 네 후손은 원수의 성문을 부수고 그 성을 점령할 것이다.","내가 네게 큰 복을 주고 네 씨가 크게 번성하여 하늘의 별과 같고 바닷가의 모래와 같게 하리니 네 씨가 그 대적의 성문을 차지하리라","내가 네게 큰 복을 주고 네 씨로 크게 성하여 하늘의 별과 같고 바닷가의 모래와 같게 하리니 네 씨가 그 대적의 문을 얻으리라","내가 네게 복을 내리리라. 한없이 복을 내리리라. 내가 분명하게 약속한다만 네 후손이 하늘에서 총총히 빛내는 별처럼 엄청나게 불어나게 하리라. 네 후손이 바닷가의 모래알처럼 많아지리라. 네 후손들이 그 원수들을 쳐부수고 원수들의 성을 정복해 버리리라.","I will bless you and make your descendants as countless as the stars of the sky and the sands of the seashore; your descendants will take possession of the gates of their enemies,","That in blessing I will bless thee, and in multiplying I will multiply thy seed as the stars of the heaven, and as the sand which is upon the sea shore; and thy seed shall possess the gate of his enemies;","I will surely bless you and make your descendants as numerous as the stars in the sky and  as the sand on the seashore. Your descendants will take possession of the cities of their  enemies,","benedicam tibi et multiplicabo semen tuum sicut stellas caeli et velut arenam, quae est in litore maris. Possidebit semen tuum portas inimicorum suorum,","כי ברך אברכך והרבה ארבה את זרעך ככוכבי השמים וכחול אשר על שפת הים וירש זרעך את שער איביו׃"],["1","22","18","네가 나에게 순종하였으니, 세상의 모든 민족들이 너의 후손을 통하여 복을 받을 것이다.”","네가 이렇게 내 말을 들었기 때문에 세상 만민이 네 후손의 덕을 입을 것이다.\"","또 네 씨로 말미암아 천하 만민이 복을 받으리니 이는 네가 나의 말을 준행하였음이니라 하셨다 하니라","또 네 씨로 말미암아 천하 만민이 복을 얻으리니 이는 네가 나의 말을 준행하였음이니라 하셨다 하니라","또한 네 후손으로 말미암아 세상의 뭇백성들이 복을 받으리라. 이는 네가 내 말을 잘 따랐기 때문이다.\"","and in your descendants all the nations of the earth will find blessing, because you obeyed my command.”","And in thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed; because thou hast obeyed my voice.","and through your offspring all nations on earth will be blessed, because you have obeyed  me.\"","et benedicentur in semine tuo omnes gentes terrae, quia oboedisti voci meae “.","והתברכו בזרעך כל גויי הארץ עקב אשר שמעת בקלי׃"],["1","22","19","아브라함은 하인들에게 돌아왔다. 그들은 함께 브에르 세바를 향하여 길을 떠났다. 그리하여 아브라함은 브에르 세바에서 살았다.","아브라함은 종들이 있는 곳으로 돌아와서 그들을 데리고 걸음을 재촉하여 브엘세바로 돌아갔다. 아브라함은 브엘세바에 눌러 살았다.","이에 아브라함이 그의 종들에게로 돌아가서 함께 떠나 브엘세바에 이르러 거기 거주하였더라","이에 아브라함이 그 사환에게로 돌아와서 함께 떠나 브엘세바에 이르러 거기 거하였더라","아브라함은 자기 종들이 기다리고 있는 곳으로 돌아와서 함께 브엘세바로 돌아갔다. 아브라함은 브엘세바에서 살았다.","Abraham then returned to his servants, and they set out together for Beer-sheba, where Abraham lived.","So Abraham returned unto his young men, and they rose up and went together to Beersheba; and Abraham dwelt at Beersheba.","Then Abraham returned to his servants, and they set off together for Beersheba. And Abraham  stayed in Beersheba.","Reversus est Abraham ad pueros suos, et surrexerunt abieruntque Bersabee simul, et habitavit Abraham in Bersabee.","וישב אברהם אל נעריו ויקמו וילכו יחדו אל באר שבע וישב אברהם בבאר שבע׃"],["1","22","20","이런 일들이 있은 뒤, 밀카도 아브라함의 아우 나호르에게 아들들을 낳아 주었다는 소식이 아브라함에게 전해졌다.","이런 일이 있은 지 얼마 뒤에 아브라함은 아우 나홀의 아내 밀가에게서 자식이 태어났다는 소식을 전해 듣게 되었다.","이 일 후에 어떤 사람이 아브라함에게 알리어 이르기를 밀가가 당신의 형제 나홀에게 자녀를 낳았다 하였더라","이 일 후에 혹이 아브라함에게 고하여 이르기를 밀가가 그대의 동생 나홀에게 자녀를 낳았다 하였더라","이런 일이 있은 뒤 아브라함은 밀가가 자기의 아우 나홀에게 여러 아들을 낳아 주었다는 소식을 전해 들었다.","Some time afterward, the news came to Abraham: “Milcah too has borne sons to your brother Nahor:","And it came to pass after these things, that it was told Abraham, saying, Behold, Milcah, she hath also born children unto thy brother Nahor;","Some time later Abraham was told, \"Milcah is also a mother; she has borne sons to your  brother Nahor:","His ita gestis, nuntiatum est Abrahae quod Melcha quoque genuisset filios Nachor fratri suo:","ויהי אחרי הדברים האלה ויגד לאברהם לאמר הנה ילדה מלכה גם הוא בנים לנחור אחיך׃"],["1","22","21","곧 맏아들 우츠, 그의 아우 부즈, 아람의 아버지인 크무엘,","그들의 이름은 아래와 같다. 맏아들 우스, 그 밑에 부즈와 크무엘이 있었는데, 크무엘은 아람의 아버지다.","그의 맏아들은 우스요 우스의 형제는 부스와 아람의 아버지 그므엘과","그 맏아들은 우스요 우스의 동생은 부스와 아람의 아비 그므엘과","나홀의 맏아들은 우스이고 우스의 아우들은 부스와 또 나중에 아람의 아버지가 된 그므엘,","Uz, his firstborn, his brother Buz, Kemuel the father of Aram,","Huz his firstborn, and Buz his brother, and Kemuel the father of Aram,","Uz the firstborn, Buz his brother, Kemuel (the father of Aram),","Us primogenitum et Buz fratrem eius et Camuel patrem Aram","את עוץ בכרו ואת בוז אחיו ואת קמואל אבי ארם׃"],["1","22","22","그리고 케셋, 하조, 필다스, 이들랍, 브투엘이다.","또 케셋, 하조, 빌다스, 이들랍, 브두엘이 있었는데","게셋과 하소와 빌다스와 이들랍과 브두엘이라","게셋과 하소와 빌다스와 이들랍과 브두엘이라","게셋, 하소, 빌다스, 이들랍, 브두엘이다.","Chesed, Hazo, Pildash, Jidlaph, and Bethuel.”","And Chesed, and Hazo, and Pildash, and Jidlaph, and Bethuel.","Kesed, Hazo, Pildash, Jidlaph and Bethuel.\"","et Cased et Azau, Pheldas quoque et Iedlaph","ואת כשד ואת חזו ואת פלדש ואת ידלף ואת בתואל׃"],["1","22","23","이 브투엘이 레베카를 낳았다. 이 여덟을 밀카가 아브라함의 아우 나호르에게 낳아 주었다.","브두엘에게서 리브가가 태어났다. 이렇게 밀가가 아브라함의 아우 나홀에게 낳아준 아들은 모두 여덟이었다.","이 여덟 사람은 아브라함의 형제 나홀의 아내 밀가의 소생이며 브두엘은 리브가를 낳았고","이 여덟 사람은 아브라함의 동생 나홀의 처 밀가의 소생이며 브두엘은 리브가를 낳았고","브두엘은 나중에 리브가를 낳았다. 이 여덟이 다 아브라함의 아우인 나홀의 아내 밀가에게서 난 아들들이다.","Bethuel became the father of Rebekah. These eight Milcah bore to Nahor, Abraham’s brother.","And Bethuel begat Rebekah: these eight Milcah did bear to Nahor, Abraham's brother.","Bethuel became the father of Rebekah. Milcah bore these eight sons to Abraham's brother  Nahor.","ac Bathuel, de quo nata est Rebecca. Octo istos genuit Melcha Nachor fratri Abrahae.","ובתואל ילד את רבקה שמנה אלה ילדה מלכה לנחור אחי אברהם׃"],["1","22","24","나호르에게는 르우마라는 이름을 가진 소실이 있었는데, 그도 테바, 가함, 타하스, 마아카를 낳았다.","나홀에게는 르우마라는 소실이 있었는데, 그에게서 테바, 가함, 다하스, 마아가가 태어났다.","나홀의 첩 르우마라 하는 자도 데바와 가함과 다하스와 마아가를 낳았더라","나홀의 첩 르우마라 하는 자도 데바와 가함과 다하스와 마아가를 낳았더라","또 나홀에게는 르우마라고 하는 소실이 있었는데, 그 여인은 데바와 가함과 다하스와 마아가, 이렇게 네 아들을 낳았다.","His concubine, whose name was Reumah, also bore children: Tebah, Gaham, Tahash, and Maacah.","And his concubine, whose name was Reumah, she bare also Tebah, and Gaham, and Thahash, and Maachah.","His concubine, whose name was Reumah, also had sons: Tebah, Gaham, Tahash and Maacah.","Concubina vero illius, nomine Reuma, peperit Tabee et Gaham et Tahas et Maacha.","ופילגשו ושמה ראומה ותלד גם הוא את טבח ואת גחם ואת תחש ואת מעכה׃"],["1","23","1","사라는 백이십칠 년을 살았다. 이것이 사라가 산 햇수이다.","사라는 백이십칠 년을 살고","사라가 백이십칠 세를 살았으니 이것이 곧 사라가 누린 햇수라","사라가 일백 이십 칠세를 살았으니 이것이 곧 사라의 향년이라","사라는 127세까지 살다가","The span of Sarah’s life was one hundred and twenty-seven years.","And Sarah was an hundred and seven and twenty years old: these were the years of the life of Sarah.","Sarah lived to be a hundred and twenty-seven years old.","Vixit autem Sara centum viginti septem annis","ויהיו חיי שרה מאה שנה ועשרים שנה ושבע שנים שני חיי שרה׃"],["1","23","2","사라는 가나안 땅 키르얏 아르바 곧 헤브론에서 죽었다. 아브라함은 빈소에 들어가 사라의 죽음을 애도하며 슬피 울었다.","키럇아르바라고도 하는 헤브론 땅에서 죽었다. 아브라함은 빈소에 들어가 가슴을 치며 슬피 울었다.","사라가 가나안 땅 헤브론 곧 기럇아르바에서 죽으매 아브라함이 들어가서 사라를 위하여 슬퍼하며 애통하다가","사라가 가나안 땅 헤브론 곧 기럇아르바에서 죽으매 아브라함이 들어가서 사라를 위하여 슬퍼하며 애통하다가","가나안 땅의 헤브론이라고도 부르는 기럇아르바에서 세상을 떠났다. 아브라함은 가슴이 미어지는 듯하여 어찌할 줄 몰랐다. 그는 슬픔을 이기지 못하고 한없이 울었다.","She died in Kiriath-arba—now Hebron—in the land of Canaan, and Abraham proceeded to mourn and weep for her.","And Sarah died in Kirjatharba; the same is Hebron in the land of Canaan: and Abraham came to mourn for Sarah, and to weep for her.","She died at Kiriath Arba (that is, Hebron) in the land of Canaan, and Abraham went to mourn  for Sarah and to weep over her.","et mortua est in Cariatharbe, quae est Hebron, in terra Chanaan; venitque Abraham, ut plangeret et fleret eam.","ותמת שרה בקרית ארבע הוא חברון בארץ כנען ויבא אברהם לספד לשרה ולבכתה׃"],["1","23","3","그런 다음 아브라함은 죽은 아내 앞에서 물러 나와 히타이트 사람들에게 가서 말하였다.","아브라함은 시신 앞에서 물러나 헷 사람들에게 가서 청하였다.","그 시신 앞에서 일어나 나가서 헷 족속에게 말하여 이르되","그 시체 앞에서 일어나 나가서 헷 족속에게 말하여 가로되","그렇게 아내의 시신 옆에서 울다가 헷 사람들을 찾아갔다. 그리고 이렇게 말하였다.","Then he left the side of his deceased wife and addressed the Hittites:","And Abraham stood up from before his dead, and spake unto the sons of Heth, saying,","Then Abraham rose from beside his dead wife and spoke to the Hittites. He said,","Cumque surrexisset ab officio funeris, locutus est ad filios Heth dicens:","ויקם אברהם מעל פני מתו וידבר אל בני חת לאמר׃"],["1","23","4","“나는 이방인이며 거류민으로 여러분 곁에 살고 있습니다. 죽은 내 아내를 내어다 안장할 수 있게, 여러분 곁에 있는 묘지를 양도해 주십시오.”","\"나는 당신들한테 몸붙여 사는 나그네에 지나지 않으나, 내 아내를 안장하게 무덤으로 쓸 땅을 좀 나누어주십시오.\"","나는 당신들 중에 나그네요 거류하는 자이니 당신들 중에서 내게 매장할 소유지를 주어 내가 나의 죽은 자를 내 앞에서 내어다가 장사하게 하시오","나는 당신들 중에 나그네요 우거한 자니 청컨대 당신들 중에서 내게 매장지를 주어 소유를 삼아 나로 내 죽은 자를 내어 장사하게 하시오","\"당신들도 잘 아시다시피 나는 당신들 틈에 끼여 사는 나그네이지 않소? 그러니 내게 땅을 좀 파시오. 그래야 세상을 뜬 내 아내를 그 땅에 장사지낼 수 있지 않겠소?\"","“Although I am a resident alien among you, sell me from your holdings a burial place, that I may bury my deceased wife.”","I am a stranger and a sojourner with you: give me a possession of a buryingplace with you, that I may bury my dead out of my sight.","\"I am an alien and a stranger among you. Sell me some property for a burial site here so I  can bury my dead.\"","Advena sum et inquilinus apud vos; date mihi possessionem sepulcri vobiscum, ut sepeliam mortuum meum.","גר ותושב אנכי עמכם תנו לי אחזת קבר עמכם ואקברה מתי מלפני׃"],["1","23","5","그러자 히타이트 사람들이 아브라함에게 대답하였다.","헷 사람들은 아브라함의 청을 받아들이며 이렇게 대답하였다.","헷 족속이 아브라함에게 대답하여 이르되","헷 족속이 아브라함에게 대답하여 가로되","그러자 헷 사람들이 아브라함에게 대답하였다.","The Hittites answered Abraham: “Please,","And the children of Heth answered Abraham, saying unto him,","The Hittites replied to Abraham,","Responderunt filii Heth dicentes:","ויענו בני חת את אברהם לאמר לו׃"],["1","23","6","“나리, 들으십시오. 나리는 우리에게 하느님의 제후이십니다. 우리 무덤 가운데에서 가장 좋은 것을 골라 고인을 안장하십시오. 나리께서 고인을 모시겠다는데, 그것이 자기 무덤이라고 해서 나리께 거절할 사람이 우리 가운데는 없습니다.”","\"영감님, 들으십시오. 영감님은 우리 가운데서 세력 있는 귀인입니다. 그러니 우리 묘지 가운데서 가장 좋은 곳을 골라 부인을 모시십시오. 영감님이 부인의 묘지로 쓰시겠다는데 거절할 사람이 어디 있겠습니까?\"","내 주여 들으소서 당신은 우리 가운데 있는 하나님이 세우신 지도자이시니 우리 묘실 중에서 좋은 것을 택하여 당신의 죽은 자를 장사하소서 우리 중에서 자기 묘실에 당신의 죽은 자 장사함을 금할 자가 없으리이다","내 주여 들으소서 당신은 우리 중 하나님의 방백이시니 우리 묘실 중에서 좋은 것을 택하여 당신의 죽은 자를 장사하소서 우리 중에서 자기 묘실에 당신의 죽은 자 장사함을 금할 자가 없으리이다","\"어르신, 우리는 하나님께서 이토록 엄청난 힘과 재산을 주신 분으로 어르신을 존경하였습니다. 그러니 우리가 가지고 있는 묘실 가운데에서 가장 좋은 묘실을 골라서 어르신의 부인을 장사 지내십시오. 우리 가운데 그 누가 어르신에게 묘실을 드리는 것을 마다하겠습니까? 아무 걱정 마시고 장사지내십시오\"","sir, listen to us! You are a mighty leader among us. Bury your dead in the choicest of our burial sites. None of us would deny you his burial ground for the burial of your dead.”","Hear us, my lord: thou art a mighty prince among us: in the choice of our sepulchres bury thy dead; none of us shall withhold from thee his sepulchre, but that thou mayest bury thy dead.","\"Sir, listen to us. You are a mighty prince among us. Bury your dead in the choicest of our  tombs. None of us will refuse you his tomb for burying your dead.\"","Audi nos, domine, princeps Dei es apud nos: in nobilissimo sepulcrorum nostrorum sepeli mortuum tuum; nullusque te prohibebit, quin in sepulcro eius sepelias mortuum tuum.","שמענו אדני נשיא אלהים אתה בתוכנו במבחר קברינו קבר את מתך איש ממנו את קברו לא יכלה ממך מקבר מתך׃"],["1","23","7","아브라함은 일어나 그곳 주민들 곧 히타이트 사람들에게 큰절을 하고,","아브라함은 일어나 그 땅에 사는 헷 사람들에게 절하며","아브라함이 일어나 그 땅 주민 헷 족속을 향하여 몸을 굽히고","아브라함이 일어나 그 땅 거민 헷 족속을 향하여 몸을 굽히고","그러자 아브라함은 그 땅에 살고 있는 헷 사람들에게 허리를 굽혀 절한 뒤 이렇게","Abraham, however, proceeded to bow low before the people of the land, the Hittites,","And Abraham stood up, and bowed himself to the people of the land, even to the children of Heth.","Then Abraham rose and bowed down before the people of the land, the Hittites.","Surrexit Abraham et adoravit populum terrae, filios videlicet Heth,","ויקם אברהם וישתחו לעם הארץ לבני חת׃"],["1","23","8","그들에게 말하였다. “내가 죽은 내 아내를 내어다 안장할 수 있게 기꺼이 허락해 주신다면, 내 말을 듣고 초하르의 아들 에프론에게 간청하여,","말하였다. \"내 아내를 안장하도록 허락해 주시니 하나 더 청을 올리겠습니다. 소할의 아들 에브론에게 말해","그들에게 말하여 이르되 나로 나의 죽은 자를 내 앞에서 내어다가 장사하게 하는 일이 당신들의 뜻일진대 내 말을 듣고 나를 위하여 소할의 아들 에브론에게 구하여","그들에게 말하여 가로되 나로 나의 죽은 자를 내어 장사하게 하는 일이 당신들의 뜻일찐대 내 말을 듣고 나를 위하여 소할의 아들 에브론에게 구하여","말하였다. \"그대들이 이 땅에 내 아내를 장사지내게 해주니 정말 고맙기 그지없소 그러면 소할의 아들 에브론에게 말을 좀 전해 주시오.","and said to them: “If you will allow me room for burial of my dead, listen to me! Intercede for me with Ephron, son of Zohar,","And he communed with them, saying, If it be your mind that I should bury my dead out of my sight; hear me, and intreat for me to Ephron the son of Zohar,","He said to them, \"If you are willing to let me bury my dead, then listen to me and intercede  with Ephron son of Zohar on my behalf","dixitque ad eos:  “Si placet animae vestrae, ut sepeliam mortuum meum, audite me et intercedite pro me apud Ephron filium Seor,","וידבר אתם לאמר אם יש את נפשכם לקבר את מתי מלפני שמעוני ופגעו לי בעפרון בן צחר׃"],["1","23","9","그가 자기의 밭머리에 있는 막펠라 동굴을 나에게 양도하게 해 주십시오. 값은 드릴 만큼 다 드릴 터이니, 여러분 앞에서 그것을 나에게 묘지로 양도하게 해 주십시오.”","그의 밭머리에 있는 막벨라 동굴을 나에게 양도하도록 해주십시오. 값은 드릴 만큼 다 드릴 터이니 당신들 앞에서 그것을 내 묘지로 삼게 해주십시오.\"","그가 그의 밭머리에 있는 그의 막벨라 굴을 내게 주도록 하되 충분한 대가를 받고 그 굴을 내게 주어 당신들 중에서 매장할 소유지가 되게 하기를 원하노라 하매","그로 그 밭머리에 있는 막벨라 굴을 내게 주게 하되 준가를 받고 그 굴을 내게 주어서 당신들 중에 내 소유 매장지가 되게하기를 원하노라","내 아내를 장사 지낼 수 있도록 그의 밭 어귀에 있는 막벨라굴을 나에게 팔라고 말이오. 물론 그 땅값은 충분히 치르겠소.\"","so that he will sell me the cave of Machpelah that he owns; it is at the edge of his field. Let him sell it to me in your presence at its full price for a burial place.”","That he may give me the cave of Machpelah, which he hath, which is in the end of his field; for as much money as it is worth he shall give it me for a possession of a buryingplace amongst you.","so he will sell me the cave of Machpelah, which belongs to him and is at the end of his  field. Ask him to sell it to me for the full price as a burial site among you.\"","ut det mihi speluncam Machpela, quam habet in extrema parte agri sui. Pecunia digna tradat eam mihi coram vobis in possessionem sepulcri “.","ויתן לי את מערת המכפלה אשר לו אשר בקצה שדהו בכסף מלא יתננה לי בתוככם לאחזת קבר׃"],["1","23","10","그때 에프론은 히타이트 사람들 사이에 앉아 있었다. 그래서 이 히타이트 사람 에프론은 성문에 나와 있는 히타이트 사람들이 모두 듣는 데에서 아브라함에게 대답하였다.","마침 에브론은 헷 사람들과 함께 앉아 있었다. 헷 사람 에브론은 성문께에 나와 있는 헷 사람들이 듣는 데서 아브라함에게 대답하였다.","에브론이 헷 족속 중에 앉아 있더니 그가 헷 족속 곧 성문에 들어온 모든 자가 듣는 데서 아브라함에게 대답하여 이르되","때에 에브론이 헷 족속 중에 앉았더니 그가 헷 족속 곧 성문에 들어온 모든 자의 듣는데 아브라함에게 대답하여 가로되","아브라함이 헷 사람들을 찾아가 이런 청을 하고 있을 때 소할의 아들 에브론도 마침 그 자리에 앉아 있었다. 에브론은 헷 사람들이 모여 있는 그 성문 마을 회관에서 여러 사람들이 듣고 있는 가운데 아브라함에게 이렇게 말하였다.","Now Ephron was sitting with the Hittites. So Ephron the Hittite replied to Abraham in the hearing of the Hittites, all who entered the gate of his city:","And Ephron dwelt among the children of Heth: and Ephron the Hittite answered Abraham in the audience of the children of Heth, even of all that went in at the gate of his city, saying,","Ephron the Hittite was sitting among his people and he replied to Abraham in the hearing of  all the Hittites who had come to the gate of his city.","Sedebat autem Ephron in medio filiorum Heth. Responditque Ephron Hetthaeus ad Abraham, filiis Heth audientibus cunctis, qui ingrediebantur portam civitatis illius, dicens:","ועפרון ישב בתוך בני חת ויען עפרון החתי את אברהם באזני בני חת לכל באי שער עירו לאמר׃"],["1","23","11","“나리, 아닙니다. 제 말을 들어 보십시오. 제가 그 밭을 나리께 그냥 드리겠습니다. 거기에 있는 동굴도 드리겠습니다. 내 겨레가 보는 앞에서 그것을 드릴 터이니, 거기에다 고인을 안장하십시오.”","\"영감님, 내 말을 들으십시오. 그 밭을 영감님에게 그냥 드립니다. 그 밭에 딸린 동굴도 함께 드립니다. 내 겨레가 보는 데서 드리는 것이니 어서 부인을 안장하십시오.\"","내 주여 그리 마시고 내 말을 들으소서 내가 그 밭을 당신에게 드리고 그 속의 굴도 내가 당신에게 드리되 내가 내 동족 앞에서 당신에게 드리오니 당신의 죽은 자를 장사하소서","내 주여 그리 마시고 내 말을 들으소서 내가 그 밭을 당신께 드리고 그 속의 굴도 내가 당신께 드리되 내가 내 동족 앞에서 당신께 드리오니 당신의 죽은 자를 장사하소서","\"어르신, 들어 보십시오. 내가 그 밭을 어르신께 드리겠습니다. 뿐만 아니라 그 밭 어귀에 있는 그 굴도 함께 어르신께 드리도록 하지요. 이렇게 우리 동족들이 모두 모여 있는 데서 어르신께 그 밭을 드리도록 하겠습니다. 우리 동족들이 증인이 될 것입니다. 그곳에 어르신의 부인을 장사지내도록 하시지요\"","“Please, sir, listen to me! I give you both the field and the cave in it; in the presence of my people I give it to you. Bury your dead!”","Nay, my lord, hear me: the field give I thee, and the cave that is therein, I give it thee; in the presence of the sons of my people give I it thee: bury thy dead.","\"No, my lord,\" he said. \"Listen to me; I give you the field, and I give you the cave that  is in it. I give it to you in the presence of my people. Bury your dead.\"","Nequaquam ita fiat, domine mi, ausculta me. Agrum do tibi et speluncam, quae in eo est, praesentibus filiis populi mei; sepeli mortuum tuum.","לא אדני שמעני השדה נתתי לך והמערה אשר בו לך נתתיה לעיני בני עמי נתתיה לך קבר מתך׃"],["1","23","12","아브라함은 그곳 주민들 앞에 큰절을 하고,","아브라함은 그 곳 백성들에게 절하고","아브라함이 이에 그 땅의 백성 앞에서 몸을 굽히고","아브라함이 이에 그 땅 백성을 대하여 몸을 굽히고","그러자 아브라함은 그곳 사람들에게 허리를 굽혀 절을 하고는","But Abraham, after bowing low before the people of the land,","And Abraham bowed down himself before the people of the land.","Again Abraham bowed down before the people of the land","Adoravit Abraham coram populo terrae","וישתחו אברהם לפני עם הארץ׃"],["1","23","13","그곳 주민들이 듣는 데에서 에프론에게 말하였다. “제발 그대가 나의 말을 들어 주기를 바랍니다. 밭 값을 드릴 터이니 받아 주십시오. 그래야 죽은 내 아내를 거기에 안장할 수 있겠습니다.”","그 곳 백성들이 듣는 데서 에브론에게 말하였다. \"그러시다면, 내 말도 들어주십시오. 땅값을 드릴 터이니 받아주십시오. 그래야 내 아내를 거기에 안장할 수 있겠습니다.\"","그 땅의 백성이 듣는 데서 에브론에게 말하여 이르되 당신이 합당히 여기면 청하건대 내 말을 들으시오 내가 그 밭 값을 당신에게 주리니 당신은 내게서 받으시오 내가 나의 죽은 자를 거기 장사하겠노라","그 땅 백성의 듣는데 에브론에게 말하여 가로되 당신이 합당히 여기면 청컨대 내 말을 들으시오 내가 그 밭값을 당신에게 주리니 당신은 내게서 받으시오 내가 나의 죽은 자를 거기 장사하겠노라","그곳 사람들이 모두 듣고 있는 데서 에브론에게 분명하게 말하였다. \"그 말뜻은 참 고맙소만 그렇게 하지는 않겠소 내가 그 땅을 사기로 하겠소. 내 청을 들어주시오. 그래야 내가 마음놓고 세상을 뜬 내 아내를 그곳에 장사 지낼 것 아니오?\"","addressed Ephron in the hearing of these men: “If only you would please listen to me! I will pay you the price of the field. Accept it from me, that I may bury my dead there.”","And he spake unto Ephron in the audience of the people of the land, saying, But if thou wilt give it, I pray thee, hear me: I will give thee money for the field; take it of me, and I will bury my dead there.","and he said to Ephron in their hearing, \"Listen to me, if you will. I will pay the price of  the field. Accept it from me so I can bury my dead there.\"","et locutus est ad Ephron, audiente populo terrae:  “Quaeso, ut audias me. Dabo pecuniam pro agro; suscipe eam, et sic sepeliam mortuum meum in eo “.","וידבר אל עפרון באזני עם הארץ לאמר אך אם אתה לו שמעני נתתי כסף השדה קח ממני ואקברה את מתי שמה׃"],["1","23","14","그러자 에프론이 아브라함에게 대답하였다.","에브론이 아브라함에게 대답하였다.","에브론이 아브라함에게 대답하여 이르되","에브론이 아브라함에게 대답하여 가로되","그러자 에브론이 대답하였다.","Ephron replied to Abraham, “Please,","And Ephron answered Abraham, saying unto him,","Ephron answered Abraham,","Respondit Ephron ad Abraham dicens ei:","ויען עפרון את אברהם לאמר לו׃"],["1","23","15","“나리, 제 말을 들어 보십시오. 은 사백 세켈짜리 땅이 저와 나리 사이에 무슨 문제가 되겠습니까? 거기에 고인을 안장하십시오.”","\"영감님, 들으십시오. 땅값으로 말하면 은 사백 세겔이 되지만, 그것이 당신과 나 사이에 무슨 문제가 됩니까? 어서 부인을 안장하십시오.\"","내 주여 내 말을 들으소서 땅 값은 은 사백 세겔이나 그것이 나와 당신 사이에 무슨 문제가 되리이까 당신의 죽은 자를 장사하소서","내 주여 내게 들으소서 땅값은 은 사백 세겔이나 나와 당신 사이에 어찌 교계하리이까 당신의 죽은 자를 장사하소서","\"어르신, 내 말을 좀 들어보십시오. 땅값은 은 400세겔입니다만 어찌 어르신한테서 땅값을 받겠습니까? 아무 걱정 마시고 그냥 그곳에 장사 지내도록 하십시오\"","sir, listen to me! A piece of land worth four hundred shekels of silver—what is that between you and me? Bury your dead!”","My lord, hearken unto me: the land is worth four hundred shekels of silver; what is that betwixt me and thee? bury therefore thy dead.","\"Listen to me, my lord; the land is worth four hundred shekels of silver, but what is that  between me and you? Bury your dead.\"","Domine mi, audi me. Terra quadringentorum siclorum argenti inter me et te quid est hoc? Sepeli mortuum tuum.","אדני שמעני ארץ ארבע מאת שקל כסף ביני ובינך מה הוא ואת מתך קבר׃"],["1","23","16","아브라함은 에프론의 말에 따라, 히타이트 사람들이 듣는 데에서 에프론이 밝힌 가격 은 사백 세켈을 상인들 사이에 통용되는 무게로 달아 내어 주었다.","아브라함은 에브론의 말을 받아들여 그가 다른 헷 사람들이 듣는 데서 말한 은 사백 세겔을, 당시 상인들 사이에 통용되던 무게로 달아 치렀다.","아브라함이 에브론의 말을 따라 에브론이 헷 족속이 듣는 데서 말한 대로 상인이 통용하는 은 사백 세겔을 달아 에브론에게 주었더니","아브라함이 에브론의 말을 좇아 에브론이 헷 족속의 듣는데서 말한대로 상고의 통용하는 은 사백 세겔을 달아 에브론에게 주었더니","아브라함은 에브론의 말을 듣고 헷 사람들이 다 보고 있는 가운데서 땅값으로 은 400세겔을 달아 에브론에게 주었다. 은 400세겔은 당시 일반적으로 거래되던 값에 준한 것이었다.","Abraham accepted Ephron’s terms; he weighed out to him the silver that Ephron had stipulated in the hearing of the Hittites, four hundred shekels of silver at the current market value.","And Abraham hearkened unto Ephron; and Abraham weighed to Ephron the silver, which he had named in the audience of the sons of Heth, four hundred shekels of silver, current money with the merchant.","Abraham agreed to Ephron's terms and weighed out for him the price he had named in the  hearing of the Hittites: four hundred shekels of silver, according to the weight current among  the merchants.","Auscultavit Abraham Ephron et appendit pecuniam, quam Ephron postulaverat, audientibus filiis Heth, quadringentos siclos argenti, sicut mos erat apud negotiatores.","וישמע אברהם אל עפרון וישקל אברהם לעפרן את הכסף אשר דבר באזני בני חת ארבע מאות שקל כסף עבר לסחר׃"],["1","23","17","그리하여 마므레 맞은쪽 막펠라에 있는 에프론의 밭, 곧 밭과 그 안에 있는 동굴과 그 밭 사방 경계 안에 있는 모든 나무가,","이리하여 마므레 동쪽 막벨라에 있는 에브론의 밭은 거기에 딸린 동굴과 사방 언저리에 있는 모든 나무와 함께","마므레 앞 막벨라에 있는 에브론의 밭 곧 그 밭과 거기에 속한 굴과 그 밭과 그 주위에 둘린 모든 나무가","마므레 앞 막벨라에 있는 에브론의 밭을 바꾸어 그 속의 굴과 그 사방에 둘린 수목을 다","이렇게 해서 에브론의 소유로 있던 마므레 동쪽에 있는 막벨라 땅이 아브라함의 소유가 되었다. 그러니까 그 밭뿐만 아니라 밭 어귀에 있던 굴과 밭 주위에 심어져 있던 나무까지도 모두 아브라함의 소유가 된 것이다.","Thus Ephron’s field in Machpelah, facing Mamre, together with its cave and all the trees anywhere within its limits, was conveyed","And the field of Ephron which was in Machpelah, which was before Mamre, the field, and the cave which was therein, and all the trees that were in the field, that were in all the borders round about, were made sure","So Ephron's field in Machpelah near Mamre--both the field and the cave in it, and all the  trees within the borders of the field--was deeded","Confirmatusque est ager Ephronis, qui erat in Machpela respiciens Mambre, tam ipse quam spelunca in eo et omnes arbores eius in cunctis terminis eius per circuitum,","ויקם שדה עפרון אשר במכפלה אשר לפני ממרא השדה והמערה אשר בו וכל העץ אשר בשדה אשר בכל גבלו סביב׃"],["1","23","18","성문에 나와 있는 히타이트 사람들이 모두 보는 앞에서 아브라함의 재산이 되었다.","성문에 모인 헷 사람들이 지켜보는 앞에서 아브라함의 땅이 되었다.","성 문에 들어온 모든 헷 족속이 보는 데서 아브라함의 소유로 확정된지라","성문에 들어온 헷 족속 앞에서 아브라함의 소유로 정한지라","그리고 성문 위의 마을 회관에 모여 있던 헷 사람들이 그 땅이 아브라함의 소유가 되었다는 사실에 증인이 되었다.","to Abraham by purchase in the presence of the Hittites, all who entered the gate of Ephron’s city.","Unto Abraham for a possession in the presence of the children of Heth, before all that went in at the gate of his city.","to Abraham as his property in the presence of all the Hittites who had come to the gate of  the city.","Abrahae in possessionem, videntibus filiis Heth cunctis, qui intrabant portam civitatis illius.","לאברהם למקנה לעיני בני חת בכל באי שער עירו׃"],["1","23","19","그런 다음 아브라함은 가나안 땅 마므레, 곧 헤브론 맞은쪽 막펠라 밭에 있는 동굴에 자기 아내 사라를 안장하였다.","그제야 아브라함은 아내 사라를 막벨라에 있는 밭에 딸린 동굴에 안장하였다. 그 밭은 가나안 땅으로 마므레라고도 하는 헤브론 동쪽에 있었다.","그 후에 아브라함이 그 아내 사라를 가나안 땅 마므레 앞 막벨라 밭 굴에 장사하였더라 (마므레는 곧 헤브론이라)","그 후에 아브라함이 그 아내 사라를 가나안 땅 마므레 앞 막벨라 밭 굴에 장사하였더라 (마므레는 곧 헤브론이라)","아브라함은 가나안 땅 마므레 동쪽에 있는 막벨라굴에다 세상을 먼저 뜬 아내 사라를 장사 지냈다. 마므레는 오늘날의 헤브론이다.","After this, Abraham buried his wife Sarah in the cave of the field of Machpelah, facing Mamre—now Hebron—in the land of Canaan.","And after this, Abraham buried Sarah his wife in the cave of the field of Machpelah before Mamre: the same is Hebron in the land of Canaan.","Afterward Abraham buried his wife Sarah in the cave in the field of Machpelah near Mamre  (which is at Hebron) in the land of Canaan.","Deinde sepelivit Abraham Saram uxorem suam in spelunca agri Machpela, qui respiciebat Mambre ­ haec est Hebron ­ in terra Chanaan.","ואחרי כן קבר אברהם את שרה אשתו אל מערת שדה המכפלה על פני ממרא הוא חברון בארץ כנען׃"],["1","23","20","이렇게 하여 그 밭과 그 안에 있는 동굴이 히타이트 사람들에게서 아브라함에게로 넘어와 그의 묘지가 되었다.","그 밭과 거기에 딸린 동굴은 헷 사람에게서 아브라함에게로 넘어와 그의 묘지가 되었다.","이와 같이 그 밭과 거기에 속한 굴이 헷 족속으로부터 아브라함이 매장할 소유지로 확정되었더라","이와 같이 그 밭과 그 속의 굴을 헷 족속이 아브라함 소유 매장지로 정하였더라","이렇게 해서 헷 사람에게 딸려 있던 그 밭과 그 어귀에 있던 굴이 모두 아브라함의 소유가 되어 아브라함의 가족 묘지가 되었다.","Thus the field with its cave was transferred from the Hittites to Abraham as a burial place.","And the field, and the cave that is therein, were made sure unto Abraham for a possession of a buryingplace by the sons of Heth.","So the field and the cave in it were deeded to Abraham by the Hittites as a burial site.","Et confirmatus est ager et antrum, quod erat in eo, Abrahae in possessionem sepulcri a filiis Heth.","ויקם השדה והמערה אשר בו לאברהם לאחזת קבר מאת בני חת׃"],["1","24","1","아브라함은 이제 늙고 나이가 무척 많았다. 주님께서는 모든 일마다 아브라함에게 복을 내려 주셨다.","아브라함은 이제 몹시 늙었다. 야훼께서는 매사에 아브라함에게 복을 내려주셨다.","아브라함이 나이가 많아 늙었고 여호와께서 그에게 범사에 복을 주셨더라","아브라함이 나이 많아 늙었고 여호와께서 그의 범사에 복을 주셨더라","아브라함은 이제 나이가 무척 많아 늙었다. 여호와께서는 그가 하는 일마다 복을 내려 주셔서 그는 큰 부자가 되었다.","Abraham was old, having seen many days, and the LORD had blessed him in every way.","And Abraham was old, and well stricken in age: and the LORD had blessed Abraham in all things.","Abraham was now old and well advanced in years, and the LORD had blessed him in every way.","Erat autem Abraham senex dierumque multorum; et Do minus in cunctis benedixerat ei.","ואברהם זקן בא בימים ויהוה ברך את אברהם בכל׃"],["1","24","2","아브라함은 자기의 모든 재산을 맡아보는, 집안의 가장 늙은 종에게 말하였다. “네 손을 내 샅에 넣어라.","아브라함은 집안 일을 도맡아 보는 늙은 심복에게 분부하였다. \"너는 내 사타구니에 손을 넣고","아브라함이 자기 집 모든 소유를 맡은 늙은 종에게 이르되 청하건대 내 허벅지 밑에 네 손을 넣으라","아브라함이 자기 집 모든 소유를 맡은 늙은 종에게 이르되 청컨대 네 손을 내 환도뼈 밑에 넣으라","어느 날 그는 자기 재산을 관리하는 임무를 맡은 나이가 가장 많은 종을 불러 일렀다. \"너는 내 환도뼈 밑에 손을 넣어 내가 시키는 일을 꼭 하겠다고 맹세하여라.","Abraham said to the senior servant of his household, who had charge of all his possessions: “Put your hand under my thigh,","And Abraham said unto his eldest servant of his house, that ruled over all that he had, Put, I pray thee, thy hand under my thigh:","He said to the chief servant in his household, the one in charge of all that he had, \"Put  your hand under my thigh.","Dixitque Abraham ad servum seniorem domus suae, qui praeerat omnibus, quae habebat:  “Pone manum tuam subter femur meum,","ויאמר אברהם אל עבדו זקן ביתו המשל בכל אשר לו שים נא ידך תחת ירכי׃"],["1","24","3","나는 네가 하늘의 하느님이시며 땅의 하느님이신 주님을 두고 맹세하게 하겠다. 내가 살고 있는 이곳 가나안족의 딸들 가운데에서 내 아들의 아내가 될 여자를 데려오지 않고,","하늘을 내신 하느님, 땅을 내신 하느님 야훼를 두고 맹세하여라. 내 며느릿감은 내가 살고 있는 이 곳 가나안 사람의 딸 가운데서 고르지 않을 것이며,","내가 너에게 하늘의 하나님, 땅의 하나님이신 여호와를 가리켜 맹세하게 하노니 너는 내가 거주하는 이 지방 가나안 족속의 딸 중에서 내 아들을 위하여 아내를 택하지 말고","내가 너로 하늘의 하나님, 땅의 하나님이신 여호와를 가리켜 맹세하게 하노니 너는 나의 거하는 이 지방 가나안 족속의 딸 중에서 내 아들을 위하여 아내를 택하지 말고","하늘과 땅을 지으신 하나님 여호와께서 살아 계시다는 사실을 두고 맹세하여라. 이곳에 사는 가나안 사람들 가운데서는 내 아들과 혼인할 처녀를 고르지 않겠다고 말이다.","and I will make you swear by the LORD, the God of heaven and the God of earth, that you will not take a wife for my son from the daughters of the Canaanites among whom I live,","And I will make thee swear by the LORD, the God of heaven, and the God of the earth, that thou shalt not take a wife unto my son of the daughters of the Canaanites, among whom I dwell:","I want you to swear by the LORD, the God of heaven and the God of earth, that you will not  get a wife for my son from the daughters of the Canaanites, among whom I am living,","ut adiurem te per Dominum, Deum caeli et Deum terrae, ut non accipias uxorem filio meo de filiabus Chananaeorum, inter quos habito;","ואשביעך ביהוה אלהי השמים ואלהי הארץ אשר לא תקח אשה לבני מבנות הכנעני אשר אנכי יושב בקרבו׃"],["1","24","4","내 고향, 내 친족에게 가서 내 아들 이사악의 아내가 될 여자를 데려오겠다고 하여라.”","내 고향 내 친척들한테 가서 내 아들 이사악의 신붓감을 골라 오겠다고 하여라.\"","내 고향 내 족속에게로 가서 내 아들 이삭을 위하여 아내를 택하라","내 고향 내 족속에게로 가서 내 아들 이삭을 위하여 아내를 택하라","너는 꼭 내가 태어난 내 고향으로 가서 거기에 사는 내 친척 가운데에서 내 아들 이삭과 혼인할 처녀를 골라 오너라.\"","but that you will go to my own land and to my relatives to get a wife for my son Isaac.”","But thou shalt go unto my country, and to my kindred, and take a wife unto my son Isaac.","but will go to my country and my own relatives and get a wife for my son Isaac.\"","sed ad terram et cognationem meam proficiscaris et inde accipias uxorem filio meo Isaac “.","כי אל ארצי ואל מולדתי תלך ולקחת אשה לבני ליצחק׃"],["1","24","5","그 종이 아브라함에게 물었다. “그 여자가 저를 따라 이 땅으로 오려고 하지 않을지도 모릅니다. 제가 아드님을 나리께서 떠나오신 그 땅으로 데려가야 합니까?”","종이 물었다. \"신부 될 사람이 저를 따라 이리로 오려고 하지 않으면, 아드님을 주인님의 옛 고향으로 데려가도 됩니까?\"","종이 이르되 여자가 나를 따라 이 땅으로 오려고 하지 아니하거든 내가 주인의 아들을 주인이 나오신 땅으로 인도하여 돌아가리이까","종이 가로되 여자가 나를 좇아 이 땅으로 오고자 아니하거든 내가 주인의 아들을 주인의 나오신 땅으로 인도하여 돌아가리이까","그러자 그 종이 물었다 \"주인님, 만일 도련님의 신부감으로 고른 그 처녀가 나를 따라 이 땅으로 오지 않겠다고 하면 어찌해야 할까요? 그때에는 도련님을 주인님의 고향으로 데리고 가도 될까요?\"","The servant asked him: “What if the woman is unwilling to follow me to this land? Should I then take your son back to the land from which you came?”","And the servant said unto him, Peradventure the woman will not be willing to follow me unto this land: must I needs bring thy son again unto the land from whence thou camest?","The servant asked him, \"What if the woman is unwilling to come back with me to this land?  Shall I then take your son back to the country you came from?\"","Respondit servus:  “Si noluerit mulier venire mecum in terram hanc, num reducere debeo filium tuum ad terram, a quo tu egressus es? “.","ויאמר אליו העבד אולי לא תאבה האשה ללכת אחרי אל הארץ הזאת ההשב אשיב את בנך אל הארץ אשר יצאת משם׃"],["1","24","6","그러자 아브라함이 그에게 대답하였다. “너는 내 아들을 그곳으로 데려가는 일이 없도록 조심하여라.","아브라함이 대답하였다. \"내 아들을 그 곳으로 데려가다니, 그건 안 될 말이다.","아브라함이 그에게 이르되 내 아들을 그리로 데리고 돌아가지 아니하도록 하라","아브라함이 그에게 이르되 삼가 내 아들을 그리로 데리고 돌아가지 말라","그 말에 아브라함이 대답하였다. \"그렇게 하지는 말아라. 내 아이를 거기로 데려가지는 말아라.","Abraham told him, “Never take my son back there for any reason!","And Abraham said unto him, Beware thou that thou bring not my son thither again.","\"Make sure that you do not take my son back there,\" Abraham said.","Dixit Abraham:  “Cave, ne quando reducas illuc filium meum.","ויאמר אליו אברהם השמר לך פן תשיב את בני שמה׃"],["1","24","7","하늘의 하느님이신 주님, 곧 나를 아버지의 집과 내 본고장에서 데려오시고, ‘내가 네 후손에게 이 땅을 주겠다.’고 나에게 말씀하시며 맹세하신 그분께서 당신 천사를 네 앞에 보내시어, 네가 그곳에서 내 아들의 아내가 될 여자를 데려올 수 있게 해 주실 것이다.","고향에서 친척들과 함께 사는 나를 그들 가운데서 이끌어내시고 이 땅을 내 후손에게 주겠다고 약속하신 하느님, 하늘을 내시고 땅을 내신 하느님 야훼께서 당신의 천사를 보내시어 거기에서 내 며느릿감을 데려오도록 네 앞길을 인도해 주실 것이다.","하늘의 하나님 여호와께서 나를 내 아버지의 집과 내 고향 땅에서 떠나게 하시고 내게 말씀하시며 내게 맹세하여 이르시기를 이 땅을 네 씨에게 주리라 하셨으니 그가 그 사자를 너보다 앞서 보내실지라 네가 거기서 내 아들을 위하여 아내를 택할지니라","하늘의 하나님 여호와께서 나를 내 아버지의 집과 내 본토에서 떠나게 하시고 내게 말씀하시며 내게 맹세하여 이르시기를 이 땅을 네 씨에게 주리라 하셨으니 그가 그 사자를 네 앞서 보내실찌라 네가 거기서 내 아들을 위하여 아내를 택할찌니라","하늘에 계신 하나님 여호와께서 우리 아버지가 사시던 고향, 또한 우리 친척들이 살고 있는 그 고향 땅에서 나를 이곳으로 인도하셨다. 그러면서 내게 분명히 약속하시기를 이 땅을 내 몸에서 난 내 후손들에게 주시겠다고 하셨다. 하나님께서는 너보다 앞서서 심부름꾼을 보내실 것이다. 그러니 걱정 말아라. 네가 우리 아버지의 고향 땅에서 손쉽게 우리 아이와 혼인할 처녀를 고를 수 있을 것이다.","The LORD, the God of heaven, who took me from my father’s house and the land of my relatives, and who confirmed by oath the promise he made to me, ‘I will give this land to your descendants’—he will send his angel before you, and you will get a wife for my son there.","The LORD God of heaven, which took me from my father's house, and from the land of my kindred, and which spake unto me, and that sware unto me, saying, Unto thy seed will I give this land; he shall send his angel before thee, and thou shalt take a wife unto my son from thence.","\"The LORD, the God of heaven, who brought me out of my father's household and my native land  and who spoke to me and promised me on oath, saying, 'To your offspring I will give this  land'--he will send his angel before you so that you can get a wife for my son from there.","Dominus, Deus caeli, qui tulit me de domo patris mei et de terra nativitatis meae, qui locutus est mihi et iuravit mihi dicens:  “Semini tuo dabo terram hanc “, ipse mittet angelum suum coram te, et accipies inde uxorem filio meo.","יהוה אלהי השמים אשר לקחני מבית אבי ומארץ מולדתי ואשר דבר לי ואשר נשבע לי לאמר לזרעך אתן את הארץ הזאת הוא ישלח מלאכו לפניך ולקחת אשה לבני משם׃"],["1","24","8","그 여자가 너를 따라오려고 하지 않으면, 너는 나에게 한 맹세에서 풀리게 된다. 다만 내 아들만은 그곳으로 데려가서는 안 된다.”","신붓감이 너를 따라오려고 하지 않으면, 너는 나에게 한 맹세에서 풀리게 된다. 다만 내 아들을 그리로 데려가지만은 말아라.\"","만일 여자가 너를 따라 오려고 하지 아니하면 나의 이 맹세가 너와 상관이 없나니 오직 내 아들을 데리고 그리로 가지 말지니라","만일 여자가 너를 좇아 오고자 아니하면 나의 이 맹세가 너와 상관이 없나니 오직 내 아들을 데리고 그리로 가지 말찌니라","혹시라도 그 처녀가 너를 따라오지 않으려 한다면 네가 한 맹세가 너하고는 아무런 상관도 없게 되는 것이니 염려 말아라. 어떤 상황에 처하더라도 내 아이를 그곳으로 데려갈 생각은 하지 말아라\"","If the woman is unwilling to follow you, you will be released from this oath to me. But never take my son back there!”","And if the woman will not be willing to follow thee, then thou shalt be clear from this my oath: only bring not my son thither again.","If the woman is unwilling to come back with you, then you will be released from this oath of  mine. Only do not take my son back there.\"","Sin autem noluerit mulier sequi te, non teneberis iuramento; filium tantum meum ne reducas illuc “.","ואם לא תאבה האשה ללכת אחריך ונקית משבעתי זאת רק את בני לא תשב שמה׃"],["1","24","9","그래서 그 종은 자기 주인 아브라함의 샅에 제 손을 넣고, 이 일에 대하여 그에게 맹세하였다.","그 종은 주인 아브라함의 사타구니에 손을 넣고 시키는 대로 하겠다고 맹세하였다.","그 종이 이에 그의 주인 아브라함의 허벅지 아래에 손을 넣고 이 일에 대하여 그에게 맹세하였더라","종이 이에 주인 아브라함의 환도뼈 아래 손을 넣고 이 일에 대하여 그에게 맹세하였더라","그래서 그 종은 주인 아브라함의 환도뼈 밑에 손을 넣고는 아브라함이 시키는 대로 맹세하였다.","So the servant put his hand under the thigh of his master Abraham and swore to him concerning this matter.","And the servant put his hand under the thigh of Abraham his master, and sware to him concerning that matter.","So the servant put his hand under the thigh of his master Abraham and swore an oath to him  concerning this matter.","Posuit ergo servus manum sub femore Abraham domini sui et iuravit illi super hac re.","וישם העבד את ידו תחת ירך אברהם אדניו וישבע לו על הדבר הזה׃"],["1","24","10","그 종은 주인의 낙타 떼에서 열 마리를 데리고, 또 주인의 온갖 선물을 가지고 나호르가 사는 성읍인 아람 나하라임으로 길을 떠났다.","그 종은 주인이 보내는 온갖 귀한 선물을 낙타 열 마리에 싣고 길을 떠나 아람 나하라임에 이르러 나홀의 성을 찾아갔다.","이에 종이 그 주인의 낙타 중 열 필을 끌고 떠났는데 곧 그의 주인의 모든 좋은 것을 가지고 떠나 메소보다미아로 가서 나홀의 성에 이르러","이에 종이 그 주인의 약대 중 열 필을 취하고 떠났는데 곧 그 주인의 모든 좋은 것을 가지고 떠나 메소보다미아로 가서 나홀의 성에 이르러","아브라함의 재산을 모두 맡아 관리를 책임지고 있는 그 종은 낙타 열 마리를 이끌고 길을 떠나 나홀이 살고 있는 북부 메소보다미아의 한 성읍에 이르렀다.","The servant then took ten of his master’s camels, and bearing all kinds of gifts from his master, he made his way to the city of Nahor in Aram Naharaim.","And the servant took ten camels of the camels of his master, and departed; for all the goods of his master were in his hand: and he arose, and went to Mesopotamia, unto the city of Nahor.","Then the servant took ten of his master's camels and left, taking with him all kinds of  good things from his master. He set out for Aram Naharaim and made his way to the town of Nahor.","Tulitque servus decem camelos de grege domini sui et abiit ex omnibus bonis eius portans secum; profectusque perrexit in Aram Naharaim ad urbem Nachor.","ויקח העבד עשרה גמלים מגמלי אדניו וילך וכל טוב אדניו בידו ויקם וילך אל ארם נהרים אל עיר נחור׃"],["1","24","11","그는 여자들이 물을 길으러 나오는 시간인 저녁때에, 성 밖 우물 곁에 낙타들을 쉬게 하였다.","그는 성 밖에 있는 샘터에서 낙타를 쉬게 하고 있었다. 마침 저녁때여서 여자들이 물을 길으러 나올 무렵이었다.","그 낙타를 성 밖 우물 곁에 꿇렸으니 저녁 때라 여인들이 물을 길으러 나올 때였더라","그 약대를 성밖 우물 곁에 꿇렸으니 저녁때라 여인들이 물을 길러 나올 때이었더라","그 성읍에 도착하여 성읍 밖에 있는 우물가에서 살고 간 낙타를 쉬게 하였다. 때는 저녁쯤이라 동네 아낙들이 우물로 물을 길러 올 때였다.","Near evening, at the time when women go out to draw water, he made the camels kneel by the well outside the city.","And he made his camels to kneel down without the city by a well of water at the time of the evening, even the time that women go out to draw water.","He had the camels kneel down near the well outside the town; it was toward evening, the  time the women go out to draw water.","Cumque camelos fecisset accumbere extra oppidum iuxta puteum aquae vespere, tempore quo solent mulieres egredi ad hauriendam aquam, dixit:","ויברך הגמלים מחוץ לעיר אל באר המים לעת ערב לעת צאת השאבת׃"],["1","24","12","그러고 나서 이렇게 기도하였다. “제 주인 아브라함의 하느님이신 주님, 오늘 일이 잘되게 해 주십시오. 제 주인 아브라함에게 자애를 베풀어 주십시오.","그 종은 이렇게 기도하였다. \"제 주인 아브라함의 하느님 야훼여! 오늘 일이 모두 뜻대로 잘되게 해주십시오. 하느님의 심복 아브라함에게 신의를 지켜주십시오.","그가 이르되 우리 주인 아브라함의 하나님 여호와여 원하건대 오늘 나에게 순조롭게 만나게 하사 내 주인 아브라함에게 은혜를 베푸시옵소서","그가 가로되 우리 주인 아브라함의 하나님 여호와여 원컨대 오늘날 나로 순적히 만나게 하사 나의 주인 아브라함에게 은혜를 베푸시옵소서","그 종은 거기서 여호와께 기도를 드렸다. \"우리 주인님 아브라함이 섬겨 모시는 하나님 여호와여, 오늘 이것이 이곳까지 찾아온 목적을 잘 이룰 수 있도록 도와 주소서. 우리 주인님께 하신 약속을 꼭 이루어 주소서. 은총을 베풀어 주소서.","Then he said: “LORD, God of my master Abraham, let it turn out favorably for me today and thus deal graciously with my master Abraham.","And he said O LORD God of my master Abraham, I pray thee, send me good speed this day, and shew kindness unto my master Abraham.","Then he prayed, \"O LORD, God of my master Abraham, give me success today, and show kindness  to my master Abraham.","Domine,Deus domini mei Abraham, occurre obsecro mihi hodie et fac misericordiam cum domino meo Abraham.","ויאמר יהוה אלהי אדני אברהם הקרה נא לפני היום ועשה חסד עם אדני אברהם׃"],["1","24","13","이제 제가 샘물 곁에 서 있으면, 성읍 주민의 딸들이 물을 길으러 나올 것입니다.","저는 지금 이 샘터에 서 있습니다. 저 성에 사는 여자들이 물을 길으러 나오면","성 중 사람의 딸들이 물 길으러 나오겠사오니 내가 우물 곁에 서 있다가","성중 사람의 딸들이 물 길러 나오겠사오니 내가 우물 곁에 섰다가","성읍에 살고 있는 아낙네들이 이제 이 우물로 물을 길러 나올 것입니다.","While I stand here at the spring and the daughters of the townspeople are coming out to draw water,","Behold, I stand here by the well of water; and the daughters of the men of the city come out to draw water:","See, I am standing beside this spring, and the daughters of the townspeople are coming out  to draw water.","Ecce ego sto prope fontem aquae, et filiae habitatorum huius civitatis egredientur ad hauriendam aquam.","הנה אנכי נצב על עין המים ובנות אנשי העיר יצאת לשאב מים׃"],["1","24","14","제가 ‘그대의 물동이를 기울여서, 내가 물을 마시게 해 주오.’ 하고 청할 때, ‘드십시오. 낙타들에게도 제가 물을 먹이겠습니다.’ 하고 대답하는 바로 그 소녀가, 당신께서 당신의 종 이사악을 위하여 정하신 여자이게 해 주십시오. 그것으로 당신께서 제 주인에게 자애를 베푸신 줄 알겠습니다.”","저는 그들에게 항아리를 내려 물을 마시게 해달라고 하겠습니다. 그들 가운데서 저에게 물을 마시게 해줄 뿐 아니라, 제 낙타에게도 물을 마시게 해주겠다고 나서는 아가씨가 있으면 그가 바로 하느님의 심복 이사악의 아내감으로 정해 주신 여자라고 알겠습니다. 이로써 하느님께서 제 주인에게 신의를 지키시는 줄 제가 알겠습니다.\"","한 소녀에게 이르기를 청하건대 너는 물동이를 기울여 나로 마시게 하라 하리니 그의 대답이 마시라 내가 당신의 낙타에게도 마시게 하리라 하면 그는 주께서 주의 종 이삭을 위하여 정하신 자라 이로 말미암아 주께서 내 주인에게 은혜 베푸심을 내가 알겠나이다","한 소녀에게 이르기를 청컨대 너는 물 항아리를 기울여 나로 마시게 하라 하리니 그의 대답이 마시라 내가 당신의 약대에게도 마시우리라 하면 그는 주께서 주의 종 이삭을 위하여 정하신 자라 이로 인하여 주께서 나의 주인에게 은혜 베푸심을 내가 알겠나이다","그 가운데에서 한 처녀에게 이렇게 말하렵니다. \"아가씨, 물항아리를 내려 내게 물을 마시게 해주시오.\" 그때 그 아가씨가 \"예, 어르신. 어르신의 낙타에게도 물을 먹이겠어요\" 하고 말한다면 그 아가씨가 바로 우리 도련님 이삭의 짝으로 하나님께서 정해 놓으신 아가씨인 줄 알겠습니다. 이런 일이 일어난다면 우리 하나님께서 주인님께 은총을 베푸시어 약속을 들어주신 줄로 믿겠습니다.\"","if I say to a young woman, ‘Please lower your jug, that I may drink,’ and she answers, ‘Drink, and I will water your camels, too,’ then she is the one whom you have decided upon for your servant Isaac. In this way I will know that you have dealt graciously with my master.”","And let it come to pass, that the damsel to whom I shall say, Let down thy pitcher, I pray thee, that I may drink; and she shall say, Drink, and I will give thy camels drink also: let the same be she that thou hast appointed for thy servant Isaac; and thereby shall I know that thou hast shewed kindness unto my master.","May it be that when I say to a girl, 'Please let down your jar that I may have a drink,'  and she says, 'Drink, and I'll water your camels too'--let her be the one you have chosen for  your servant Isaac. By this I will know that you have shown kindness to my master.\"","Igitur puella, cui ego dixero:  “Inclina hydriam tuam, ut bibam “, et illa responderit:  “Bibe, quin et camelis tuis dabo potum “, ipsa est, quam praeparasti servo tuo Isaac, et per hoc intellegam quod feceris misericordiam cum domino meo “.","והיה הנער אשר אמר אליה הטי נא כדך ואשתה ואמרה שתה וגם גמליך אשקה אתה הכחת לעבדך ליצחק ובה אדע כי עשית חסד עם אדני׃"],["1","24","15","그가 말을 마치기도 전에, 아브라함의 아우 나호르의 아내인 밀카의 아들 브투엘에게서 태어난 레베카가 어깨에 물동이를 메고 나왔다.","이 말이 채 끝나기도 전에 리브가가 어깨에 항아리를 메고 나왔다. 리브가는 밀가의 아들 브두엘의 딸이었다. 그런데 밀가로 말하면 나홀의 아내이므로 아브라함에게는 제수뻘이었다.","말을 마치기도 전에 리브가가 물동이를 어깨에 메고 나오니 그는 아브라함의 동생 나홀의 아내 밀가의 아들 브두엘의 소생이라","말을 마치지 못하여서 리브가가 물 항아리를 어깨에 메고 나오니 그는 아브라함의 동생 나홀의 아내 밀가의 아들 브두엘의 소생이라","그가 이런 기도를 채 마치기도 전에 리브가가 어깨에 물항아리를 메고 우물가로 다가왔다. 리브가는 아브라함의 동생 나홀과 그 아내 밀가 사이에서 태어난 브두엘의 딸이었다.","He had scarcely finished speaking when Rebekah—who was born to Bethuel, son of Milcah, the wife of Abraham’s brother Nahor—came out with a jug on her shoulder.","And it came to pass, before he had done speaking, that, behold, Rebekah came out, who was born to Bethuel, son of Milcah, the wife of Nahor, Abraham's brother, with her pitcher upon her shoulder.","Before he had finished praying, Rebekah came out with her jar on her shoulder. She was the  daughter of Bethuel son of Milcah, who was the wife of Abraham's brother Nahor.","Necdum intra se verba compleverat, et ecce Rebecca egrediebatur filia Bathuel filii Melchae uxoris Nachor fratris Abraham habens hydriam in scapula:","ויהי הוא טרם כלה לדבר והנה רבקה יצאת אשר ילדה לבתואל בן מלכה אשת נחור אחי אברהם וכדה על שכמה׃"],["1","24","16","이 소녀는 아직 남자를 알지 못하는 아주 예쁜 처녀였다. 그가 샘으로 내려가서 물동이를 채워 올라오자,","그 아가씨는 아직 남자를 모르는 아주 예쁜 처녀였다. 그가 샘터에 내려와서 항아리에 물을 채워가지고 올라오는데","그 소녀는 보기에 심히 아리땁고 지금까지 남자가 가까이 하지 아니한 처녀더라 그가 우물로 내려가서 물을 그 물동이에 채워가지고 올라오는지라","그 소녀는 보기에 심히 아리땁고 지금까지 남자가 가까이 하지아니한 처녀더라 그가 우물에 내려가서 물을 그 물 항아리에 채워가지고 올라오는지라","그 아가씨는 매우 아리땁고 예쁜 처녀였다. 그녀는 우물로 내려가 항아리를 내려 놓고 물을 가득 채워서 다시 어깨에 메고 집으로 돌아가려 하였다.","The young woman was very beautiful, a virgin, untouched by man. She went down to the spring and filled her jug. As she came up,","And the damsel was very fair to look upon, a virgin, neither had any man known her: and she went down to the well, and filled her pitcher, and came up.","The girl was very beautiful, a virgin; no man had ever lain with her. She went down to the  spring, filled her jar and came up again.","puella decora nimis, virgo et incognita viro. Descendit ad fontem et implevit hydriam ac revertebatur.","והנער טבת מראה מאד בתולה ואיש לא ידעה ותרד העינה ותמלא כדה ותעל׃"],["1","24","17","그 종이 그에게 달려가서 말하였다. “그대의 물동이에서 물을 좀 들이키게 해 주오.”","아브라함의 종이 뛰어나가 그를 반기며 항아리의 물을 좀 마시게 해달라고 청했다.","종이 마주 달려가서 이르되 청하건대 네 물동이의 물을 내게 조금 마시게 하라","종이 마주달려가서 가로되 청컨대 네 물 항아리의 물을 내게 조금 마시우라","아브라함의 종은 뛰어가 \"아가씨, 물 좀 마실 수 있겠소. 목이 마르오\" 하였다.","the servant ran toward her and said, “Please give me a sip of water from your jug.”","And the servant ran to meet her, and said, Let me, I pray thee, drink a little water of thy pitcher.","The servant hurried to meet her and said, \"Please give me a little water from your jar.\"","Occurritque ei servus et ait:  “Pauxillum mihi ad sorbendum praebe aquae de hydria tua “.","וירץ העבד לקראתה ויאמר הגמיאיני נא מעט מים מכדך׃"],["1","24","18","그러자 그가 “나리, 드십시오.” 하면서, 급히 물동이를 내려 손에 받쳐들고서는 그 종에게 물을 마시게 해 주었다.","리브가는 \"할아버지, 어서 물을 마시십시오.\" 하며 항아리를 내려 손에 받쳐들고 마시게 해주었다.","그가 이르되 내 주여 마시소서 하며 급히 그 물동이를 손에 내려 마시게 하고","그가 가로되 주여 마시소서 하며 급히 그 물 항아리를 손에 내려 마시게 하고","\"그러시지요. 여기 있어요\" 하고 그 아가씨가 대답하였다. 그러고는 어깨에 메고 있던 물항아리를 내려 그에게 물을 떠주었다.","“Drink, sir,” she replied, and quickly lowering the jug into her hand, she gave him a drink.","And she said, Drink, my lord: and she hasted, and let down her pitcher upon her hand, and gave him drink.","\"Drink, my lord,\" she said, and quickly lowered the jar to her hands and gave him a drink.","Quae respondit:  “Bibe, domine mi “. Celeriterque deposuit hydriam super ulnam suam et dedit ei potum.","ותאמר שתה אדני ותמהר ותרד כדה על ידה ותשקהו׃"],["1","24","19","이렇게 그 종에게 물을 마시게 해 준 다음, 레베카는 “낙타들도 물을 다 마실 때까지 계속 길어다 주겠습니다.” 하면서,","이렇게 물을 마시게 해주고 나서 낙타들에게도 실컷 마시게 물을 길어주겠다고 하였다.","마시게 하기를 다하고 이르되 당신의 낙타를 위하여서도 물을 길어 그것들도 배불리 마시게 하리이다 하고","마시우기를 다하고 가로되 당신의 약대도 위하여 물을 길어 그것들로 배불리 마시게 하리이다 하고","리브가는 그가 물을 다 마실 때까지 기다리고 있다가 그가 물을 마시고 나자 \"어르신의 낙타에게도 물을 마시게 하지요\" 하였다.","When she had finished giving him a drink, she said, “I will draw water for your camels, too, until they have finished drinking.”","And when she had done giving him drink, she said, I will draw water for thy camels also, until they have done drinking.","After she had given him a drink, she said, \"I'll draw water for your camels too, until they  have finished drinking.\"","Cumque ille bibisset, adiecit:  “Quin et camelis tuis hauriam aquam, donec cuncti bibant “.","ותכל להשקתו ותאמר גם לגמליך אשאב עד אם כלו לשתת׃"],["1","24","20","서둘러 물동이에 남아 있는 물을 물통에 붓고는, 다시 물을 길으러 우물로 달려갔다. 이렇게 레베카는 그 낙타들에게 모두 물을 길어다 주었다.","그리고 병에 남아 있는 물을 얼른 구유에 붓고는 물을 길으러 샘터로 달려가서 낙타들도 모두 마시게 물을 길어다 주었다.","급히 물동이의 물을 구유에 붓고 다시 길으려고 우물로 달려가서 모든 낙타를 위하여 긷는지라","급히 물 항아리의 물을 구유에 붓고 다시 길으려고 우물로 달려가서 모든 약대를 위하여 긷는지라","그러고는 물항아리에 남아 있는 물을 구유에 쏟아 붓고는 낙타에게 충분히 물을 먹이려고 얼른 우물로 달려 내려가 물을 더 길어 왔다.","With that, she quickly emptied her jug into the drinking trough and ran back to the well to draw more water, until she had drawn enough for all the camels.","And she hasted, and emptied her pitcher into the trough, and ran again unto the well to draw water, and drew for all his camels.","So she quickly emptied her jar into the trough, ran back to the well to draw more water,  and drew enough for all his camels.","Effundensque hydriam in canalibus recurrit ad puteum, ut hauriret aquam; et haustam omnibus camelis dedit.","ותמהר ותער כדה אל השקת ותרץ עוד אל הבאר לשאב ותשאב לכל גמליו׃"],["1","24","21","그러는 동안 그 남자는 주님께서 자기 여행의 목적을 이루어 주시려는지 알아보려고, 그 처녀를 말없이 지켜보고 있었다.","그러는 동안, 그는 자기가 띠고 온 사명을 야훼께서 뜻대로 이루어주시려는지 알아보려고 리브가를 지켜보고 있었다.","그 사람이 그를 묵묵히 주목하며 여호와께서 과연 평탄한 길을 주신 여부를 알고자 하더니","그 사람이 그를 묵묵히 주목하며 여호와께서 과연 평탄한 길을 주신 여부를 알고자 하더니","그는 리브가가 하는 일을 가만히 바라보았다. 그는 자기가 여기까지 찾아온 목적을 여호와께서 잘 이루어 주실까 하여 기다리고 있었던 것이다.","The man watched her the whole time, silently waiting to learn whether or not the LORD had made his journey successful.","And the man wondering at her held his peace, to wit whether the LORD had made his journey prosperous or not.","Without saying a word, the man watched her closely to learn whether or not the LORD had  made his journey successful.","Ille autem contemplabatur eam tacitus, scire volens utrum prosperum fecisset iter suum Dominus an non.","והאיש משתאה לה מחריש לדעת ההצליח יהוה דרכו אם לא׃"],["1","24","22","낙타들이 물을 다 마시고 나자, 그 남자는 무게가 반 세켈 나가는 금 코걸이 하나를 그 처녀의 코에 걸어 주고, 무게가 금 열 세켈 나가는 팔찌 두 개를 팔에 끼워 주고는","이윽고 낙타들이 물을 다 마시고 나자, 그는 반 세겔 나가는 금코고리를 아가씨에게 걸어주고 다시 십 세겔 나가는 금팔찌 두 개를 팔목에 끼워주고는,","낙타가 마시기를 다하매 그가 반 세겔 무게의 금 코걸이 한 개와 열 세겔 무게의 금 손목고리 한 쌍을 그에게 주며","약대가 마시기를 다하매 그가 반 세겔중 금고리 한개와 열 세겔중 금 손목고리 한 쌍을 그에게 주며","낙타가 물을 다 마시자 그는 값비싼 금코고리와 금팔찌 한 쌍을 리브가에게 주면서","When the camels had finished drinking, the man took out a gold nose-ring weighing half a shekel, and two gold bracelets weighing ten shekels for her wrists.","And it came to pass, as the camels had done drinking, that the man took a golden earring of half a shekel weight, and two bracelets for her hands of ten shekels weight of gold;","When the camels had finished drinking, the man took out a gold nose ring weighing a beka  and two gold bracelets weighing ten shekels.","Postquam ergo biberunt cameli, protulit vir anulum aureum pondo dimidii sicli pro naribus et duas armillas pro manibus eius pondo siclorum decem;","ויהי כאשר כלו הגמלים לשתות ויקח האיש נזם זהב בקע משקלו ושני צמידים על ידיה עשרה זהב משקלם׃"],["1","24","23","말하였다. “그대가 누구의 따님인지 나에게 말해 주오. 그대의 아버지 집에 우리가 밤을 지낼 수 있는 자리가 있겠소?”","리브가에게 물었다. \"아가씨는 뉘 댁 따님이시오? 아가씨의 아버지 집에는 하룻밤 쉬어갈 만한 방이 없겠소?\"","이르되 네가 누구의 딸이냐 청하건대 내게 말하라 네 아버지의 집에 우리가 유숙할 곳이 있느냐","가로되 네가 뉘 딸이냐 청컨대 내게 고하라 네 부친의 집에 우리 유숙할 곳이 있느냐","물어 보았다. \"아가씨, 아버지가 뉘시오? 아가씨 집에 우리가 묵고 갈 방이 있는지 모르겠소\"","Then he asked her: “Whose daughter are you? Tell me, please. And is there a place in your father’s house for us to spend the night?”","And said, Whose daughter art thou? tell me, I pray thee: is there room in thy father's house for us to lodge in?","Then he asked, \"Whose daughter are you? Please tell me, is there room in your father's  house for us to spend the night?\"","dixitque:  “Cuius es filia? lndica mihi. Est in domo patris tui locus nobis ad pernoctandum? “.","ויאמר בת מי את הגידי נא לי היש בית אביך מקום לנו ללין׃"],["1","24","24","레베카가 그에게 대답하였다. “저는 밀카가 나호르에게 낳아 준 아들 브투엘의 딸입니다.”","리브가는, \"저는 브두엘이라는 분의 딸입니다. 할아버지는 나홀이고 할머니는 밀가라고 합니다.\" 하고 대답하고 나서","그 여자가 그에게 이르되 나는 밀가가 나홀에게서 낳은 아들 브두엘의 딸이니이다","그 여자가 그에게 이르되 나는 밀가가 나홀에게 낳은 아들 브두엘의 딸이니이다","\"예, 제 아버지는 브두엘이라 합니다. 할머니는 밀가이고 할아버지는 나홀이라 하지요\" 이렇게 대답하면서 리브가는 말을 이었다.","She answered: “I am the daughter of Bethuel the son of Milcah, whom she bore to Nahor.","And she said unto him, I am the daughter of Bethuel the son of Milcah, which she bare unto Nahor.","She answered him, \"I am the daughter of Bethuel, the son that Milcah bore to Nahor.\"","Quae respondit:  “Filia Bathuelis sum filii Melchae, quem peperit Nachor “.","ותאמר אליו בת בתואל אנכי בן מלכה אשר ילדה לנחור׃"],["1","24","25","그리고 그에게 또 말하였다. “저희 집에는 꼴과 여물도 넉넉하고, 밤을 지낼 수 있는 자리도 있습니다.”","이렇게 말하였다. \"저의 집에는 겨와 여물도 넉넉하고 쉬어가실 만한 방도 있습니다.\"","또 이르되 우리에게 짚과 사료가 족하며 유숙할 곳도 있나이다","또 가로되 우리에게 짚과 보리가 족하며 유숙할 곳도 있나이다","\"저희 집에는 낙타에게 먹일 겨와 여물도 넉넉히 있습니다. 또 어르신께서 묵어 가실 방도 있습니다\"","We have plenty of straw and fodder,” she added, “and also a place to spend the night.”","She said moreover unto him, We have both straw and provender enough, and room to lodge in.","And she added, \"We have plenty of straw and fodder, as well as room for you to spend the  night.\"","Et addidit dicens:  “Palearum quoque et pabuli plurimum est apud nos et locus ad pernoctandum “.","ותאמר אליו גם תבן גם מספוא רב עמנו גם מקום ללון׃"],["1","24","26","그는 무릎을 꿇어 주님께 경배하고 나서","그는 야훼께 엎드려 경배하고는","이에 그 사람이 머리를 숙여 여호와께 경배하고","이에 그 사람이 머리를 숙여 여호와께 경배하고","그는 무릎을 꿇고 엎드려 여호와께 기도드렸다.","The man then knelt and bowed down to the LORD,","And the man bowed down his head, and worshipped the LORD.","Then the man bowed down and worshiped the LORD,","Inclinavit se homo et adoravit Dominum","ויקד האיש וישתחו ליהוה׃"],["1","24","27","말하였다. “나의 주인에게 당신 자애와 신의를 거절하지 않으셨으니, 내 주인 아브라함의 하느님이신 주님께서는 찬미받으소서. 주님께서는 이 몸을 내 주인의 아우 집에 이르는 길로 이끌어 주셨구나.”","\"내 주인의 하느님 야훼, 찬양을 받으실 분이어라. 야훼께서는 내 주인을 버리지 않으시고, 참으로 신의를 지키셨구나. 야훼께서 이렇게 나를 주인의 친척 집에까지 인도해 주셨구나.\" 하며 찬양하였다.","이르되 나의 주인 아브라함의 하나님 여호와를 찬송하나이다 나의 주인에게 주의 사랑과 성실을 그치지 아니하셨사오며 여호와께서 길에서 나를 인도하사 내 주인의 동생 집에 이르게 하셨나이다 하니라","가로되 나의 주인 아브라함의 하나님 여호와를 찬송하나이다 나의 주인에게 주의 인자와 성실을 끊이지 아니하셨사오며 여호와께서 길에서 나를 인도하사 내 주인의 동생집에 이르게 하셨나이다 하니라","\"우리 주인님이 섬겨 모시는 여호와 하나님, 정말 고맙습니다. 여호와께 찬미드립니다. 우리 주인님에게 하신 약속을 잊지 않으시고 꼭 지켜 주시는군요. 우리 주인님을 버리지 아니하시고 이토록 진실되이 약속을 지켜 주시는군요. 주께서는 이것을 우리 주인님의 아우 집으로 인도하시는군요. 정말 고맙습니다\"","saying: “Blessed be the LORD, the God of my master Abraham, who has not let his kindness and fidelity toward my master fail. As for me, the LORD has led me straight to the house of my master’s brother.”","And he said, Blessed be the LORD God of my master Abraham, who hath not left destitute my master of his mercy and his truth: I being in the way, the LORD led me to the house of my master's brethren.","saying, \"Praise be to the LORD, the God of my master Abraham, who has not abandoned his  kindness and faithfulness to my master. As for me, the LORD has led me on the journey to the  house of my master's relatives.\"","dicens:  “Benedictus Dominus, Deus domini mei Abraham, qui non abstulit misericordiam et veritatem suam a domino meo et recto itinere me perduxit in domum fratris domini mei “.","ויאמר ברוך יהוה אלהי אדני אברהם אשר לא עזב חסדו ואמתו מעם אדני אנכי בדרך נחני יהוה בית אחי אדני׃"],["1","24","28","그 소녀는 달려가서 어머니 집 식구들에게 이 일을 알렸다.","아가씨는 뛰어가서 어머니 집 식구들에게 이 일을 알렸다.","소녀가 달려가서 이 일을 어머니 집에 알렸더니","소녀가 달려가서 이 일을 어미 집에 고하였더니","그러는 동안 리브가는 집으로 달려가서 우물가에서 이러저러한 일이 있었다는 것을 식구들에게 말하였다.","Then the young woman ran off and told her mother’s household what had happened.","And the damsel ran, and told them of her mother's house these things.","The girl ran and told her mother's household about these things.","Cucurrit itaque puella et nuntiavit in domum matris suae omnia, quae evenerant.","ותרץ הנער ותגד לבית אמה כדברים האלה׃"],["1","24","29","레베카에게는 라반이라는 오빠가 있었는데, 라반은 샘에 있는 그 사람에게 뛰어나갔다.","그런데 리브가에게는 라반이라는 오라버니가 있었다. 라반이 그를 맞으러 우물로 뛰어나왔다.","리브가에게 오라버니가 있어 그의 이름은 라반이라 그가 우물로 달려가 그 사람에게 이르러","리브가에게 오라비가 있어 이름은 라반이라 그가 우물로 달려가 그 사람에게 이르니","리브가에게는 라반이라는 오빠가 있었다. 그가 집 밖으로 달려 나가 아브라함의 종이 있던 우물가로 갔다.","Now Rebekah had a brother named Laban. Laban rushed outside to the man at the spring.","And Rebekah had a brother, and his name was Laban: and Laban ran out unto the man, unto the well.","Now Rebekah had a brother named Laban, and he hurried out to the man at the spring.","Habebat autem Rebecca fratrem nomine Laban, qui festinus egressus est ad hominem, ubi erat fons.","ולרבקה אח ושמו לבן וירץ לבן אל האיש החוצה אל העין׃"],["1","24","30","그는 코걸이와 누이의 팔에 걸려 있는 팔찌를 보고, 또 “그 사람이 저에게 이렇게 말했습니다.” 하고 말하는 누이 레베카의 이야기를 듣고 그 남자에게 간 것이다. 가서 보니 그는 아직도 샘물 옆 낙타 곁에 서 있었다.","라반은 코고리와 누이 동생 팔에 끼어져 있는 팔찌를 보고, 또 리브가가 하는 말을 듣고 달려 나온 것이다. 나와보니 그는 아직도 낙타와 함께 샘터에 서 있었다.","그의 누이의 코걸이와 그 손의 손목고리를 보고 또 그의 누이 리브가가 그 사람이 자기에게 이같이 말하더라 함을 듣고 그 사람에게로 나아감이라 그 때에 그가 우물가 낙타 곁에 서 있더라","그가 그 누이의 고리와 그 손의 손목고리를 보고 또 그 누이 리브가가 그 사람이 자기에게 이같이 말하더라 함을 듣고 그 사람에게로 나아감이라 때에 그가 우물가 약대 곁에 섰더라","누이동생 리브가가 우물가에서 이러저러한 일이 있었다고 말하면서 코에는 값비싼 금코고리와 팔에도 값비싼 금팔찌를 끼고 있는 것을 보고는 급하게 우물가로 달려온 것이다. 정말 아브라함의 종이 우물가에 낙타와 함께 서 있었다.","When he saw the nose-ring and the bracelets on his sister’s arms and when he heard Rebekah repeating what the man had said to her, he went to him while he was standing by the camels at the spring.","And it came to pass, when he saw the earring and bracelets upon his sister's hands, and when he heard the words of Rebekah his sister, saying, Thus spake the man unto me; that he came unto the man; and, behold, he stood by the camels at the well.","As soon as he had seen the nose ring, and the bracelets on his sister's arms, and had heard  Rebekah tell what the man said to her, he went out to the man and found him standing by the  camels near the spring.","Cumque vidisset anulum in naribus et armillas in manibus sororis suae et audisset cuncta verba referentis:  “Haec locutus est mihi homo “, venit ad virum, qui stabat iuxta camelos et prope fontem aquae;","ויהי כראת את הנזם ואת הצמדים על ידי אחתו וכשמעו את דברי רבקה אחתו לאמר כה דבר אלי האיש ויבא אל האיש והנה עמד על הגמלים על העין׃"],["1","24","31","라반이 말하였다. “주님께 복 받으신 분이시여, 들어오십시오. 왜 밖에 서 계십니까? 제가 집을 치워 놓았고 낙타들을 둘 곳도 마련하였습니다.”","라반이 권하였다. \"야훼께 복받은 노인장, 어서 들어가십시다. 왜 이렇게 밖에 서 계십니까? 방도 치워놓았고 낙타 우리도 마련해 놓았습니다.\"","라반이 이르되 여호와께 복을 받은 자여 들어오소서 어찌 밖에 서 있나이까 내가 방과 낙타의 처소를 준비하였나이다","라반이 가로되 여호와께 복을 받은 자여 들어오소서 어찌 밖에 섰나이까 내가 방과 약대의 처소를 예비하였나이다","라반은 그에게 다가가 이렇게 말하였다. \"자, 이렇게 여기에 서 계시지만 마시고 우리 집으로 가시지요. 어르신은 여호와께 복받으신 분이시로군요. 우리 집에 어르신이 묵으실 방도 준비해 두었습니다. 또 낙타가 쉴 외양간도 마련해 두었으니 어서 함께 가시지요\"","He said: “Come, blessed of the LORD! Why are you standing outside when I have made the house ready, as well as a place for the camels?”","And he said, Come in, thou blessed of the LORD; wherefore standest thou without? for I have prepared the house, and room for the camels.","\"Come, you who are blessed by the LORD,\" he said. \"Why are you standing out here? I have  prepared the house and a place for the camels.\"","dixitque ad eum:  “Ingredere, benedicte Domini, cur foris stas? Praeparavi domum et locum camelis “.","ויאמר בוא ברוך יהוה למה תעמד בחוץ ואנכי פניתי הבית ומקום לגמלים׃"],["1","24","32","그 사람이 집으로 들어오자, 라반은 낙타들의 짐을 부리고 낙타들에게 꼴과 여물을 주었으며, 그와 동행자들에게 발 씻을 물을 주었다.","라반은 그를 집으로 모신 다음 낙타 등에 실은 짐과 안장을 풀어 내리고 낙타에게 겨와 여물을 주고 일행의 발을 씻을 물을 떠 왔다.","그 사람이 그 집으로 들어가매 라반이 낙타의 짐을 부리고 짚과 사료를 낙타에게 주고 그 사람의 발과 그의 동행자들의 발 씻을 물을 주고","그 사람이 집으로 들어가매 라반이 약대의 짐을 부리고 짚과 보리를 약대에게 주고 그 사람의 발과 그 종자의 발 씻을 물을 주고","그가 집으로 들어가자 라반이 낙타의 짐을 부리고 낙타에게 먹일 겨와 여물을 주었다. 또한 아브라함의 종과 그 일행에게 발 씻을 물을 갖다 주었다.","The man then went inside; and while the camels were being unloaded and provided with straw and fodder, water was brought to bathe his feet and the feet of the men who were with him.","And the man came into the house: and he ungirded his camels, and gave straw and provender for the camels, and water to wash his feet, and the men's feet that were with him.","So the man went to the house, and the camels were unloaded. Straw and fodder were brought  for the camels, and water for him and his men to wash their feet.","Et introduxit eum in hospitium ac destravit camelos; deditque paleas et pabulum camelis et aquam ad lavandos pedes eius et virorum, qui venerant cum eo.","ויבא האיש הביתה ויפתח הגמלים ויתן תבן ומספוא לגמלים ומים לרחץ רגליו ורגלי האנשים אשר אתו׃"],["1","24","33","그리고 그 사람 앞에 먹을 것을 차려 놓았다. 그러나 그 사람이 “저의 볼일을 여쭙기 전에는 먹을 수가 없습니다.” 하자, 라반이 “말씀하십시오.” 하고 대답하였다.","그리고 밥상을 차려 내놓았다. 그러나 아브라함의 종은 자기는 심부름 온 사람이라는 것을 밝히고 그 일을 아뢰기 전에는 수저를 들 수 없다고 하였다. 라반이 어서 말하라고 하자","그 앞에 음식을 베푸니 그 사람이 이르되 내가 내 일을 진술하기 전에는 먹지 아니하겠나이다 라반이 이르되 말하소서","그 앞에 식물을 베푸니 그 사람이 가로되 내가 내 일을 진술하기 전에는 먹지 아니하겠나이다 라반이 가로되 말하소서","음식상이 차려 나오자 그가 말하였다. \"내가 여기에 온 목적을 다 말하기 전까지는 절대로 이 음식에 입을 대지 않겠습니다\" \"그러시다면 하실 말씀을 하시지요\" 하고 라반이 대답하였다.","But when food was set before him, he said, “I will not eat until I have told my story.” “Go ahead,” they replied.","And there was set meat before him to eat: but he said, I will not eat, until I have told mine errand. And he said, Speak on.","Then food was set before him, but he said, \"I will not eat until I have told you what I  have to say.\" \"Then tell us,\" Laban said.","Et apposuit in conspectu eius panem. Qui ait:  “Non comedam, donec loquar sermones meos “. Respondit:  “Loquere “.","ויישם לפניו לאכל ויאמר לא אכל עד אם דברתי דברי ויאמר דבר׃"],["1","24","34","그 사람이 말하였다. “저는 아브라함의 종입니다.","그는 입을 열어 말하였다. \"제 주인은 아브라함이라고 합니다.","그가 이르되 나는 아브라함의 종이니이다","그가 가로되 나는 아브라함의 종이니이다","그가 말을 시작하였다. \"나는 아브라함의 종입니다.","“I am Abraham’s servant,” he began.","And he said, I am Abraham's servant.","So he said, \"I am Abraham's servant.","At ille:  “Servus, inquit, Abraham sum;","ויאמר עבד אברהם אנכי׃"],["1","24","35","주님께서 저의 주인에게 복을 내리시어, 그분은 큰 부자가 되셨습니다. 주님께서는 그분에게 양과 소, 은과 금, 남종과 여종, 낙타와 나귀들을 주셨습니다.","제 주인은 야훼께 복을 많이 받아 굉장한 부자가 되었습니다. 그는 양떼와 소떼, 금과 은, 남종과 여종, 낙타와 나귀를 야훼께 많이 받았습니다.","여호와께서 나의 주인에게 크게 복을 주시어 창성하게 하시되 소와 양과 은금과 종들과 낙타와 나귀를 그에게 주셨고","여호와께서 나의 주인에게 크게 복을 주어 창성케 하시되 우양과 은금과 노비와 약대와 나귀를 그에게 주셨고","여호와께서 우리 주인님에게 큰 복을 내려 주셔서 큰 부자가 되게 하셨습니다. 우리 주인님은 양떼와 소떼, 은과 금, 남종과 여종, 그리고 낙타와 나귀 등 엄청난 재산을 가지고 있습니다.","“The LORD has blessed my master so abundantly that he has become wealthy; he has given him flocks and herds, silver and gold, male and female slaves, and camels and donkeys.","And the LORD hath blessed my master greatly; and he is become great: and he hath given him flocks, and herds, and silver, and gold, and menservants, and maidservants, and camels, and asses.","The LORD has blessed my master abundantly, and he has become wealthy. He has given him  sheep and cattle, silver and gold, menservants and maidservants, and camels and donkeys.","et Dominus benedixit domino meo valde, magnificatusque est; et dedit ei oves et boves, argentum et aurum, servos et ancillas, camelos et asinos.","ויהוה ברך את אדני מאד ויגדל ויתן לו צאן ובקר וכסף וזהב ועבדם ושפחת וגמלים וחמרים׃"],["1","24","36","제 주인의 부인인 사라가 늘그막에 제 주인에게 아들을 낳아 주셨는데, 주인은 자기의 모든 재산을 그 아들에게 주셨습니다.","안주인 사라는 늘그막에 주인에게 아들을 낳아드렸는데 주인은 그의 전 재산을 그 아들에게 주었습니다.","나의 주인의 아내 사라가 노년에 나의 주인에게 아들을 낳으매 주인이 그의 모든 소유를 그 아들에게 주었나이다","나의 주인의 부인 사라가 노년에 나의 주인에게 아들을 낳으매 주인이 그 모든 소유를 그 아들에게 주었나이다","우리 주인님 아브라함의 부인이신 사라 늘그막에 아들을 낳으셨지요. 그리고 우리 주인님께서 그 아들에게 그 많은 재산을 모두 물려주셨습니다.","My master’s wife Sarah bore a son to my master in her old age, and he has given him everything he owns.","And Sarah my master's wife bare a son to my master when she was old: and unto him hath he given all that he hath.","My master's wife Sarah has borne him a son in her old age, and he has given him everything  he owns.","Et peperit Sara uxor domini mei filium domino meo in senectute sua; deditque illi omnia, quae habuerat.","ותלד שרה אשת אדני בן לאדני אחרי זקנתה ויתן לו את כל אשר לו׃"],["1","24","37","저의 주인은 이렇게 말씀하시면서 저에게 맹세하게 하셨습니다. ‘너는 내가 살고 있는 이 땅 가나안족의 딸들 가운데에서 내 아들의 아내가 될 여자를 데려오지 말고,","그런데 제 주인은 저에게 맹세하라고 하시면서 이렇게 당부하셨습니다. '나는 내가 살고 있는 이 곳 가나안 사람의 딸들 가운데서는 며느릿감을 고르지 않겠다.","나의 주인이 나에게 맹세하게 하여 이르되 너는 내 아들을 위하여 내가 사는 땅 가나안 족속의 딸들 중에서 아내를 택하지 말고","나의 주인이 나로 맹세하게 하여 가로되 너는 내 아들을 위하여 나 사는 땅 가나안 족속의 딸 중에서 아내를 택하지 말고","주인님께서는 나에게 당신이 명령하신 대로 꼭 하겠다는 맹세를 하라고 하시더군요. 곧 \"네 아들과 혼인할 처녀를 하나 고르되 우리가 지금 살고 있는 가나안에서는 그 어떤 처녀라도 골라서는 안 된다\"고 말입니다.","My master put me under oath, saying: ‘You shall not take a wife for my son from the daughters of the Canaanites in whose land I live;","And my master made me swear, saying, Thou shalt not take a wife to my son of the daughters of the Canaanites, in whose land I dwell:","And my master made me swear an oath, and said, 'You must not get a wife for my son from the  daughters of the Canaanites, in whose land I live,","Et adiuravit me dominus meus dicens:  “Non accipies uxorem filio meo de filiabus Chananaeorum, in quorum terra habito;","וישבעני אדני לאמר לא תקח אשה לבני מבנות הכנעני אשר אנכי ישב בארצו׃"],["1","24","38","내 아버지의 집안, 내 친족에게 가서 내 아들의 아내가 될 여자를 데려와야 한다.’","그러니 너는 내 아버지의 가문, 내 일가를 찾아가서 며느릿감을 골라 오너라.'","내 아버지의 집, 내 족속에게로 가서 내 아들을 위하여 아내를 택하라 하시기로","내 아비 집, 내 족속에게로 가서 내 아들을 위하여 아내를 택하라 하시기로","그러시면서 \"내 집안 사람들과 또 친척들이 살고 있는 고향 땅으로 가서 거기서 내 아들과 혼인할 처녀를 골라오라\"고 말씀하셨습니다.","instead, you must go to my father’s house, to my own family, to get a wife for my son.’","But thou shalt go unto my father's house, and to my kindred, and take a wife unto my son.","but go to my father's family and to my own clan, and get a wife for my son.'","sed ad domum patris mei perges et de cognatione mea accipies uxorem filio meo “.","אם לא אל בית אבי תלך ואל משפחתי ולקחת אשה לבני׃"],["1","24","39","그래서 제가 주인에게 ‘그 여자가 저를 따라오려고 하지 않을지도 모릅니다.’ 하고 아뢰었더니,","제가 주인에게 '만일 신붓감이 저를 따라오려고 하지 않으면 어떻게 할까요?' 하고 여쭈었더니","내가 내 주인에게 여쭈되 혹 여자가 나를 따르지 아니하면 어찌하리이까 한즉","내가 내 주인에게 말씀하되 혹 여자가 나를 좇지 아니하면 어찌하리이까 한즉","그래서 내가 이렇게 주인님께 말씀드렸지요. \"도련님과 혼인하기로 하여 고른 그 처녀가 나를 따라오지 않으면 어떻게 해야 할까요\" 하고 말입니다.","When I asked my master, ‘What if the woman will not follow me?’","And I said unto my master, Peradventure the woman will not follow me.","\"Then I asked my master, 'What if the woman will not come back with me?'","Ego vero respondi domino meo: Quid, si noluerit venire mecum mulier?","ואמר אל אדני אלי לא תלך האשה אחרי׃"],["1","24","40","저에게 말씀하셨습니다. ‘내가 모시고 살아가는 주님께서 당신의 천사를 너와 함께 보내시어 네 여행의 목적을 이루어 주셔서, 너는 내 친족, 내 아버지의 집안에서 내 아들의 아내가 될 여자를 데려올 수 있을 것이다.","주인은 저에게 이렇게 일러주셨습니다. '내가 섬겨온 야훼께서 당신의 천사를 딸려 보내시어 네가 가서 하려는 일을 뜻대로 이루어주실 것이다. 너는 내 아버지의 가문, 내 일가 가운데서 며느릿감을 골라 올 수 있을 것이다.","주인이 내게 이르되 내가 섬기는 여호와께서 그의 사자를 너와 함께 보내어 네게 평탄한 길을 주시리니 너는 내 족속 중 내 아버지 집에서 내 아들을 위하여 아내를 택할 것이니라","주인이 내게 이르되 나의 섬기는 여호와께서 그 사자를 너와 함께 보내어 네게 평탄한 길을 주시리니 너는 내 족속 중 내 아비 집에서 내 아들을 위하여 아내를 택할 것이니라","그랬더니 주인님께서는 \"내가 섬기는 여호와께서 그 심부름꾼을 너와 함께 보내셔서 네 앞길을 잘 열어 주실 것이니 아무 걱정 말고 집안 사람과 친척들이 살고 있는 내 고향 땅으로 가서 내 아이와 혼인할 처녀를 고르라\"고 하셨지요.","he replied: ‘The LORD, in whose presence I have always walked, will send his angel with you and make your journey successful, and so you will get a wife for my son from my own family and my father’s house.","And he said unto me, The LORD, before whom I walk, will send his angel with thee, and prosper thy way; and thou shalt take a wife for my son of my kindred, and of my father's house:","\"He replied, 'The LORD, before whom I have walked, will send his angel with you and make  your journey a success, so that you can get a wife for my son from my own clan and from my  father's family.","Dominus, ait, in cuius conspectu ambulo, mittet angelum suum tecum et diriget viam tuam; accipiesque uxorem filio meo de cognatione mea et de domo patris mei.","ויאמר אלי יהוה אשר התהלכתי לפניו ישלח מלאכו אתך והצליח דרכך ולקחת אשה לבני ממשפחתי ומבית אבי׃"],["1","24","41","그러니 네가 내 친족에게 가기만 하면 너는 나에게 한 서약에서 풀려난다. 그들이 여자를 내주지 않아도 너는 나에게 한 서약에서 풀려난다.’","그러니 너는 내 일가들한테로 가기만 하면 네 책임을 다하는 것이다. 내 일가들이 며느릿감을 내주지 않아도 너는 책임이 없다.'","네가 내 족속에게 이를 때에는 네가 내 맹세와 상관이 없으리라 만일 그들이 네게 주지 아니할지라도 네가 내 맹세와 상관이 없으리라 하시기로","네가 내 족속에게 이를 때에는 네가 내 맹세와 상관이 없으리라 설혹 그들이 네게 주지 아니할찌라도 네가 내 맹세와 상관이 없으리라 하시기로","또한 내가 주인님의 친척들이 살고 있는 고향 땅에 다다르면 우리 주인님에게 한 맹세를 다 이행한 것이며, 설령 친척들이 그의 딸을 며느리감으로 내주지 않는다 하더라도 이미 나는 내가 한 맹세를 다 이행한 것이라고 말씀하셨습니다.","Then you will be freed from my curse. If you go to my family and they refuse you, then, too, you will be free from my curse.’","Then shalt thou be clear from this my oath, when thou comest to my kindred; and if they give not thee one, thou shalt be clear from my oath.","Then, when you go to my clan, you will be released from my oath even if they refuse to give  her to you--you will be released from my oath.'","Innocens eris a maledictione mea, cum veneris ad propinquos meos, et non dederint tibi; tunc innocens eris a maledictione mea “.","אז תנקה מאלתי כי תבוא אל משפחתי ואם לא יתנו לך והיית נקי מאלתי׃"],["1","24","42","그래서 제가 오늘 그 샘터에 다다라 이렇게 기도하였습니다. ‘제 주인 아브라함의 하느님이신 주님, 제가 하고 있는 여행의 목적을 제발 이루어 주십시오.","저는 오늘 그 샘터에 이르러 기도했습니다. '제 주인 아브라함의 하느님! 제가 띠고 온 사명을 뜻대로 이루어주시려거든 이렇게 해주십시오.","내가 오늘 우물에 이르러 말하기를 내 주인 아브라함의 하나님 여호와여 만일 내가 행하는 길에 형통함을 주실진대","내가 오늘 우물에 이르러 말씀하기를 나의 주인 아브라함의 하나님 여호와여 만일 나의 행하는 길에 형통함을 주실찐대","그래서 내가 길을 떠나 오늘 이 동네 우물가에 다다라서 여호와께 이렇게 기도를 드렸지요 \"우리 주인 아브라함이 모셔 섬기는 하나님 여호와여, 이 몸이 여기까지 찾아온 목적을 잘 이룰 수 있도록 도와주소서.","“When I came to the spring today, I said: ‘LORD, God of my master Abraham, please make successful the journey I am on.","And I came this day unto the well, and said, O LORD God of my master Abraham, if now thou do prosper my way which I go:","\"When I came to the spring today, I said, 'O LORD, God of my master Abraham, if you will,  please grant success to the journey on which I have come.","Veni ergo hodie ad fontem et dixi: Domine, Deus domini mei Abraham, si direxisti viam meam, in qua nunc ambulo,","ואבא היום אל העין ואמר יהוה אלהי אדני אברהם אם ישך נא מצליח דרכי אשר אנכי הלך עליה׃"],["1","24","43","이제 제가 샘물 곁에 서 있다가 처녀가 물을 길으러 나오면 그에게, ′그대의 물동이에서 물을 좀 마시게 해 주오.′ 하고 말하겠습니다.","지금 제가 샘터에 서 있는데, 혼기가 찬 여자가 물을 길으러 나오면, 항아리에서 물을 한 모금 마시게 해달라고 말을 걸어보겠습니다.","내가 이 우물 곁에 서 있다가 젊은 여자가 물을 길으러 오거든 내가 그에게 청하기를 너는 물동이의 물을 내게 조금 마시게 하라 하여","내가 이 우물 곁에 섰다가 청년 여자가 물을 길러 오거든 내가 그에게 청하기를 너는 물 항아리의 물을 내게 조금 마시우라 하여","이 몸이 이곳 우물가에 와 있습니다. 젊은 아가씨가 물을 길러 이곳으로 올 때 그에게 마실 물을 좀 달라고 부탁하렵니다.","While I stand here at the spring, if I say to a young woman who comes out to draw water, ‘Please give me a little water from your jug,’","Behold, I stand by the well of water; and it shall come to pass, that when the virgin cometh forth to draw water, and I say to her, Give me, I pray thee, a little water of thy pitcher to drink;","See, I am standing beside this spring; if a maiden comes out to draw water and I say to  her, \"Please let me drink a little water from your jar,\"","ecce sto iuxta fontem aquae; et virgo, quae egredietur ad hauriendam aquam, audierit a me:  “Da mihi pauxillum aquae ad bibendum ex hydria tua “;","הנה אנכי נצב על עין המים והיה העלמה היצאת לשאב ואמרתי אליה השקיני נא מעט מים מכדך׃"],["1","24","44","만일 그가 저에게 ′드십시오. 낙타들에게도 제가 물을 길어다 주겠습니다.′ 하고 대답하면, 바로 그가 주님께서 제 주인의 아들을 위하여 정하신 여자이게 해 주십시오.’","만일 저에게 물을 마시게 해줄 뿐만 아니라, 제 낙타에게도 물을 길어주겠다고 나서는 여자가 있으면, 그 여자가 바로 제 주인의 며느릿감으로 야훼께서 정해 주신 여자인 줄 알겠습니다.'","그의 대답이 당신은 마시라 내가 또 당신의 낙타를 위하여도 길으리라 하면 그 여자는 여호와께서 내 주인의 아들을 위하여 정하여 주신 자가 되리이다 하며","그의 대답이 당신은 마시라 내가 또 당신의 약대를 위하여도 길으리라 하면 그 여자는 여호와께서 나의 주인의 아들을 위하여 정하여 주신 자가 되리이다 하며","만일 그 아가씨가 물을 드시라고 하면서 항아리에서 물을 떠주고, 또한 내 낙타에게도 물을 마시게 하면 바로 그 아가씨가 하나님께서 우리 도련님의 색시감으로 정해 놓으신 아가씨인 줄로 알겠습니다\"","and she answers, ‘Drink, and I will draw water for your camels, too—then she is the woman whom the LORD has decided upon for my master’s son.’","And she say to me, Both drink thou, and I will also draw for thy camels: let the same be the woman whom the LORD hath appointed out for my master's son.","and if she says to me, \"Drink, and I'll draw water for your camels too,\" let her be the one  the LORD has chosen for my master's son.'","et dixerit mihi:  “Et tu bibe, et camelis tuis hauriam “, ipsa est mulier, quam praeparavit Dominus filio domini mei.","ואמרה אלי גם אתה שתה וגם לגמליך אשאב הוא האשה אשר הכיח יהוה לבן אדני׃"],["1","24","45","제가 마음속으로 말을 마치기도 전에, 레베카가 어깨에 물동이를 메고 나와 샘터로 내려가서 물을 길었습니다. 그래서 제가 그에게 ‘물을 마시게 해 주오.’ 하였더니,","제가 이렇게 기도를 마치기도 전에 리브가가 항아리를 어깨에 메고 나와 물을 길으러 샘터로 내려오는 것이 아니겠습니까? 그래서 저는 리브가에게 물 한 모금만 달라고 했습니다.","내가 마음속으로 말하기를 마치기도 전에 리브가가 물동이를 어깨에 메고 나와서 우물로 내려와 긷기로 내가 그에게 이르기를 청하건대 내게 마시게 하라 한즉","내가 묵도하기를 마치지 못하여 리브가가 물 항아리를 어깨에 메고 나와서 우물로 내려와 긷기로 내가 그에게 이르기를 청컨대 내게 마시우라 한즉","그런데 내가 기도를 채 마치기도 전에 바로 리브가 아가씨가 내가 서 있던 우물가로 나오더군요. 물을 길려고 물항아리를 어깨에 메고 오는 것이었지요. 그래서 내가 리브가 아가씨에게 \"아가씨, 물 좀 마실 수 있겠소\" 하고 부탁하자","“I had scarcely finished saying this to myself when Rebekah came out with a jug on her shoulder. After she went down to the spring and drew water, I said to her, ‘Please let me have a drink.’","And before I had done speaking in mine heart, behold, Rebekah came forth with her pitcher on her shoulder; and she went down unto the well, and drew water: and I said unto her, Let me drink, I pray thee.","\"Before I finished praying in my heart, Rebekah came out, with her jar on her shoulder. She  went down to the spring and drew water, and I said to her, 'Please give me a drink.'","Dum haec tacitus mecum volverem, apparuit Rebecca veniens cum hydria, quam portabat in scapula; descenditque ad fontem et hausit aquam. Et aio ad eam: Da mihi paululum bibere.","אני טרם אכלה לדבר אל לבי והנה רבקה יצאת וכדה על שכמה ותרד העינה ותשאב ואמר אליה השקיני נא׃"],["1","24","46","서둘러 물동이를 어깨에서 내려놓고, ‘드십시오. 낙타들에게도 제가 물을 먹이겠습니다.’ 하고 말하였습니다. 그래서 제가 물을 마셨습니다. 그리고 그는 낙타들에게도 물을 먹였습니다.","그랬더니 리브가는 어깨에서 얼른 항아리를 내려놓으며 마시라고 하면서 나의 낙타들에게도 물을 길어주겠다고 하였습니다. 그래서 저는 물을 마셨습니다. 리브가는 낙타들에게도 물을 길어주었습니다.","그가 급히 물동이를 어깨에서 내리며 이르되 마시라 내가 당신의 낙타에게도 마시게 하리라 하기로 내가 마시매 그가 또 낙타에게도 마시게 한지라","그가 급히 물 항아리를 어깨에서 내리며 가로되 마시라 내가 당신의 약대에게도 마시우리라 하기로 내가 마시매 그가 또 약대에게도 마시운지라","리브가 아가씨가 어깨에 메고 있던 물항아리를 얼른 내려 내게 물을 떠주면서 잡수시라고 하더군요. 그러면서 내가 끌고 온 낙타에게도 물을 마시게 하겠다면서 물을 더 길어와 내 낙타에게도 물을 먹게 하였습니다.","She quickly lowered the jug she was carrying and said, ‘Drink, and I will water your camels, too.’ So I drank, and she watered the camels also.","And she made haste, and let down her pitcher from her shoulder, and said, Drink, and I will give thy camels drink also: so I drank, and she made the camels drink also.","\"She quickly lowered her jar from her shoulder and said, 'Drink, and I'll water your camels  too.' So I drank, and she watered the camels also.","Quae festina deposuit hydriam de umero et dixit mihi:  “Et tu bibe, et camelis tuis potum tribuam “. Bibi, et adaquavit camelos.","ותמהר ותורד כדה מעליה ותאמר שתה וגם גמליך אשקה ואשת וגם הגמלים השקתה׃"],["1","24","47","제가 그에게 ‘그대는 누구의 따님이오?’ 하고 물었더니, ‘밀카가 나호르에게 낳아 준 아들 브투엘의 딸입니다.’ 하고 대답하였습니다. 저는 그의 코에 코걸이를 걸어 주고 두 팔에는 팔찌를 끼워 주고 나서,","저는 리브가에게 뉘 댁 따님이냐고 물었습니다. 그랬더니 브두엘의 딸이요 나홀과 밀가의 손녀라는 것이었습니다. 저는 그의 코에 코걸이를 걸어주고 두 팔목에 팔찌를 끼워주고 나서","내가 그에게 묻기를 네가 뉘 딸이냐 한즉 이르되 밀가가 나홀에게서 낳은 브두엘의 딸이라 하기로 내가 코걸이를 그 코에 꿰고 손목고리를 그 손에 끼우고","내가 그에게 묻기를 네가 뉘 딸이뇨 한즉 가로되 밀가가 나홀에게 낳은 브두엘의 딸이라 하기로 내가 고리를 그 코에 꿰고 손목고리를 그 손에 끼우고","그래, 내가 아가씨에게 물어 보았지요. 뉘 집 따님이시냐구요. 그랬더니 할머니는 밀가이고 할아버지는 나홀이며 아버지는 브두엘이라고 대답하더군요. 그래서 내가 금코고리를 꺼내어 코에 달아주고 금팔찌를 손에 끼워 주었지요.","When I asked her, ‘Whose daughter are you?’ she answered, ‘The daughter of Bethuel, son of Nahor, borne to Nahor by Milcah.’ So I put the ring on her nose and the bracelets on her wrists.","And I asked her, and said, Whose daughter art thou? And she said, the daughter of Bethuel, Nahor's son, whom Milcah bare unto him: and I put the earring upon her face, and the bracelets upon her hands.","\"I asked her, 'Whose daughter are you?' \"She said, 'The daughter of Bethuel son of Nahor,  whom Milcah bore to him.' \"Then I put the ring in her nose and the bracelets on her arms,","Interrogavique eam et dixi: Cuius es filia? Quae respondit:  “Filia Bathuelis sum filii Nachor, quem peperit illi Melcha “. Suspendi itaque anulum in naribus eius et armillas posui in manibus eius.","ואשאל אתה ואמר בת מי את ותאמר בת בתואל בן נחור אשר ילדה לו מלכה ואשם הנזם על אפה והצמידים על ידיה׃"],["1","24","48","무릎을 꿇어 주님께 경배하고 제 주인 아브라함의 하느님이신 주님을 찬미하였습니다. 그분께서는 제 주인의 아우님 딸을 주인 아들의 아내로 얻을 수 있도록 저를 바른길로 인도해 주셨습니다.","야훼께 엎드려 경배하고 제 주인 아브라함의 하느님을 찬양하였습니다. 그분은 저를 이렇게 바로 인도해 주시어 주인님의 조카딸을 주인댁 아드님의 아내감으로 찾아내게 하셨습니다.","내 주인 아브라함의 하나님 여호와께서 나를 바른 길로 인도하사 나의 주인의 동생의 딸을 그의 아들을 위하여 택하게 하셨으므로 내가 머리를 숙여 그에게 경배하고 찬송하였나이다","나의 주인 아브라함의 하나님 여호와께서 나를 바른 길로 인도하사 나의 주인의 동생의 딸을 그 아들을 위하여 택하게 하셨으므로 내가 머리를 숙여 그에게 경배하고 찬송하였나이다","이 늙은이는 무척 기뻤습니다. 우리 주인님께서 늘 섬겨 모시는 하나님 여호와께서 이 몸이 헤매지 않고 바른길로 오도록 이끄셔서 우리 주인님의 조카딸을 만나게 해주셨으니 말입니다. 이 아가씨를 우리 도련님의 색시감으로 골라 주셨으니 어찌 그분께 고맙지 않을 수 있겠어요. 그래서 나는 엎드려 하나님께 감사드리고 찬송하였습니다.","Then I knelt and bowed down to the LORD, blessing the LORD, the God of my master Abraham, who had led me on the right road to obtain the daughter of my master’s kinsman for his son.","And I bowed down my head, and worshipped the LORD, and blessed the LORD God of my master Abraham, which had led me in the right way to take my master's brother's daughter unto his son.","and I bowed down and worshiped the LORD. I praised the LORD, the God of my master Abraham,  who had led me on the right road to get the granddaughter of my master's brother for his son.","Pronusque adoravi Dominum benedicens Domino, Deo domini mei Abraham, qui perduxit me recto itinere, ut sumerem filiam fratris domini mei filio eius.","ואקד ואשתחוה ליהוה ואברך את יהוה אלהי אדני אברהם אשר הנחני בדרך אמת לקחת את בת אחי אדני לבנו׃"],["1","24","49","이제 여러분께서 저의 주인에게 자애와 신의를 베풀어 주시려거든, 그렇다고 제게 알려 주십시오. 아니면 그렇지 않다고 제게 알려 주십시오. 그러면 제가 오른쪽으로든 왼쪽으로든 가겠습니다.”","그러니 이제 제 주인에게 참 호의를 베풀어주시려거든 그렇다고 말씀해 주십시오. 아니면 그렇지 않다고 말씀해 주십시오. 그래야 저도 제 갈 길을 찾겠습니다.\"","이제 당신들이 인자함과 진실함으로 내 주인을 대접하려거든 내게 알게 해 주시고 그렇지 아니할지라도 내게 알게 해 주셔서 내가 우로든지 좌로든지 행하게 하소서","이제 당신들이 인자와 진실로 나의 주인을 대접하려거든 내게 고하시고 그렇지 않을찌라도 내게 고하여 나로 좌우간 행하게 하소서","그러니 이제 말씀해 주시지요. 어르신들께서 우리 주인님의 뜻을 받아 주실 것인지 아닌지를 말입니다. 분명히 말씀해 주셔야 나도 어떻게 할 것인지 결정을 할 것입니다. 우리 주인님의 뜻을 받아들이지 않는다 하더라도 분명히 말씀해 주셔야 하겠습니다. 내 생각으로는 어르신들께서 우리 주인님의 뜻을 받아 주셨으면 합니다만, 하여튼 말씀해 주십시오\"","Now, if you will act with kindness and fidelity toward my master, let me know; but if not, let me know that too. I can then proceed accordingly.”","And now if ye will deal kindly and truly with my master, tell me: and if not, tell me; that I may turn to the right hand, or to the left.","Now if you will show kindness and faithfulness to my master, tell me; and if not, tell me,  so I may know which way to turn.\"","Quam ob rem, si facitis misericordiam et veritatem cum domino meo, indicate mihi; sin autem aliud placet, et hoc dicite mihi, ut vadam ad dexteram sive ad sinistram “.","ועתה אם ישכם עשים חסד ואמת את אדני הגידו לי ואם לא הגידו לי ואפנה על ימין או על שמאל׃"],["1","24","50","그러자 라반과 브투엘이 대답하였다. “이 일은 주님에게서 비롯된 것이니, 우리가 당신에게 나쁘다 좋다 말할 수가 없습니다.","그러자 라반과 브두엘이 \"이 일은 야훼께서 하시는 일인데 우리가 어찌 좋다 싫다 하겠습니까?\" 하며 승낙하였다.","라반과 브두엘이 대답하여 이르되 이 일이 여호와께로 말미암았으니 우리는 가부를 말할 수 없노라","라반과 브두엘이 대답하여 가로되 이 일이 여호와께로 말미암았으니 우리는 가부를 말할 수 없노라","라반과 브두엘이 이 말을 듣고 대답하였다. \"이 일이 여호와께로 말미암은 일이니, 우리가 어떻게 이리저리 하겠다고 결정하겠습니까?","Laban and Bethuel said in reply: “This thing comes from the LORD; we can say nothing to you either for or against it.","Then Laban and Bethuel answered and said, The thing proceedeth from the LORD: we cannot speak unto thee bad or good.","Laban and Bethuel answered, \"This is from the LORD; we can say nothing to you one way or  the other.","Responderunt Laban et Bathuel:  “A Domino egressus est sermo; non possumus extra placitum eius quidquam aliud loqui tecum.","ויען לבן ובתואל ויאמרו מיהוה יצא הדבר לא נוכל דבר אליך רע או טוב׃"],["1","24","51","레베카가 여기 있으니 데리고 가서, 주님께서 말씀하신 대로 당신 주인 아들의 아내가 되게 하십시오.”","리브가가 여기 있으니 데리고 가십시오. 야훼께서 말씀하신 대로 당신 주인의 며느리로 삼으십시오.\"","리브가가 당신 앞에 있으니 데리고 가서 여호와의 명령대로 그를 당신의 주인의 아들의 아내가 되게 하라","리브가가 그대 앞에 있으니 데리고 가서 여호와의 명대로 그로 그대의 주인의 아들의 아내가 되게 하라","리브가가 여기 있으니 이 아이를 데리고 가시지요. 여호와께서 이미 말씀하신 대로 이 아이를 데려가 그대 주인님 아들의 아내로 삼도록 하시지요\"","Here is Rebekah, right in front of you; take her and go, that she may become the wife of your master’s son, as the LORD has said.”","Behold, Rebekah is before thee, take her, and go, and let her be thy master's son's wife, as the LORD hath spoken.","Here is Rebekah; take her and go, and let her become the wife of your master's son, as the  LORD has directed.\"","En Rebecca coram te est; tolle eam et proficiscere, et sit uxor filii domini tui, sicut locutus est Dominus “.","הנה רבקה לפניך קח ולך ותהי אשה לבן אדניך כאשר דבר יהוה׃"],["1","24","52","아브라함의 종은 그들의 말을 듣고 땅에 엎드려 주님께 경배하였다.","아브라함의 종은 그 말을 듣고 땅에 엎드려 야훼께 경배하고","아브라함의 종이 그들의 말을 듣고 땅에 엎드려 여호와께 절하고","아브라함의 종이 그들의 말을 듣고 땅에 엎드리어 여호와께 절하고","아브라함의 종은 이 말을 듣고 너무나 고마워 꿇어 엎드려 여호와께 경배하였다.","When Abraham’s servant heard their answer, he bowed to the ground before the LORD.","And it came to pass, that, when Abraham's servant heard their words, he worshipped the LORD, bowing himself to the earth.","When Abraham's servant heard what they said, he bowed down to the ground before the LORD.","Quod cum audisset puer Abraham, procidens adoravit in terram Dominum.","ויהי כאשר שמע עבד אברהם את דבריהם וישתחו ארצה ליהוה׃"],["1","24","53","그리고 그 종은 금은 패물과 옷가지를 꺼내어 레베카에게 주고, 또 레베카의 오빠와 어머니에게도 값진 선물을 주었다.","금은 패물과 옷가지들을 리브가에게 건네고 그의 오라버니와 어머니에게도 선물을 주었다.","은금 패물과 의복을 꺼내어 리브가에게 주고 그의 오라버니와 어머니에게도 보물을 주니라","은금 패물과 의복을 꺼내어 리브가에게 주고 그 오라비와 어미에게도 보물을 주니라","그러고는 가지고 온 금은 패물과 옷을 꺼내어 리브가에게 주었다. 또한 그의 오빠와 어머니에게도 값비싼 선물들을 나누어 주었다.","Then he brought out objects of silver and gold and clothing and presented them to Rebekah; he also gave costly presents to her brother and mother.","And the servant brought forth jewels of silver, and jewels of gold, and raiment, and gave them to Rebekah: he gave also to her brother and to her mother precious things.","Then the servant brought out gold and silver jewelry and articles of clothing and gave them  to Rebekah; he also gave costly gifts to her brother and to her mother.","Prolatisque vasis argenteis et aureis ac vestibus, dedit ea Rebeccae; res pretiosas dedit fratri eius et matri.","ויוצא העבד כלי כסף וכלי זהב ובגדים ויתן לרבקה ומגדנת נתן לאחיה ולאמה׃"],["1","24","54","종과 그의 일행은 먹고 마신 뒤 그곳에서 밤을 지냈다. 이튿날 아침, 모두 일어났을 때에 그 종이, “제 주인에게 돌아가게 해 주십시오.” 하고 청하자,","그와 그의 일행은 융숭한 대접을 받고 하룻밤 편히 쉬었다. 이튿날 아침, 모두 일어났을 때 아브라함의 종이 주인에게 돌아가야 하겠다고 하자,","이에 그들 곧 종과 동행자들이 먹고 마시고 유숙하고 아침에 일어나서 그가 이르되 나를 보내어 내 주인에게로 돌아가게 하소서","이에 그들 곧 종과 종자들이 먹고 마시고 유숙하고 아침에 일어나서 그가 가로되 나를 보내어 내 주인에게로 돌아가게 하소서","그제야 아브라함의 종과 그와 함께 온 일행은 차려 놓은 음식을 맛있게 먹고 그날 밤 그 집에서 묵었다. 그리고 아침에 일어나서는 \"우리 주인님께로 돌아가야겠습니다\"하고 말하였다.","After he and the men with him had eaten and drunk, they spent the night there. When they got up the next morning, he said, “Allow me to return to my master.”","And they did eat and drink, he and the men that were with him, and tarried all night; and they rose up in the morning, and he said, Send me away unto my master.","Then he and the men who were with him ate and drank and spent the night there. When they  got up the next morning, he said, \"Send me on my way to my master.\"","Tunc comederunt et biberunt ipse et viri, qui erant cum eo, et pernoctaverunt ibi. Surgens autem mane locutus est puer:  “Dimittite me, ut vadam ad dominum meum “.","ויאכלו וישתו הוא והאנשים אשר עמו וילינו ויקומו בבקר ויאמר שלחני לאדני׃"],["1","24","55","레베카의 오빠와 어머니는 “저 애를 다만 며칠이라도, 열흘만이라도 우리와 더 머물게 해 주십시오. 그런 다음 가십시오.” 하고 말하였다.","리브가의 오라버니와 어머니가 만류하고 나섰다. \"좀 더 집에 두었다가 데려가십시오. 열흘 만이라도 두었다가 데려가십시오.\"","리브가의 오라버니와 그의 어머니가 이르되 이 아이로 하여금 며칠 또는 열흘을 우리와 함께 머물게 하라 그 후에 그가 갈 것이니라","리브가의 오라비와 그 어미가 가로되 소녀로 며칠을 적어도 열흘을 우리와 함께 있게 하라 그 후에 그가 갈 것이니라","그러자 리브가의 오빠와 어머니가 간청하였다. \"이 아이가 우리와 함께 한 이레나 열흘을 더 지내게 하면 어떻겠어요. 그런 다음에 같이 길을 떠나시지요\"","Her brother and mother replied, “Let the young woman stay with us a short while, say ten days; after that she may go.”","And her brother and her mother said, Let the damsel abide with us a few days, at the least ten; after that she shall go.","But her brother and her mother replied, \"Let the girl remain with us ten days or so; then  you may go.\"","Responderuntque frater eius et mater:  “Maneat puella saltem decem dies apud nos et postea proficiscetur “.","ויאמר אחיה ואמה תשב הנער אתנו ימים או עשור אחר תלך׃"],["1","24","56","그러자 그가 대답하였다. “저를 붙잡지 말아 주십시오. 주님께서 제 여행의 목적을 이루어 주셨으니, 주인에게 갈 수 있게 저를 보내 주십시오.”","그러나 아브라함의 종은 \"붙잡지 마십시오. 제가 여기에 찾아온 목적을 야훼께서 이렇게 뜻대로 이루어주셨으니, 주인에게 돌아가야 하겠습니다. 떠나게 해주십시오.\" 하고 듣지 않았다.","그 사람이 그들에게 이르되 나를 만류하지 마소서 여호와께서 내게 형통한 길을 주셨으니 나를 보내어 내 주인에게로 돌아가게 하소서","그 사람이 그들에게 이르되 나를 만류치 마소서 여호와께서 내게 형통한 길을 주셨으니 나를 보내어 내 주인에게로 돌아가게 하소서","우리가 여기서 더 지체하지 않게 해주셨으면 합니다. 여호와께서 돌보아주셔서 우리가 여기까지 찾아온 길을 잘 이끌어 주시고, 또 이렇게 우리 도련님의 색시감도 얻게 해주셨으니 곧바로 주인님께 돌아갔으면 합니다\"하고 아브라함의 종이 길을 서둘렀다.","But he said to them, “Do not detain me, now that the LORD has made my journey successful; let me go back to my master.”","And he said unto them, Hinder me not, seeing the LORD hath prospered my way; send me away that I may go to my master.","But he said to them, \"Do not detain me, now that the LORD has granted success to my  journey. Send me on my way so I may go to my master.\"","Nolite, ait, me retinere, quia Dominus direxit viam meam; dimittite me, ut pergam ad dominum meum.",null],["1","24","57","그래서 그들이 “그 애를 불러다가 직접 물어봅시다.” 하고는,","그들이 말하였다. \"그러시다면 그 애를 불러서 물어봅시다.\"","그들이 이르되 우리가 소녀를 불러 그에게 물으리라 하고","그들이 가로되 우리가 소녀를 불러 그에게 물으리라 하고","\"그러시다면 우리가 리브가를 불러 그 아이 생각은 어떤지 물어 보지요\" 하고 그들이 대답하고는","They answered, “Let us call the young woman and see what she herself has to say about it.”","And they said, We will call the damsel, and enquire at her mouth.","Then they said, \"Let's call the girl and ask her about it.\"","Dixerunt: “Vocemus puellam et quaeramus ipsius voluntatem”.",null],["1","24","58","레베카를 불러 그에게 “이 사람과 같이 가겠느냐?” 하고 묻자, 그가 “가겠습니다.” 하고 대답하였다.","그들은 리브가를 불러서 \"이 어른과 같이 갈 마음이 있느냐?\" 하고 물어보았다. 리브가가 대답하였다. \"예, 가겠습니다.\"","리브가를 불러 그에게 이르되 네가 이 사람과 함께 가려느냐 그가 대답하되 가겠나이다","리브가를 불러 그에게 이르되 네가 이 사람과 함께 가려느냐 그가 대답하되 가겠나이다","리브가를 불러 물어 보았다. \"이분하고 지금 함께 가고 싶으냐?\" \"예, 가겠어요\" 하고 리브가가 대답하였다.","So they called Rebekah and asked her, “Will you go with this man?” She answered, “I will.”","And they called Rebekah, and said unto her, Wilt thou go with this man? And she said, I will go.","So they called Rebekah and asked her, \"Will you go with this man?\" \"I will go,\" she said.","Cumque vocata venisset, sciscitati sunt:  “Vis ire cum homine isto? “. Quae ait:  “Vadam “.",null],["1","24","59","그리하여 그들은 누이 레베카와 그의 유모를 아브라함의 종과 그 일행과 함께 보내면서,","그러자 그들은 누이 동생 리브가와 그의 유모를 아브라함의 종과 그의 일행에 딸려 보내며","그들이 그 누이 리브가와 그의 유모와 아브라함의 종과 그 동행자들을 보내며","그들이 그 누이 리브가와 그의 유모와 아브라함의 종과 종자들을 보내며","그래서 그들은 누이동생 리브가와 그의 유모를 아브라함의 종 일행과 함께 길을 떠나도록 하였다.","At this they sent off their sister Rebekah and her nurse with Abraham’s servant and his men.","And they sent away Rebekah their sister, and her nurse, and Abraham's servant, and his men.","So they sent their sister Rebekah on her way, along with her nurse and Abraham's servant  and his men.","Dimiserunt ergo Rebeccam sororem eorum et nutricem illius servumque Abraham et comites eius,",null],["1","24","60","레베카에게 축복하였다. “우리 누이야 너는 수천만의 어머니가 되어라. 너의 후손은 적들의 성문을 차지하여라.”","리브가에게 복을 빌어주었다. \"누이야, 너는 억조 창생의 어머니가 되어라. 네 후손은 원수들의 성문을 부수고 그 성을 빼앗아라.\"","리브가에게 축복하여 이르되 우리 누이여 너는 천만인의 어머니가 될지어다 네 씨로 그 원수의 성 문을 얻게 할지어다","리브가에게 축복하여 가로되 우리 누이여 너는 천만인의 어미가 될찌어다 네 씨로 그 원수의 성문을 얻게 할찌어다","떠나 보내면서 그들은 리브가에게 이렇게 복을 빌어 주었다. \"우리 누이 리브가야, 너는 수천 수만 사람의 어미가 되거라. 너의 후손이 원수들의 성들을 정복하기를 빈다\"","They blessed Rebekah and said: “Sister, may you grow into thousands of myriads; And may your descendants gain possession of the gates of their enemies!”","And they blessed Rebekah, and said unto her, Thou art our sister, be thou the mother of thousands of millions, and let thy seed possess the gate of those which hate them.","And they blessed Rebekah and said to her, \"Our sister, may you increase to thousands upon  thousands; may your offspring possess the gates of their enemies.\"","imprecantes prospera sorori suae atque dicentes:  “Soror nostra es, crescas in mille milia, et possideat semen tuum portas inimicorum suorum! “.",null],["1","24","61","레베카는 몸종들과 함께 일어나, 낙타를 타고 그 사람을 따라나섰다. 이리하여 그 종은 레베카를 데리고 길을 떠나게 되었다.","리브가는 몸종들과 함께 낙타를 타고 그 사람을 따라 나섰다. 이리하여 그 종은 리브가를 데리고 길을 떠나게 되었다.","리브가가 일어나 여자 종들과 함께 낙타를 타고 그 사람을 따라가니 그 종이 리브가를 데리고 가니라","리브가가 일어나 비자와 함께 약대를 타고 그 사람을 따라가니 종이 리브가를 데리고 가니라","리브가와 그의 유모는 여행할 준비를 모두 마치고 낙타에 올라타 아브라함의 종 일행과 함께 길을 떠났다.","Then Rebekah and her attendants started out; they mounted the camels and followed the man. So the servant took Rebekah and went on his way.","And Rebekah arose, and her damsels, and they rode upon the camels, and followed the man: and the servant took Rebekah, and went his way.","Then Rebekah and her maids got ready and mounted their camels and went back with the man.  So the servant took Rebekah and left.","Igitur surrexit Rebecca et puellae illius et, ascensis camelis, secutae sunt virum; sumpsitque servus Rebeccam et abiit.",null],["1","24","62","그때 이사악은 브에르 라하이 로이를 떠나, 네겝 땅에 살고 있었다.","그 때 이사악은 라하이 로이라는 샘이 있는 사막 지방에 와서 살고 있었다. 그 곳은 네겝 땅이었다.","그 때에 이삭이 브엘라해로이에서 왔으니 그가 네게브 지역에 거주하였음이라","때에 이삭이 브엘 라해로이에서 왔으니 그가 남방에 거하였었음이라","이때 이삭은 \"나를 보살펴 주시는 살아 계신 분의 우물\"이라는 뜻을 지니고 있는 브엘라해로이로 와서 살고 있었다. 그곳은 가나안의 남부 지역이었다.","Meanwhile Isaac had gone from Beer-lahai-roi and was living in the region of the Negeb.","And Isaac came from the way of the well Lahairoi; for he dwelt in the south country.","Now Isaac had come from Beer Lahai Roi, for he was living in the Negev.","Isaac autem venerat a regione putei Lahairoi et habitabat in terra Nageb.",null],["1","24","63","저녁 무렵 이사악이 들에 바람을 쐬러 나갔다가 눈을 들어 보니, 낙타 떼가 오고 있었다.","저녁때가 되어 이사악은 들에 바람쐬러 나왔다가 고개를 들어 낙타떼가 가까이 오고 있는 것을 보았다.","이삭이 저물 때에 들에 나가 묵상하다가 눈을 들어 보매 낙타들이 오는지라","이삭이 저물 때에 들에 나가 묵상하다가 눈을 들어 보매 약대들이 오더라","날이 저물 즈음에 이삭은 들녘에 바람을 쐬러 나왔다가 낙타 떼가 가까이 오는 것을 보았다.","One day toward evening he went out to walk in the field, and caught sight of camels approaching.","And Isaac went out to meditate in the field at the eventide: and he lifted up his eyes, and saw, and, behold, the camels were coming.","He went out to the field one evening to meditate, and as he looked up, he saw camels  approaching.","Et egressus est Isaac ad lamentandum in agro, inclinata iam die. Cumque levasset oculos, vidit camelos venientes.",null],["1","24","64","레베카도 눈을 들어 이사악을 보고서는 얼른 낙타에서 내려,","리브가도 고개를 들어 이사악을 보고 낙타에서 내려","리브가가 눈을 들어 이삭을 바라보고 낙타에서 내려","리브가가 눈을 들어 이삭을 바라보고 약대에서 내려","리브가는 이삭을 보고는 낙타에서 내려","Rebekah, too, caught sight of Isaac, and got down from her camel.","And Rebekah lifted up her eyes, and when she saw Isaac, she lighted off the camel.","Rebekah also looked up and saw Isaac. She got down from her camel","Rebecca quoque levavit oculos et vidit Isaac; descenditque de camelo",null],["1","24","65","그 종에게 물었다. “들을 가로질러 우리 쪽으로 오는 저 남자는 누구입니까?” 그 종이 “그분은 나의 주인입니다.” 하고 대답하자, 레베카는 너울을 꺼내어 얼굴을 가렸다.","아브라함의 종에게 물었다. \"들을 가로질러 우리 쪽으로 오시는 저분은 누구입니까?\" 종이 대답하였다. \"제 주인입니다.\" 리브가는 종의 말을 듣고 너울을 꺼내어 얼굴을 가렸다.","종에게 말하되 들에서 배회하다가 우리에게로 마주 오는 자가 누구냐 종이 이르되 이는 내 주인이니이다 리브가가 너울을 가지고 자기의 얼굴을 가리더라","종에게 말하되 들에서 배회하다가 우리에게로 마주 오는 자가 누구뇨 종이 가로되 이는 내 주인이니이다 리브가가 면박을 취하여 스스로 가리우더라","아브라함의 종에게 물었다. \"저렇게 들녘에서 왔다갔다 하다가 우리 쪽으로 오는 사람이 누군지요?\" \"예, 우리 주인 어른의 아들입니다\" 하고 종이 대답하였다. 리브가는 그 말을 듣고 너울로 얼굴을 가리웠다.","She asked the servant, “Who is the man over there, walking through the fields toward us?” “That is my master,” replied the servant. Then she took her veil and covered herself.","For she had said unto the servant, What man is this that walketh in the field to meet us? And the servant had said, It is my master: therefore she took a vail, and covered herself.","and asked the servant, \"Who is that man in the field coming to meet us?\" \"He is my master,\"  the servant answered. So she took her veil and covered herself.","et ait ad puerum:  “Quis est ille homo, qui venit per agrum in occursum nobis? “. Dixitque ei:  “Ipse est dominus meus “. At illa tollens cito velum operuit se.",null],["1","24","66","그 종은 이사악에게 자기가 한 모든 일을 이야기하였다.","아브라함의 종은 그 동안의 경위를 낱낱이 이사악에게 보고하였다.","종이 그 행한 일을 다 이삭에게 아뢰매","종이 그 행한 일을 다 이삭에게 고하매","아브라함의 종은 이삭에게 일이 이러이러하였다고 상세히 이야기하였다.","The servant recounted to Isaac all the things he had done.","And the servant told Isaac all things that he had done.","Then the servant told Isaac all he had done.","Servus autem cuncta, quae gesserat, narravit Isaac;",null],["1","24","67","이사악은 레베카를 자기 어머니 사라의 천막으로 데리고 들어가서, 그를 아내로 맞아들였다. 이사악은 레베카를 사랑하였다. 이로써 이사악은 어머니를 여읜 뒤에 위로를 받게 되었다.","이사악은 리브가를 천막으로 맞아들여 아내로 삼았다. 이사악은 아내를 사랑하며 어머니 잃은 슬픔을 달랬다.","이삭이 리브가를 인도하여 그의 어머니 사라의 장막으로 들이고 그를 맞이하여 아내로 삼고 사랑하였으니 이삭이 그의 어머니를 장례한 후에 위로를 얻었더라","이삭이 리브가를 인도하여 모친 사라의 장막으로 들이고 그를 취하여 아내를 삼고 사랑하였으니 이삭이 모친 상사 후에 위로를 얻었더라","이삭은 리브가를 데리고 어머니 사라가 살던 천막 안으로 데리고 들어가 잠자리를 같이하였다. 이렇게 해서 리브가는 이삭의 아내가 되었다. 어머니 사라가 세상을 뜬 뒤 마음을 제대로 잡지 못하던 이삭은 리브가를 사랑하며 그 울적한 마음을 달랬다.","Then Isaac brought Rebekah into the tent of his mother Sarah. He took Rebekah as his wife. Isaac loved her and found solace after the death of his mother.","And Isaac brought her into his mother Sarah's tent, and took Rebekah, and she became his wife; and he loved her: and Isaac was comforted after his mother's death.","Isaac brought her into the tent of his mother Sarah, and he married Rebekah. So she became  his wife, and he loved her; and Isaac was comforted after his mother's death.","qui introduxit eam in tabernaculum Sarae matris suae et accepit Rebeccam uxorem; et dilexit eam et consolatus est a morte matris suae.",null],["1","25","1","아브라함은 다시 아내를 맞아들였는데, 그의 이름은 크투라였다.","아브라함이 다시 아내를 맞았는데 이름은 크투라라고 하였다.","아브라함이 후처를 맞이하였으니 그의 이름은 그두라라","아브라함이 후처를 취하였으니 그 이름은 그두라라","아브라함은 또 다른 여인과 혼인하였다. 그 여인의 이름은 그두라였다.","Abraham took another wife, whose name was Keturah.","Then again Abraham took a wife, and her name was Keturah.","Abraham took another wife, whose name was Keturah.","Abraham vero aliam duxit uxorem nomine Ceturam,","ויסף אברהם ויקח אשה ושמה קטורה׃"],["1","25","2","그는 아브라함에게 지므란, 욕산, 므단, 미디안, 이스박, 수아를 낳아 주었다.","그는 아브라함에게 지므란, 욕산, 므단, 미디안, 이스박, 수아를 낳아주었다.","그가 시므란과 욕산과 므단과 미디안과 이스박과 수아를 낳고","그가 시므란과 욕산과 므단과 미디안과 이스박과 수아를 낳았고","그두라는 시므란과 욕산과 므단과 미디안과 이스박과 수아를 낳았다.","She bore him Zimran, Jokshan, Medan, Midian, Ishbak, and Shuah.","And she bare him Zimran, and Jokshan, and Medan, and Midian, and Ishbak, and Shuah.","She bore him Zimran, Jokshan, Medan, Midian, Ishbak and Shuah.","quae peperit ei Zamran et Iecsan et Madan et Madian et Iesboc et Sue.","ותלד לו את זמרן ואת יקשן ואת מדן ואת מדין ואת ישבק ואת שוח׃"],["1","25","3","욕산은 세바와 드단을 낳았다. 드단의 자손들은 아수르인, 르투스인, 르옴인이다.","욕산은 세바와 드단을 낳았다. 드단의 자식들에게서 아수르족, 르투스족, 르움족이 퍼졌다.","욕산은 스바와 드단을 낳았으며 드단의 자손은 앗수르 족속과 르두시 족속과 르움미 족속이며","욕산은 스바와 드단을 낳았으며 드단의 자손은 앗수르 족속과 르두시 족속과 르움미 족속이며","욕산은 스바와 드단을 낳았는데 앗수르 사람, 르두시 사람, 르움미 사람은 모두 드단의 후손이다.","Jokshan became the father of Sheba and Dedan. The descendants of Dedan were the Asshurim, the Letushim, and the Leummim.","And Jokshan begat Sheba, and Dedan. And the sons of Dedan were Asshurim, and Letushim, and Leummim.","Jokshan was the father of Sheba and Dedan; the descendants of Dedan were the Asshurites, the  Letushites and the Leummites.","Iecsan quoque genuit Saba et Dedan. Filii Dedan fuerunt Assurim et Latusim et Loommim.","ויקשן ילד את שבא ואת דדן ובני דדן היו אשורם ולטושים ולאמים׃"],["1","25","4","미디안의 아들들은 에파, 에페르, 하녹, 아비다, 엘다아이다. 이들 모두가 크투라의 자손들이다.","미디안의 아들들은 에바, 에벨, 하녹, 아비다, 엘다아였다. 이들이 모두 크투라의 후손들이다.","미디안의 아들은 에바와 에벨과 하녹과 아비다와 엘다아이니 다 그두라의 자손이었더라","미디안의 아들은 에바와 에벨과 하녹과 아비다와 엘다아니 다 그두라의 자손이었더라","미디안은 에바와 에벨과 하녹과 아비다와 엘다아를 낳았다. 이 모두가 그두라에게서 태어난 후손들이다.","The descendants of Midian were Ephah, Epher, Hanoch, Abida, and Eldaah. All of these were descendants of Keturah.","And the sons of Midian; Ephah, and Epher, and Hanoch, and Abidah, and Eldaah. All these were the children of Keturah.","The sons of Midian were Ephah, Epher, Hanoch, Abida and Eldaah. All these were descendants  of Keturah.","At vero ex Madian ortus est Epha et Opher et Henoch et Abida et Eldaa. Omnes hi filii Ceturae.","ובני מדין עיפה ועפר וחנך ואבידע ואלדעה כל אלה בני קטורה׃"],["1","25","5","아브라함은 자기의 모든 재산을 이사악에게 물려주었다.","아브라함은 자기 재산을 모두 이사악에게 물려주었다.","아브라함이 이삭에게 자기의 모든 소유를 주었고","아브라함이 이삭에게 자기 모든 소유를 주었고","아브라함은 가지고 있던 모든 재산을 아들 이삭에게 물려주었다.","Abraham gave everything that he owned to his son Isaac.","And Abraham gave all that he had unto Isaac.","Abraham left everything he owned to Isaac.","Deditque Abraham cuncta, quae possederat, Isaac;","ויתן אברהם את כל אשר לו ליצחק׃"],["1","25","6","아브라함은 소실들이 자기에게 낳아 준 아들들에게도 한몫씩 나누어 주었다. 그런 다음 아브라함은 죽기 전에, 그들을 자기 아들 이사악에게서 떼어 동쪽 곧 동방의 땅으로 내보냈다.","아브라함은 소실들에게서 난 자식들에게도 살림 밑천을 골고루 나누어주었다. 그리고 그는 죽기 전에 그 자식들을 아들 이사악에게서 떼어 해 뜨는 동쪽으로 보내버렸다.","자기 서자들에게도 재산을 주어 자기 생전에 그들로 하여금 자기 아들 이삭을 떠나 동방 곧 동쪽 땅으로 가게 하였더라","자기 서자들에게도 재물을 주어 자기 생전에 그들로 자기 아들 이삭을 떠나 동방 곧 동국으로 가게 하였더라","그렇지만 그가 살아 있을 동안 그두라에게서 난 자식들에게도 재산을 나누어 주어 이삭이 살고 있는 곳을 떠나 동쪽 땅으로 가서 살게 하였다.","To the sons of his concubines, however, he gave gifts while he was still living, as he sent them away eastward, to the land of Kedem, away from his son Isaac.","But unto the sons of the concubines, which Abraham had, Abraham gave gifts, and sent them away from Isaac his son, while he yet lived, eastward, unto the east country.","But while he was still living, he gave gifts to the sons of his concubines and sent them  away from his son Isaac to the land of the east.","filiis autem concubinarum suarum largitus est munera et separavit eos ab Isaac filio suo, dum adhuc ipse viveret, ad plagam orientalem.","ולבני הפילגשים אשר לאברהם נתן אברהם מתנת וישלחם מעל יצחק בנו בעודנו חי קדמה אל ארץ קדם׃"],["1","25","7","아브라함이 산 햇수는 백칠십오 년이다.","아브라함은 백칠십오 년을 살았다.","아브라함의 향년이 백칠십오 세라","아브라함의 향년이 일백 칠십 오세라","아브라함의 나이가 175세나 되었다.","The whole span of Abraham’s life was one hundred and seventy-five years.","And these are the days of the years of Abraham's life which he lived, an hundred threescore and fifteen years.","Altogether, Abraham lived a hundred and seventy-five years.","Fuerunt autem dies vitae Abrahae centum septuaginta quinque anni.","ואלה ימי שני חיי אברהם אשר חי מאת שנה ושבעים שנה וחמש שנים׃"],["1","25","8","아브라함은 장수를 누린 노인으로, 한껏 살다가 숨을 거두고 죽어 선조들 곁으로 갔다.","아브라함은 백발이 되도록 천수를 누리다가 세상을 떠났다.","그의 나이가 높고 늙어서 기운이 다하여 죽어 자기 열조에게로 돌아가매","그가 수가 높고 나이 많아 기운이 진하여 죽어 자기 열조에게로 돌아가매","그는 이렇게 나이가 들어 기력이 쇠하여 숨을 거두고 조상들이 있는 곳으로 돌아갔다.","Then he breathed his last, dying at a ripe old age, grown old after a full life; and he was gathered to his people.","Then Abraham gave up the ghost, and died in a good old age, an old man, and full of years; and was gathered to his people.","Then Abraham breathed his last and died at a good old age, an old man and full of years; and  he was gathered to his people.","Et deficiens mortuus est Abraham in senectute bona provectaeque aetatis et plenus dierum congregatusque est ad populum suum.","ויגוע וימת אברהם בשיבה טובה זקן ושבע ויאסף אל עמיו׃"],["1","25","9","그의 아들 이사악과 이스마엘이 그를 막펠라 동굴에 안장하였다. 이 굴은 마므레 맞은쪽, 히타이트 사람 초하르의 아들 에프론의 밭에 있었다.","아들 이사악과 이스마엘이 그를 막벨라 동굴에 안장하였다. 그 동굴은 헷 사람 소할의 아들 에브론의 밭에 있었는데, 이 밭은 마므레 동쪽에 있었다.","그의 아들들인 이삭과 이스마엘이 그를 마므레 앞 헷 족속 소할의 아들 에브론의 밭에 있는 막벨라 굴에 장사하였으니","그 아들 이삭과 이스마엘이 그를 마므레 앞 헷 족속 소할의 아들 에브론의 밭에 있는 막벨라 굴에 장사하였으니","그의 아들 이삭과 이스마엘은 전에 헷 사람 소할의 아들 에브론의 밭이었던 그 막벨라굴에 아브라함의 시신을 안장하였다.","His sons Isaac and Ishmael buried him in the cave of Machpelah, in the field of Ephron, son of Zohar the Hittite, which faces Mamre,","And his sons Isaac and Ishmael buried him in the cave of Machpelah, in the field of Ephron the son of Zohar the Hittite, which is before Mamre;","His sons Isaac and Ishmael buried him in the cave of Machpelah near Mamre, in the field of  Ephron son of Zohar the Hittite,","Et sepelierunt eum Isaac et Ismael filii sui in spelunca Machpela, quae sita est in agro Ephron filii Seor Hetthaei e regione Mambre,","ויקברו אתו יצחק וישמעאל בניו אל מערת המכפלה אל שדה עפרן בן צחר החתי אשר על פני ממרא׃"],["1","25","10","이 밭은 아브라함이 히타이트 사람들에게서 사들인 것으로, 바로 이곳에 아브라함과 그의 아내 사라가 안장되었다.","아브라함은 헷 사람들에게서 사들인 이 밭에 아내 사라를 안장했었는데 이제 자신이 그 옆에 눕게 된 것이다.","이것은 아브라함이 헷 족속에게서 산 밭이라 아브라함과 그의 아내 사라가 거기 장사되니라","이것은 아브라함이 헷 족속에게서 산 밭이라 아브라함과 그 아내 사라가 거기 장사되니라","그 밭은 아브라함이 헷 사람한테서 산 밭으로, 거기에는 아브라함의 아내 사라도 묻혀 있었다.","the field that Abraham had bought from the Hittites; there he was buried next to his wife Sarah.","The field which Abraham purchased of the sons of Heth: there was Abraham buried, and Sarah his wife.","the field Abraham had bought from the Hittites. There Abraham was buried with his wife  Sarah.","quem emerat a filiis Heth. Ibi sepultus est ipse et Sara uxor eius.","השדה אשר קנה אברהם מאת בני חת שמה קבר אברהם ושרה אשתו׃"],["1","25","11","아브라함이 죽은 뒤에 하느님께서는 그의 아들 이사악에게 복을 내리셨다. 이사악은 브에르 라하이 로이에 자리 잡고 살았다.","아브라함이 죽은 뒤에 하느님께서는 그의 아들 이사악에게 복을 내리셨다. 이사악은 라하이 로이 우물이 있는 곳에 머물러 살았다.","아브라함이 죽은 후에 하나님이 그의 아들 이삭에게 복을 주셨고 이삭은 브엘라해로이 근처에 거주하였더라","아브라함이 죽은 후에 하나님이 그 아들 이삭에게 복을 주셨고 이삭은 브엘 라해로이 근처에 거하였더라","아브라함이 세상을 뜬 뒤에도 하나님께서는 그의 아들 이삭에게 복을 내려 주셨다. 이삭은 브엘라해로이 근처에서 살았다.","After the death of Abraham, God blessed his son Isaac, who lived near Beer-lahai-roi.","And it came to pass after the death of Abraham, that God blessed his son Isaac; and Isaac dwelt by the well Lahairoi.","After Abraham's death, God blessed his son Isaac, who then lived near Beer Lahai Roi.","Et post obitum illius benedixit Deus Isaac filio eius, qui habitabat iuxta puteum Lahairoi.","ויהי אחרי מות אברהם ויברך אלהים את יצחק בנו וישב יצחק עם באר לחי ראי׃"],["1","25","12","사라의 여종인 이집트 여자 하가르가 아브라함에게 낳아 준 아들, 곧 아브라함의 아들 이스마엘의 족보는 이러하다.","사라의 몸종 이집트 여자 하갈이 아브라함에게 낳아준 아들 이스마엘의 후손은 아래와 같다.","사라의 여종 애굽인 하갈이 아브라함에게 낳은 아들 이스마엘의 족보는 이러하고","사라의 여종 애굽인 하갈이 아브라함에게 낳은 아들 이스마엘의 후예는 이러하고","사라의 몸종 애굽 여인 하갈이 낳은 아브라함의 아들 이스마엘 후손의 족보는 이러하다.","These are the descendants of Abraham’s son Ishmael, whom Hagar the Egyptian, Sarah’s slave, bore to Abraham.","Now these are the generations of Ishmael, Abraham's son, whom Hagar the Egyptian, Sarah's handmaid, bare unto Abraham:","This is the account of Abraham's son Ishmael, whom Sarah's maidservant, Hagar the Egyptian,  bore to Abraham.","Hae sunt generationes Ismael filii Abrahae, quem peperit ei Agar Aegyptia famula Sarae.","ואלה תלדת ישמעאל בן אברהם אשר ילדה הגר המצרית שפחת שרה לאברהם׃"],["1","25","13","태어난 순서에 따르면, 이스마엘 아들들의 이름은 이러하다. 곧 이스마엘의 맏아들 느바욧, 케다르, 앗브엘, 밉삼,","이스마엘의 아들들의 이름을 태어난 차례를 따라 적으면 아래와 같다. 맏아들 느바욧, 그 아래로 케달, 아드브엘, 밉삼,","이스마엘의 아들들의 이름은 그 이름과 그 세대대로 이와 같으니라 이스마엘의 장자는 느바욧이요 그 다음은 게달과 앗브엘과 밉삼과","이스마엘의 아들들의 이름은 그 이름과 그 세대대로 이와 같으니라 이스마엘의 장자는 느바욧이요 그 다음은 게달과 앗브엘과 밉삼과","이스마엘의 아들을 태어난 순서대로 보면 다음과 같다. 이스마엘의 맏아들은 느바욧이고 그 다음은 게달, 앗브엘, 밉삼,","These are the names of Ishmael’s sons, listed in the order of their birth: Ishmael’s firstborn Nebaioth, Kedar, Adbeel, Mibsam,","And these are the names of the sons of Ishmael, by their names, according to their generations: the firstborn of Ishmael, Nebajoth; and Kedar, and Adbeel, and Mibsam,","These are the names of the sons of Ishmael, listed in the order of their birth: Nebaioth  the firstborn of Ishmael, Kedar, Adbeel, Mibsam,","Et haec nomina filiorum Ismael in vocabulis et generationibus suis: primogenitus Ismaelis Nabaioth, dein Ceddar et Adbeel et Mabsam,","ואלה שמות בני ישמעאל בשמתם לתולדתם בכר ישמעאל נבית וקדר ואדבאל ומבשם׃"],["1","25","14","미스마, 두마, 마싸,","미스마, 두마, 마싸,","미스마와 두마와 맛사와","미스마와 두마와 맛사와","미스마, 두마, 맛사,","Mishma, Dumah, Massa,","And Mishma, and Dumah, and Massa,","Mishma, Dumah, Massa,","Masma quoque et Duma et Massa,","ומשמע ודומה ומשא׃"],["1","25","15","하닷, 테마, 여투르, 나피스, 케드마이다.","하닷, 데마, 여툴, 나비스, 케드마.","하닷과 데마와 여둘과 나비스와 게드마니","하닷과 데마와 여둘과 나비스와 게드마니","하닷, 데마, 여둘, 나비스, 게드마였다.","Hadad, Tema, Jetur, Naphish, and Kedemah.","Hadar, and Tema, Jetur, Naphish, and Kedemah:","Hadad, Tema, Jetur, Naphish and Kedemah.","Hadad et Thema, Iethur et Naphis et Cedma.","חדד ותימא יטור נפיש וקדמה׃"],["1","25","16","이들이 이스마엘의 아들들이고, 또 마을과 고을에 따라 본 그들의 이름으로서, 열두 부족의 족장들이다.","이것이 이스마엘의 아들들의 이름이다. 이것은 그들이 모여 사는 천막촌의 이름이요, 열두 부족의 대표 이름이기도 하다.","이들은 이스마엘의 아들들이요 그 촌과 부락대로 된 이름이며 그 족속대로는 열두 지도자들이었더라","이들은 이스마엘의 아들들이요 그 촌과 부락대로 된 이름이며 그 족속대로는 십 이 방백이었더라","이들은 모두 이스마엘의 아들이었다. 이들은 열두 부족의 조상들이었고, 이들이 살던 동네와 지역은 이들의 이름을 따라 불려졌다.","These are the sons of Ishmael, their names by their villages and encampments; twelve chieftains of as many tribal groups.","These are the sons of Ishmael, and these are their names, by their towns, and by their castles; twelve princes according to their nations.","These were the sons of Ishmael, and these are the names of the twelve tribal rulers  according to their settlements and camps.","Isti sunt filii Ismaelis, et haec nomina eorum per vicos et mansiones eorum: duodecim principes tribuum suarum.","אלה הם בני ישמעאל ואלה שמתם בחצריהם ובטירתם שנים עשר נשיאם לאמתם׃"],["1","25","17","이스마엘이 산 햇수는 백삼십칠 년이다. 그는 숨을 거두고 죽어 선조들 곁으로 갔다.","이스마엘은 백삼십칠 년을 살고 세상을 떠났다.","이스마엘은 향년이 백삼십칠 세에 기운이 다하여 죽어 자기 백성에게로 돌아갔고","이스마엘은 향년이 일백 삼십 칠세에 기운이 진하여 죽어 자기 열조에게로 돌아갔고","이스마엘은 137세까지 살고 기력이 쇠하여 조상들이 있는 곳으로 돌아갔다.","The span of Ishmael’s life was one hundred and thirty-seven years. After he had breathed his last and died, he was gathered to his people.","And these are the years of the life of Ishmael, an hundred and thirty and seven years: and he gave up the ghost and died; and was gathered unto his people.","Altogether, Ishmael lived a hundred and thirty-seven years. He breathed his last and died,  and he was gathered to his people.","Et facti sunt anni vitae Ismaelis centum triginta septem; deficiens mortuus est et appositus ad populum suum.","ואלה שני חיי ישמעאל מאת שנה ושלשים שנה ושבע שנים ויגוע וימת ויאסף אל עמיו׃"],["1","25","18","그들은 하윌라에서 수르에 이르는 지방에 살았다. 수르는 이집트 맞은쪽, 아시리아로 가는 곳에 있다. 이렇게 그는 자기의 모든 형제들에게 맞서 혼자 떨어져 살았다.","이스마엘 사람들은 하윌라에서 수르에 이르는 지방에 퍼져 살았다. 수르는 이집트 동쪽 아시리아로 가는 도중에 있다. 이렇게 그들은 모든 골육의 형제들과 맞서 자리를 잡았다.","그 자손들은 하윌라에서부터 앗수르로 통하는 애굽 앞 술까지 이르러 그 모든 형제의 맞은편에 거주하였더라","그 자손들은 하윌라에서부터 앗수르로 통하는 애굽 앞 술까지 이르러 그 모든 형제의 맞은편에 거하였더라","이스마엘의 후손은 애굽 동쪽의 앗수르로 통하는 길목에 위치한 술과 하윌라 사이에 있는 지역에서 살았다. 이들은 이렇게 아브라함의 다른 후손들과는 떨어져서 살았다.","The Ishmaelites ranged from Havilah, by Shur, which is on the border of Egypt, all the way to Asshur; and they pitched camp alongside their various kindred.","And they dwelt from Havilah unto Shur, that is before Egypt, as thou goest toward Assyria: and he died in the presence of all his brethren.","His descendants settled in the area from Havilah to Shur, near the border of Egypt, as you  go toward Asshur. And they lived in hostility toward all their brothers.","Habitaverunt autem ab Hevila usque Sur, quae respicit Aegyptum introeuntibus Assyriam. In faciem cunctorum fratrum suorum obiit.","וישכנו מחוילה עד שור אשר על פני מצרים באכה אשורה על פני כל אחיו נפל׃"],["1","25","19","아브라함의 아들 이사악의 역사는 이러하다. 아브라함은 이사악을 낳았고,","아브라함의 아들 이사악의 역사는 아래와 같다. 아브라함의 혈통을 이어 이사악이 태어났는데,","아브라함의 아들 이삭의 족보는 이러하니라 아브라함이 이삭을 낳았고","아브라함의 아들 이삭의 후예는 이러하니라 아브라함이 이삭을 낳았고","아브라함의 아들 이삭의 이야기는 이러하다.","These are the descendants of Isaac, son of Abraham; Abraham begot Isaac.","And these are the generations of Isaac, Abraham's son: Abraham begat Isaac:","This is the account of Abraham's son Isaac. Abraham became the father of Isaac,","Hae sunt generationes Isaac filii Abraham: Abraham genuit Isaac;","ואלה תולדת יצחק בן אברהם אברהם הוליד את יצחק׃"],["1","25","20","이사악은 나이 마흔에, 파딴 아람에 사는 아람 사람 브투엘의 딸이며 아람 사람 라반의 누이인 레베카를 아내로 맞이하였다.","이사악이 리브가를 아내로 맞을 때 그의 나이는 사십 세였다. 리브가는 바딴아람에 사는 아람 사람 브두엘의 딸로서 아람 사람 라반의 누이였다.","이삭은 사십 세에 리브가를 맞이하여 아내를 삼았으니 리브가는 밧단 아람의 아람 족속 중 브두엘의 딸이요 아람 족속 중 라반의 누이였더라","이삭은 사십세에 리브가를 취하여 아내를 삼았으니 리브가는 밧단 아람의 아람 족속 중 브두엘의 딸이요 아람 족속 중 라반의 누이였더라","이삭은 40세가 되어 리브가와 혼인하였다. 리브가는 메소보다미아 출신인 아람 사람 브두엘의 딸이며 라반의 누이동생이다.","Isaac was forty years old when he married Rebekah, the daughter of Bethuel the Aramean of Paddan-aram and the sister of Laban the Aramean.","And Isaac was forty years old when he took Rebekah to wife, the daughter of Bethuel the Syrian of Padanaram, the sister to Laban the Syrian.","and Isaac was forty years old when he married Rebekah daughter of Bethuel the Aramean from  Paddan Aram and sister of Laban the Aramean.","qui, cum quadraginta esset annorum, duxit uxorem Rebeccam filiam Bathuelis Aramaei de Paddanaram, sororem Laban Aramaei.","ויהי יצחק בן ארבעים שנה בקחתו את רבקה בת בתואל הארמי מפדן ארם אחות לבן הארמי לו לאשה׃"],["1","25","21","이사악은 자기 아내가 임신하지 못하는 몸이었기 때문에, 그를 위하여 주님께 기도하였다. 주님께서 그의 기도를 들어주시어, 그의 아내 레베카가 임신하게 되었다.","리브가가 아기를 낳지 못하였으므로 이사악은 야훼께 아기를 갖게 해달라고 빌었다. 야훼께서 그의 기도를 들어주시어 아내 리브가가 임신하였는데,","이삭이 그의 아내가 임신하지 못하므로 그를 위하여 여호와께 간구하매 여호와께서 그의 간구를 들으셨으므로 그의 아내 리브가가 임신하였더니","이삭이 그 아내가 잉태하지 못하므로 그를 위하여 여호와께 간구하매 여호와께서 그 간구를 들으셨으므로 그 아내 리브가가 잉태하였더니","혼인한 뒤에도 리브가에게 아이가 없자 이삭은 아이를 갖게 해달라고 여호와께 간구하였다. 여호와께서는 그의 기도를 들으시고 리브가에게 아이를 갖게 하셨는데","Isaac entreated the LORD on behalf of his wife, since she was sterile. The LORD heard his entreaty, and his wife Rebekah became pregnant.","And Isaac intreated the LORD for his wife, because she was barren: and the LORD was intreated of him, and Rebekah his wife conceived.","Isaac prayed to the LORD on behalf of his wife, because she was barren. The LORD answered  his prayer, and his wife Rebekah became pregnant.","Deprecatusque est Isaac Dominum pro uxore sua, eo quod esset sterilis. Qui exaudivit eum et dedit conceptum Rebeccae.","ויעתר יצחק ליהוה לנכח אשתו כי עקרה הוא ויעתר לו יהוה ותהר רבקה אשתו׃"],["1","25","22","그런데 아기들이 속에서 서로 부딪쳐 대자, 레베카는 “어째서 나에게 이런 일이 일어나는가?” 하면서, 주님께 문의하러 갔다.","뱃속에 든 두 아이가 서로 싸우므로 리브가는 \"이렇게 괴로워서야 어디 살겠는가!\" 하면서 야훼께 까닭을 물으러 나갔다.","그 아들들이 그의 태 속에서 서로 싸우는지라 그가 이르되 이럴 경우에는 내가 어찌할꼬 하고 가서 여호와께 묻자온대","아이들이 그의 태 속에서 서로 싸우는지라 그가 가로되 이같으면 내가 어찌할꼬 하고 가서 여호와께 묻자온대","두 아이가 뱃속에서 서로 다투었다. 리브가는 어찌나 고통이 심하던지 \"어휴, 어쩌다 내게 이런 일이 닥쳤을까\" 하며 괴로워하였다. 그래서 리브가는 어찌하면 좋겠느냐고 여호와께 여쭈어 보았다.","But the children jostled each other in the womb so much that she exclaimed, “If it is like this, why go on living!” She went to consult the LORD,","And the children struggled together within her; and she said, If it be so, why am I thus? And she went to enquire of the LORD.","The babies jostled each other within her, and she said, \"Why is this happening to me?\" So  she went to inquire of the LORD.","Sed collidebantur in utero eius parvuli. Quae ait:  “Si sic est, cur mihi? “. Perrexitque, ut consuleret Dominum.","ויתרצצו הבנים בקרבה ותאמר אם כן למה זה אנכי ותלך לדרש את יהוה׃"],["1","25","23","주님께서 그에게 대답하셨다. “너의 배 속에는 두 민족이 들어 있다. 두 겨레가 네 몸에서 나와 갈라지리라. 한 겨레가 다른 겨레보다 강하고 형이 동생을 섬기리라.”","야훼께서 리브가에게 말씀하셨다. \"너의 태에는 두 민족이 들어 있다. 태에서 나오기도 전에 두 부족으로 갈라졌는데, 한 부족이 다른 부족을 억누를 것이다. 형이 동생을 섬기게 될 것이다.\"","여호와께서 그에게 이르시되 두 국민이 네 태중에 있구나 두 민족이 네 복중에서부터 나누이리라 이 족속이 저 족속보다 강하겠고 큰 자가 어린 자를 섬기리라 하셨더라","여호와께서 그에게 이르시되 두 국민이 네 태중에 있구나 두 민족이 네 복중에서부터 나누이리라 이 족속이 저 족속보다 강하겠고 큰 자는 어린 자를 섬기리라 하셨더라","그러자 여호와께서는 이렇게 대답하셨다. \"두 나라가 네 속에 있구나. 서로 싸울 두 민족을 낳겠구나. 한 쪽이 다른 쪽을 짓누르겠구나. 형이 아우를 섬기겠구나\"","and the LORD answered her: Two nations are in your womb, two peoples are separating while still within you; But one will be stronger than the other, and the older will serve the younger.","And the LORD said unto her, Two nations are in thy womb, and two manner of people shall be separated from thy bowels; and the one people shall be stronger than the other people; and the elder shall serve the younger.","The LORD said to her, \"Two nations are in your womb, and two peoples from within you will  be separated; one people will be stronger than the other, and the older will serve the younger.\"","Qui respondens ait:  “Duae gentes sunt in utero tuo, et duo populi ex ventre tuo dividentur; populusque populum superabit, et maior serviet minori “.","ויאמר יהוה לה שני גיים בבטנך ושני לאמים ממעיך יפרדו ולאם מלאם יאמץ ורב יעבד צעיר׃"],["1","25","24","달이 차서 몸 풀 때가 되고 보니, 레베카의 배 속에는 쌍둥이가 들어 있었다.","달이 차서 몸을 풀고 보니 쌍둥이였다.","그 해산 기한이 찬즉 태에 쌍둥이가 있었는데","그 해산 기한이 찬즉 태에 쌍동이가 있었는데","해산할 때가 다 되어 리브가는 쌍둥이를 낳았는데","When the time of her delivery came, there were twins in her womb.","And when her days to be delivered were fulfilled, behold, there were twins in her womb.","When the time came for her to give birth, there were twin boys in her womb.","Iam tempus pariendi venerat, et ecce gemini in utero eius.","וימלאו ימיה ללדת והנה תומם בבטנה׃"],["1","25","25","선둥이가 나왔는데 살갗이 붉고 온몸이 털투성이라, 그의 이름을 에사우라 하였다.","선둥이는 살결이 붉은데다가 온 몸이 털투성이였다. 그래서 이름을 에사오라 하였다.","먼저 나온 자는 붉고 전신이 털옷 같아서 이름을 에서라 하였고","먼저 나온 자는 붉고 전신이 갖옷 같아서 이름을 에서라 하였고","먼저 나온 아이는 온 몸이 불그스레하고 털투성이였다. 그래서 그 아이의 이름을 \"털보\"라는 뜻으로 에서라 지어 불렀다.","The first to emerge was reddish, and his whole body was like a hairy mantle; so they named him Esau.","And the first came out red, all over like an hairy garment; and they called his name Esau.","The first to come out was red, and his whole body was like a hairy garment; so they named  him Esau.","Qui primus egressus est rufus erat et totus quasi pallium pilosum; vocatumque est nomen eius Esau. Postea frater eius egrediens plantam Esau tenebat manu, et idcirco appellatum est nomen eius Iacob.","ויצא הראשון אדמוני כלו כאדרת שער ויקראו שמו עשו׃"],["1","25","26","이어 동생이 나오는데, 그의 손이 에사우의 발뒤꿈치를 붙잡고 있어, 그의 이름을 야곱이라 하였다. 이들이 태어났을 때 이사악의 나이는 예순 살이었다.","후둥이는 에사오의 발꿈치를 잡고 나왔다. 그래서 그의 이름을 야곱이라 했다. 리브가가 그들을 낳은 것은 이사악이 육십 세 되던 해였다.","후에 나온 아우는 손으로 에서의 발꿈치를 잡았으므로 그 이름을 야곱이라 하였으며 리브가가 그들을 낳을 때에 이삭이 육십 세였더라","후에 나온 아우는 손으로 에서의 발꿈치를 잡았으므로 그 이름을 1)야곱이라 하였으며 리브가가 그들을 낳을 때에 이삭이 육십세이었더라발꿈치를 잡았다는 뜻","둘째 아이는 나올 때 형 에서의 발뒤꿈치를 꼭 붙들고 나왔다. 그래서 그 아이의 이름을 \"발뒤꿈치\"라는 뜻으로 야곱이라 지어 불렀다. 이 두 아이를 낳았을 때 이삭의 나이는 60세였다.","Next his brother came out, gripping Esau’s heel; so he was named Jacob. Isaac was sixty years old when they were born.","And after that came his brother out, and his hand took hold on Esau's heel; and his name was called Jacob: and Isaac was threescore years old when she bare them.","After this, his brother came out, with his hand grasping Esau's heel; so he was named  Jacob. Isaac was sixty years old when Rebekah gave birth to them.","Sexagenarius erat Isaac, quando nati sunt parvuli.","ואחרי כן יצא אחיו וידו אחזת בעקב עשו ויקרא שמו יעקב ויצחק בן ששים שנה בלדת אתם׃"],["1","25","27","이 아이들이 자라서, 에사우는 솜씨 좋은 사냥꾼 곧 들사람이 되고, 야곱은 온순한 사람으로 천막에서 살았다.","두 아들이 자라나, 에사오는 날쌘 사냥꾼이 되어 들에서 살고, 야곱은 성질이 차분하여 천막에 머물러 살았다.","그 아이들이 장성하매 에서는 익숙한 사냥꾼이었으므로 들사람이 되고 야곱은 조용한 사람이었으므로 장막에 거주하니","그 아이들이 장성하매 에서는 익숙한 사냥군인고로 들사람이 되고 야곱은 종용한 사람인고로 장막에 거하니","두 아이는 무럭무럭 자라났다. 에서는 커서 솜씨가 매우 좋은 사냥꾼이 되었다. 에서는 밖에 나가서 지내기를 좋아하였다. 그러나 야곱은 조용한 성격을 지녔기 때문에 집안에서 지내는 것을 더 좋아하였다.","When the boys grew up, Esau became a skillful hunter, a man of the open country; whereas Jacob was a simple man, who stayed among the tents.","And the boys grew: and Esau was a cunning hunter, a man of the field; and Jacob was a plain man, dwelling in tents.","The boys grew up, and Esau became a skillful hunter, a man of the open country, while Jacob  was a quiet man, staying among the tents.","Quibus adultis, factus est Esau vir gnarus venandi et homo agrestis; Iacob autem vir compositus et habitans in tabernaculis.","ויגדלו הנערים ויהי עשו איש ידע ציד איש שדה ויעקב איש תם ישב אהלים׃"],["1","25","28","이사악은 사냥한 고기를 좋아하여 에사우를 사랑하였고, 레베카는 야곱을 사랑하였다.","이사악은 에사오가 사냥해 오는 고기에 맛을 들여 에사오를 더 사랑하였고 리브가는 야곱을 더 사랑하였다.","이삭은 에서가 사냥한 고기를 좋아하므로 그를 사랑하고 리브가는 야곱을 사랑하였더라","이삭은 에서의 사냥한 고기를 좋아하므로 그를 사랑하고 리브가는 야곱을 사랑하였더라","이삭은 에서를 더 귀여워하였다. 에서가 잡아 온 들짐승 고기를 이삭이 좋아한 까닭이다. 그러나 어머니 리브가는 에서보다 야곱을 더 귀여워하였다.","Isaac preferred Esau, because he was fond of game; but Rebekah preferred Jacob.","And Isaac loved Esau, because he did eat of his venison: but Rebekah loved Jacob.","Isaac, who had a taste for wild game, loved Esau, but Rebekah loved Jacob.","Isaac amabat Esau, eo quod de venationibus illius libenter vesceretur; et Rebecca diligebat Iacob.","ויאהב יצחק את עשו כי ציד בפיו ורבקה אהבת את יעקב׃"],["1","25","29","하루는 야곱이 죽을 끓이고 있었다. 그때 에사우가 허기진 채 들에서 돌아왔다.","하루는 에사오가 허기져 들에서 돌아와 보니 야곱이 죽을 끓이고 있었다.","야곱이 죽을 쑤었더니 에서가 들에서 돌아와서 심히 피곤하여","야곱이 죽을 쑤었더니 에서가 들에서부터 돌아와서 심히 곤비하여","어느 날 야곱이 죽을 끓이고 있었는데, 마침 에서가 들에서 사냥을 하고 돌아왔다. 에서는 너무나 배가 고파","Once, when Jacob was cooking a stew, Esau came in from the open country, famished.","And Jacob sod pottage: and Esau came from the field, and he was faint:","Once when Jacob was cooking some stew, Esau came in from the open country, famished.","Coxit autem Iacob pulmentum; ad quem, cum venisset Esau de agro lassus, Dixerunt:  “Vocemus puellam et quaeramus ipsius voluntatem “.","ויזד יעקב נזיד ויבא עשו מן השדה והוא עיף׃"],["1","25","30","에사우가 야곱에게 “허기지구나. 저 붉은 것, 그 붉은 것 좀 먹게 해 다오.” 하고 말하였다. 그리하여 그의 이름을 에돔이라 하였다.","에사오가 야곱에게 \"배고파 죽겠다. 그 붉은 죽 좀 먹자.\" 하였다. 그의 이름을 1)에돔이라고도 부르는 데는 이런 사연이 있다. \"에돔\"은 '붉다'는 히브리어 \"아돔\"과 비슷하다.","야곱에게 이르되 내가 피곤하니 그 붉은 것을 내가 먹게 하라 한지라 그러므로 에서의 별명은 에돔이더라","야곱에게 이르되 내가 곤비하니 그 붉은 것을 나로 먹게 하라 한지라 그러므로 에서의 별명은 2)에돔이더라 붉음","죽을 끓이고 있는 야곱에게 말을 건넸다. \"야곱아, 내가 지금 무척 배가 고프다. 네가 지금 끓이고 있는 붉은 죽을 나한테 좀 줄래? 먹고 싶어 죽을 지경이다.\" 이 때문에 에서의 별명이 \"붉다\"라는 뜻의 에돔이 되었다.","He said to Jacob, “Let me gulp down some of that red stuff; I am famished.” That is why he was called Edom.","And Esau said to Jacob, Feed me, I pray thee, with that same red pottage; for I am faint: therefore was his name called Edom.","He said to Jacob, \"Quick, let me have some of that red stew! I'm famished!\" (That is why he  was also called Edom.)","ait:  “Da mihi de coctione hac rufa, quia oppido lassus sum “. Quam ob causam vocatum est nomen eius Edom (id est Rufus).","ויאמר עשו אל יעקב הלעיטני נא מן האדם האדם הזה כי עיף אנכי על כן קרא שמו אדום׃"],["1","25","31","그러나 야곱은 “먼저 형의 맏아들 권리를 내게 파시오.” 하고 말하였다.","야곱이 형에게 당장 상속권을 팔라고 제안하자","야곱이 이르되 형의 장자의 명분을 오늘 내게 팔라","야곱이 가로되 형의 장자의 명분을 오늘날 내게 팔라","\"지금 형의 장자권을 나한테 팔아. 그러면 내가 이 죽을 줄께\"하고 야곱이 대답하였다.","But Jacob replied, “First sell me your right as firstborn.”","And Jacob said, Sell me this day thy birthright.","Jacob replied, \"First sell me your birthright.\"","Cui dixit Iacob:  “Vende mihi prius primogenita tua “.","ויאמר יעקב מכרה כיום את בכרתך לי׃"],["1","25","32","그러자 에사우가 대답하였다. “내가 지금 죽을 지경인데, 맏아들 권리가 내게 무슨 소용이겠느냐?”","에사오는 배고파 죽을 지경인데 상속권 따위가 무슨 소용이 있느냐고 하였다.","에서가 이르되 내가 죽게 되었으니 이 장자의 명분이 내게 무엇이 유익하리요","에서가 가로되 내가 죽게 되었으니 이 장자의 명분이 내게 무엇이 유익하리요","\"그래, 내가 지금 배가 고파 죽을 지경인 데 내가 가지고 있는 장자권이 무슨 소용이 있겠니. 좋아 내 장자권을 네가 가져\" 하고 에서가 말하였다.","“Look,” said Esau, “I am on the point of dying. What good is the right as firstborn to me?”","And Esau said, Behold, I am at the point to die: and what profit shall this birthright do to me?","\"Look, I am about to die,\" Esau said. \"What good is the birthright to me?\"","Ille respondit:  “En morior; quid mihi proderunt primogenita? “.","ויאמר עשו הנה אנכי הולך למות ולמה זה לי בכרה׃"],["1","25","33","그래서 야곱이 “먼저 나에게 맹세부터 하시오.” 하자, 에사우는 맹세를 하고 자기의 맏아들 권리를 야곱에게 팔아넘겼다.","그러나 야곱은, 먼저 맹세부터 하라고 다그쳐 요구하였다. 에사오는 맹세하고 장자의 상속권을 야곱에게 팔아 넘겼다.","야곱이 이르되 오늘 내게 맹세하라 에서가 맹세하고 장자의 명분을 야곱에게 판지라","야곱이 가로되 오늘 내게 맹세하라 에서가 맹세하고 장자의 명분을 야곱에게 판지라","\"그럼, 지금 나한테 맹세를 해줘. 나에게 장자권을 주겠다고 말야\" 하고 야곱이 말하였다. 에서는 야곱이 말한 대로 맹세를 하고 그의 장자권을 야곱에게 주었다.","But Jacob said, “Swear to me first!” So he sold Jacob his right as firstborn under oath.","And Jacob said, Swear to me this day; and he sware unto him: and he sold his birthright unto Jacob.","But Jacob said, \"Swear to me first.\" So he swore an oath to him, selling his birthright to  Jacob.","Ait Iacob:  “Iura ergo mihi “. Iuravit et vendidit primogenita.","ויאמר יעקב השבעה לי כיום וישבע לו וימכר את בכרתו ליעקב׃"],["1","25","34","그러자 야곱이 빵과 불콩죽을 에사우에게 주었다. 그는 먹고 마시고서는 일어나 나갔다. 이렇게 에사우는 맏아들 권리를 대수롭지 않게 여겼다.","그리고 에사오는 야곱에게서 떡과 불콩죽을 받아먹은 후에 일어나 나갔다. 이렇게 에사오는 자기의 상속권을 대수롭지 않게 여겼다.","야곱이 떡과 팥죽을 에서에게 주매 에서가 먹으며 마시고 일어나 갔으니 에서가 장자의 명분을 가볍게 여김이었더라","야곱이 떡과 팥죽을 에서에게 주매 에서가 먹으며 마시고 일어나서 갔으니 에서가 장자의 명분을 경홀히 여김이었더라","그러자 야곱이 떡 몇 개와 자기가 쑨 팥죽을 에서에게 주자 에서는 그것을 먹고는 일어나 나갔다. 에서는 이렇게 장자의 권한을 별것 아닌 것처럼 가볍게 생각하였다.","Jacob then gave him some bread and the lentil stew; and Esau ate, drank, got up, and went his way. So Esau treated his right as firstborn with disdain.","Then Jacob gave Esau bread and pottage of lentiles; and he did eat and drink, and rose up, and went his way: thus Esau despised his birthright.","Then Jacob gave Esau some bread and some lentil stew. He ate and drank, and then got up and  left. So Esau despised his birthright.","Et sic, accepto pane et lentis edulio, comedit et bibit; surrexit et abiit parvipendens quod primogenita vendidisset.","ויעקב נתן לעשו לחם ונזיד עדשים ויאכל וישת ויקם וילך ויבז עשו את הבכרה׃"],["1","26","1","일찍이 아브라함 시대에 기근이 든 적이 있었는데, 그 땅에 또 기근이 들었다. 그래서 이사악은 그라르로 필리스티아 임금 아비멜렉에게 갔다.","그 지방에는 아브라함 당시에도 흉년이 든 일이 있었는데 그런 흉년이 또 들었다. 그래서 이사악은 불레셋 왕 아비멜렉이 사는 그랄로 가려는데","아브라함 때에 첫 흉년이 들었더니 그 땅에 또 흉년이 들매 이삭이 그랄로 가서 블레셋 왕 아비멜렉에게 이르렀더니","아브라함 때에 첫 흉년이 들었더니 그 땅에 또 흉년이 들매 이삭이 그랄로 가서 블레셋왕 아비멜렉에게 이르렀더니","그 땅에 일찍이 아브라함이 살던 시절에 있었던 것과 같은 매우 심한 기근이 또다시 들었다. 그래서 이삭은 블레셋 왕 아비멜렉이 다스리고 있던 그랄로 갔다.","There was a famine in the land, distinct from the earlier one that had occurred in the days of Abraham, and Isaac went down to Abimelech, king of the Philistines in Gerar.","And there was a famine in the land, beside the first famine that was in the days of Abraham. And Isaac went unto Abimelech king of the Philistines unto Gerar.","Now there was a famine in the land--besides the earlier famine of Abraham's time--and Isaac  went to Abimelech king of the Philistines in Gerar.","Orta autem fame super terram post eam sterilitatem, quae acciderat in diebus Abraham, abiit Isaac ad Abimelech regem Philisthim in Gerara.","ויהי רעב בארץ מלבד הרעב הראשון אשר היה בימי אברהם וילך יצחק אל אבימלך מלך פלשתים גררה׃"],["1","26","2","주님께서 이사악에게 나타나 말씀하셨다. “이집트로 내려가지 말고, 내가 너에게 일러 주는 땅에 자리 잡아라.","야훼께서 나타나 말씀하셨다. \"이집트로 내려가지 말고 내가 너에게 일러주는 땅에 자리잡고","여호와께서 이삭에게 나타나 이르시되 애굽으로 내려가지 말고 내가 네게 지시하는 땅에 거주하라","여호와께서 이삭에게 나타나 가라사대 애굽으로 내려가지말고 내가 네게 지시하는 땅에 거하라","그때 여호와께서 이삭에게 나타나 말씀하셨다. \"애굽으로는 내려가지 말아라. 내가 일찍이 가서 살라고 말해 두었던 이 땅에서 그냥 살아라.","The LORD appeared to him and said: Do not go down to Egypt, but camp in this land wherever I tell you.","And the LORD appeared unto him, and said, Go not down into Egypt; dwell in the land which I shall tell thee of:","The LORD appeared to Isaac and said, \"Do not go down to Egypt; live in the land where I tell  you to live.","Apparuitque ei Dominus et ait:  “Ne descendas in Aegyptum, sed habita in terra, quam dixero tibi,","וירא אליו יהוה ויאמר אל תרד מצרימה שכן בארץ אשר אמר אליך׃"],["1","26","3","너는 이 땅에서 나그네살이하여라. 내가 너와 함께 있으면서, 너에게 복을 내려 주겠다. 내가 너와 네 후손에게 이 모든 땅을 주고, 너의 아버지 아브라함에게 맹세한 그 맹세를 이루어 주겠다.","그 땅에 몸붙여 살아라. 나는 너를 보살펴 주며 너에게 복을 내려주리라. 네 아비 아브라함과 맺은 내 맹세를 지켜 이 모든 지방을 너와 네 후손에게 주리라.","이 땅에 거류하면 내가 너와 함께 있어 네게 복을 주고 내가 이 모든 땅을 너와 네 자손에게 주리라 내가 네 아버지 아브라함에게 맹세한 것을 이루어","이 땅에 유하면 내가 너와 함께 있어 네게 복을 주고 내가 이 모든 땅을 너와 네 자손에게 주리라 내가 네 아비 아브라함에게 맹세한 것을 이루어","내가 너와 함께 할 것이고, 또 네게 복을 내리리라. 이 온 땅을 내가 너와 네 후손에게 주리라. 내가 일찍이 네 아버지 아브라함에게 맹세하였던 것을 다 이루리라.","Sojourn in this land, and I will be with you and bless you; for to you and your descendants I will give all these lands, in fulfillment of the oath that I swore to your father Abraham.","Sojourn in this land, and I will be with thee, and will bless thee; for unto thee, and unto thy seed, I will give all these countries, and I will perform the oath which I sware unto Abraham thy father;","Stay in this land for a while, and I will be with you and will bless you. For to you and  your descendants I will give all these lands and will confirm the oath I swore to your father  Abraham.","et peregrinare in ea; eroque tecum et benedicam tibi. Tibi enim et semini tuo dabo universas regiones has complens iuramentum, quod spopondi Abraham patri tuo,","גור בארץ הזאת ואהיה עמך ואברכך כי לך ולזרעך אתן את כל הארצת האל והקמתי את השבעה אשר נשבעתי לאברהם אביך׃"],["1","26","4","너의 후손을 하늘의 별처럼 불어나게 하고, 네 후손에게 이 모든 땅을 주겠다. 세상의 모든 민족들이 너의 후손을 통하여 복을 받을 것이다.","그리고 네 자손을 하늘에 있는 별만큼 불어나게 하여 그들에게 이 모든 지방을 주리라. 땅 위의 모든 민족이 네 후손의 덕을 입을 것이다.","네 자손을 하늘의 별과 같이 번성하게 하며 이 모든 땅을 네 자손에게 주리니 네 자손으로 말미암아 천하 만민이 복을 받으리라","네 자손을 하늘의 별과 같이 번성케 하며 이 모든 땅을 네 자손에게 주리니 네 자손을 인하여 천하 만민이 복을 받으리라","이제 네 후손은 하늘에 총총히 떠 있는 별과 같이 무수히 불어나리라. 내가 분명히 말한다만 이 땅을 네 후손에게 주리라. 네 후손으로 말미암아 뭇 백성들이 복을 받을 것이다.","I will make your descendants as numerous as the stars in the sky, and I will give them all these lands, and in your descendants all the nations of the earth will find blessing—","And I will make thy seed to multiply as the stars of heaven, and will give unto thy seed all these countries; and in thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed;","I will make your descendants as numerous as the stars in the sky and will give them all  these lands, and through your offspring all nations on earth will be blessed,","et multiplicabo semen tuum sicut stellas caeli daboque posteris tuis universas regiones has; et benedicentur in semine tuo omnes gentes terrae,","והרביתי את זרעך ככוכבי השמים ונתתי לזרעך את כל הארצת האל והתברכו בזרעך כל גויי הארץ׃"],["1","26","5","이는 아브라함이 내 말에 순종하고, 나의 명령과 나의 계명, 나의 규정과 나의 법을 지켰기 때문이다.”","이는 아브라함이 내 말을 따라 내가 지키라고 일러준 나의 계명과 규정과 훈계를 성심껏 지킨 덕이다.\"","이는 아브라함이 내 말을 순종하고 내 명령과 내 계명과 내 율례와 내 법도를 지켰음이라 하시니라","이는 아브라함이 내 말을 순종하고 내 명령과 내 계명과 내 율례와 내 법도를 지켰음이니라 하시니라","이는 네 아버지 아브라함이 내 말을 잘 따르고 또 내가 지시한 것을 잘 지켰기 때문이다.\"","this because Abraham obeyed me, keeping my mandate, my commandments, my ordinances, and my instructions.","Because that Abraham obeyed my voice, and kept my charge, my commandments, my statutes, and my laws.","because Abraham obeyed me and kept my requirements, my commands, my decrees and my laws.\"","eo quod oboedierit Abraham voci meae et custodierit praecepta et mandata mea et iustificationes legesque servaverit “.","עקב אשר שמע אברהם בקלי וישמר משמרתי מצותי חקותי ותורתי׃"],["1","26","6","이리하여 이사악은 그라르에 살게 되었다.","이리하여 이사악은 그랄에서 살게 되었는데,","이삭이 그랄에 거주하였더니","이삭이 그랄에 거하였더니","그래서 이삭은 그랄에서 그냥 머물러 살았다.","So Isaac settled in Gerar.","And Isaac dwelt in Gerar:","So Isaac stayed in Gerar.","Mansit itaque Isaac in Geraris.","וישב יצחק בגרר׃"],["1","26","7","그런데 그곳 사내들이 자기 아내에 대하여 묻자, 이사악은 “내 누이요.” 하고 대답하였다. 그는 ‘레베카가 예뻐서 이곳 사내들이 레베카 때문에 나를 죽일지도 모르지.’ 하고 생각하였기에, “내 아내요.” 하고 말하기가 두려웠던 것이다.","그 곳 사람들이 이사악의 아내를 보고 이 여자가 누구냐고 물었다. 이사악은 그가 자기의 누이라고 대답하였다. 리브가가 너무 아름다워서 그 곳 사람들이 리브가 때문에 자기를 죽이지나 않을까 걱정이 되어 자기 아내라고 하기를 꺼렸던 것이다.","그 곳 사람들이 그의 아내에 대하여 물으매 그가 말하기를 그는 내 누이라 하였으니 리브가는 보기에 아리따우므로 그 곳 백성이 리브가로 말미암아 자기를 죽일까 하여 그는 내 아내라 하기를 두려워함이었더라","그곳 사람들이 그 아내를 물으매 그가 말하기를 그는 나의 누이라 하였으니 리브가는 보기에 아리따우므로 그곳 백성이 리브가로 인하여 자기를 죽일까 하여 그는 나의 아내라 하기를 두려워함이었더라","이삭은 그곳 사람들이 리브가가 누구냐고 물으면 늘 그 사람은 내 누이라고 대답하였다. 리브가를 빼앗아 가려고 자기를 죽이지는 않을까 해서였다.","When the men of the place asked questions about his wife, he answered, “She is my sister.” He was afraid that, if he called her his wife, the men of the place would kill him on account of Rebekah, since she was beautiful.","And the men of the place asked him of his wife; and he said, She is my sister: for he feared to say, She is my wife; lest, said he, the men of the place should kill me for Rebekah; because she was fair to look upon.","When the men of that place asked him about his wife, he said, \"She is my sister,\" because he  was afraid to say, \"She is my wife.\" He thought, \"The men of this place might kill me on account  of Rebekah, because she is beautiful.\"","Qui, cum interrogaretur a viris loci illius super uxore sua, respondit:  “Soror mea est “. Timuerat enim confiteri quod sibi esset sociata coniugio, reputans ne forte interficerent eum propter illius pulchritudinem.","וישאלו אנשי המקום לאשתו ויאמר אחתי הוא כי ירא לאמר אשתי פן יהרגני אנשי המקום על רבקה כי טובת מראה היא׃"],["1","26","8","이사악이 그곳에 산 지 꽤 오래된 어느 날, 필리스티아 임금 아비멜렉이 창문으로 밖을 내다보니, 이사악이 자기 아내 레베카를 애무하고 있었다.","이사악이 그 곳에 자리잡은 지 얼마 뒤의 일이다. 불레셋 왕 아비멜렉은 창문으로 밖을 내다보다가 이사악이 그의 아내 리브가를 애무하고 있는 것을 보고","이삭이 거기 오래 거주하였더니 이삭이 그 아내 리브가를 껴안은 것을 블레셋 왕 아비멜렉이 창으로 내다본지라","이삭이 거기 오래 거하였더니 이삭이 그 아내 리브가를 껴안은 것을 블레셋 왕 아비멜렉이 창으로 내다본지라","이삭은 한동안 그 땅에서 살았다. 하루는 이삭이 그의 아내 리브가와 사랑을 나누고 있는 모습을 블레셋 왕 아비멜렉이 창문 밖으로 우연히 보게 되었다.","But when they had been there for a long time, Abimelech, king of the Philistines, looked out of a window and saw Isaac fondling his wife Rebekah.","And it came to pass, when he had been there a long time, that Abimelech king of the Philistines looked out at a window, and saw, and, behold, Isaac was sporting with Rebekah his wife.","When Isaac had been there a long time, Abimelech king of the Philistines looked down from a  window and saw Isaac caressing his wife Rebekah.","Cumque pertransissent dies plurimi et ibidem moraretur, prospiciens Abimelech rex Philisthim per fenestram vidit eum iocantem cum Rebecca uxore sua.","ויהי כי ארכו לו שם הימים וישקף אבימלך מלך פלשתים בעד החלון וירא והנה יצחק מצחק את רבקה אשתו׃"],["1","26","9","그래서 아비멜렉이 이사악을 불러 말하였다. “그 여자는 그대의 아내임이 분명한데, 그대는 어째서 ‘그 여자는 내 누이요.’ 하고 말하였소?” 이사악이 그에게 “그 여자 때문에 제가 목숨을 잃을지도 모른다고 생각하였기 때문입니다.” 하고 대답하자,","이사악을 불러들여 나무랐다. \"그 여자는 분명히 네 아내다. 그런데 왜 네 누이라고 하였느냐?\" 이사악이 아내 때문에 죽게 될 것 같아서 그랬노라고 대답하자","이에 아비멜렉이 이삭을 불러 이르되 그가 분명히 네 아내거늘 어찌 네 누이라 하였느냐 이삭이 그에게 대답하되 내 생각에 그로 말미암아 내가 죽게 될까 두려워하였음이로라","이에 아비멜렉이 이삭을 불러 이르되 그가 정녕 네 아내여늘 어찌 네 누이라 하였느냐 이삭이 그에게 대답하되 내 생각에 그를 인하여 내가 죽게 될까 두려워하였음이로라","그래서 아비멜렉은 사람을 보내어 이삭을 불러들여 따졌다. \"아니, 어찌해서 자네 아내를 누이동생이라고 말하였는가? 이 여인은 자네 아내가 분명하지 않은가?\" \"그렇소. 이 사람은 내 아내요. 혹시나 이 사람 때문에 내가 죽임을 당하지는 않을까 두려워서 그렇게 말하였소\" 하고 이삭이 대답하였다.","He called for Isaac and said: “She must certainly be your wife! How could you have said, ‘She is my sister’?” Isaac replied, “I thought I might lose my life on her account.”","And Abimelech called Isaac, and said, Behold, of a surety she is thy wife; and how saidst thou, She is my sister? And Isaac said unto him, Because I said, Lest I die for her.","So Abimelech summoned Isaac and said, \"She is really your wife! Why did you say, 'She is my  sister'?\" Isaac answered him, \"Because I thought I might lose my life on account of her.\"","Et, accersito eo, ait:  “Perspicuum est quod uxor tua sit; cur mentitus es eam sororem tuam esse? “. Respondit:  “Timui, ne morerer propter eam “.","ויקרא אבימלך ליצחק ויאמר אך הנה אשתך הוא ואיך אמרת אחתי הוא ויאמר אליו יצחק כי אמרתי פן אמות עליה׃"],["1","26","10","아비멜렉이 말하였다. “그대는 어쩌자고 우리에게 이런 일을 저질렀소? 하마터면 백성 가운데 누군가 그대 아내와 동침하여, 우리를 죄에 빠뜨릴 뻔하지 않았소?”","아비멜렉은 \"어쩌다가 우리에게 이런 일을 했느냐? 하마터면 내 백성 가운데 누가 네 아내를 범할 뻔했다. 너 때문에 우리가 죄를 뒤집어쓸 뻔하지 않았느냐?\" 하고 나무라고 나서","아비멜렉이 이르되 네가 어찌 우리에게 이렇게 행하였느냐 백성 중 하나가 네 아내와 동침할 뻔하였도다 네가 죄를 우리에게 입혔으리라","아비멜렉이 가로되 네가 어찌 우리에게 이렇게 행하였느냐 백성 중 하나가 네 아내와 동침하기 쉬웠을뻔 하였은즉 네가 죄를 우리에게 입혔으리라","\"어쩌자고 우리에게 그런 거짓말을 하였소? 하마터면 우리 땅에 사는 사람들이 자네 부인과 쉽게 동침할 뻔하지 않았소? 우리가 자네 때문에 죄를 질 뻔하였군\" 하고 말하면서","“How could you have done this to us!” exclaimed Abimelech. “It would have taken very little for one of the people to lie with your wife, and so you would have brought guilt upon us!”","And Abimelech said, What is this thou hast done unto us? one of the people might lightly have lien with thy wife, and thou shouldest have brought guiltiness upon us.","Then Abimelech said, \"What is this you have done to us? One of the men might well have  slept with your wife, and you would have brought guilt upon us.\"","Dixitque Abimelech:  “Quare hoc fecisti nobis? Potuit coire quispiam de populo cum uxore tua, et induxeras super nos grande peccatum “. Praecepitque omni populo dicens:","ויאמר אבימלך מה זאת עשית לנו כמעט שכב אחד העם את אשתך והבאת עלינו אשם׃"],["1","26","11","그러고서 아비멜렉은 온 백성에게 경고하였다. “이 남자와 이 여자를 건드리는 자는 사형을 받을 것이다.”","온 국민에게 경고를 내렸다. \"이 사람이나 그의 아내를 건드리는 자는 누구든지 사형을 받을 것이다.\"","아비멜렉이 이에 모든 백성에게 명하여 이르되 이 사람이나 그의 아내를 범하는 자는 죽이리라 하였더라","아비멜렉이 이에 모든 백성에게 명하여 가로되 이 사람이나 그 아내에게 범하는 자는 죽이리라 하였더라","그곳 사람들에게 다음과 같이 경고하였다 \"누구든 이 사람이나 그의 아내를 건드리는 자는 반드시 죽이리라.\"","Abimelech then commanded all the people: “Anyone who maltreats this man or his wife shall be put to death.”","And Abimelech charged all his people, saying, He that toucheth this man or his wife shall surely be put to death.","So Abimelech gave orders to all the people: \"Anyone who molests this man or his wife shall  surely be put to death.\"","Qui tetigerit hominem hunc et uxorem eius, morte morietur.","ויצו אבימלך את כל העם לאמר הנגע באיש הזה ובאשתו מות יומת׃"],["1","26","12","이사악은 그 땅에 씨를 뿌려, 그해에 수확을 백 배나 올렸다. 주님께서 그에게 이렇듯 복을 내리시어,","이사악은 그 땅에 씨를 뿌려 그 해에 수확을 백 배나 올렸다. 야훼께서 이렇듯 복을 내리셔서","이삭이 그 땅에서 농사하여 그 해에 백 배나 얻었고 여호와께서 복을 주시므로","이삭이 그 땅에서 농사하여 그 해에 백배나 얻었고 여호와께서 복을 주시므로","그해 이삭은 그 땅에서 농사를 지어 다른 해보다도 백 배나 더 소출을 거두어들였다. 여호와께서 그에게 복을 내리신 까닭이다.","Isaac sowed a crop in that region and reaped a hundredfold the same year. Since the LORD blessed him,","Then Isaac sowed in that land, and received in the same year an hundredfold: and the LORD blessed him.","Isaac planted crops in that land and the same year reaped a hundredfold, because the LORD  blessed him.","Sevit autem Isaac in terra illa et invenit in ipso anno centuplum; benedixitque ei Dominus.","ויזרע יצחק בארץ ההוא וימצא בשנה ההוא מאה שערים ויברכהו יהוה׃"],["1","26","13","그는 부자가 되었다. 그는 점점 더 부유해져 마침내 큰 부자가 되었다.","그는 부자가 되었다. 점점 재산이 불어 마침내 거부가 되었다.","그 사람이 창대하고 왕성하여 마침내 거부가 되어","그 사람이 창대하고 왕성하여 마침내 거부가 되어","그는 농사가 계속 잘 되어 재산이 자꾸 불어나 큰 부자가 되었다.","he became richer and richer all the time, until he was very wealthy.","And the man waxed great, and went forward, and grew until he became very great:","The man became rich, and his wealth continued to grow until he became very wealthy.","Et locupletatus est homo et ibat proficiens atque succrescens, donec magnus vehementer effectus est;","ויגדל האיש וילך הלוך וגדל עד כי גדל מאד׃"],["1","26","14","그가 양 떼와 소 떼와 많은 하인을 거느리자, 필리스티아인들이 그를 시기하였다.","그는 양떼와 소떼와 많은 종들을 거느리게 되어 불레셋 사람들의 시기를 사게 되었다.","양과 소가 떼를 이루고 종이 심히 많으므로 블레셋 사람이 그를 시기하여","양과 소가 떼를 이루고 노복이 심히 많으므로 블레셋 사람이 그를 시기하여","이렇게 양떼와 소떼가 자꾸 불어나고 또 종들도 많아지자 그 땅에 살고 있던 블레셋 사람들이 이삭에게 샘을 내었다.","He acquired flocks and herds, and a great work force, and so the Philistines became envious of him.","For he had possession of flocks, and possession of herds, and great store of servants: and the Philistines envied him.","He had so many flocks and herds and servants that the Philistines envied him.","habuitque possessionem ovium et armentorum et familiae plurimum. Ob haec invidentes ei Philisthim","ויהי לו מקנה צאן ומקנה בקר ועבדה רבה ויקנאו אתו פלשתים׃"],["1","26","15","그래서 필리스티아인들은 이사악의 아버지 아브라함 시대에 이사악 아버지의 종들이 판 우물을 모두 막고 흙으로 메워 버렸다.","불레셋 사람들은 전에 이사악의 아버지 아브라함의 종들이 아브라함 생전에 팠던 우물을 모조리 흙으로 메워버렸다.","그 아버지 아브라함 때에 그 아버지의 종들이 판 모든 우물을 막고 흙으로 메웠더라","그 아비 아브라함 때에 그 아비의 종들이 판 모든 우물을 막고 흙으로 메웠더라","결국 블레셋 사람들은 이삭의 아버지 아브라함이 살아 있을 때 그 종들이 파놓은 우물을 다 메워 버렸다.","The Philistines had stopped up and filled with dirt all the wells that his father’s servants had dug back in the days of his father Abraham.","For all the wells which his father's servants had digged in the days of Abraham his father, the Philistines had stopped them, and filled them with earth.","So all the wells that his father's servants had dug in the time of his father Abraham, the  Philistines stopped up, filling them with earth.","omnes puteos, quos foderant servi patris illius in diebus Abraham, obstruxerunt implentes humo,","וכל הבארת אשר חפרו עבדי אביו בימי אברהם אביו סתמום פלשתים וימלאום עפר׃"],["1","26","16","아비멜렉이 이사악에게 말하였다. “이제 그대가 우리보다 훨씬 강해졌으니, 우리를 떠나 주시오.”","한편 아비멜렉은 이사악에게 \"너는 우리보다도 훨씬 강해졌으니 여기에서 물러가라.\" 하였다.","아비멜렉이 이삭에게 이르되 네가 우리보다 크게 강성한즉 우리를 떠나라","아비멜렉이 이삭에게 이르되 네가 우리보다 크게 강성한즉 우리를 떠나가라","그 즈음 아비멜렉이 이삭에게 말하였다. \"이보게, 이제 우리 땅에서 떠나 주었으면 좋겠네. 자네가 우리보다도 재산이 더 많게 되니 좀 곤란하네\"","So Abimelech said to Isaac, “Go away from us; you have become far too numerous for us.”","And Abimelech said unto Isaac, Go from us; for thou art much mightier than we.","Then Abimelech said to Isaac, \"Move away from us; you have become too powerful for us.\"","in tantum ut ipse Abimelech diceret ad Isaac:  “Recede a nobis, quoniam potentior nostri factus es valde “.","ויאמר אבימלך אל יצחק לך מעמנו כי עצמת ממנו מאד׃"],["1","26","17","그래서 이사악은 그곳을 떠나 그라르 골짜기에 천막을 치고 살았다.","이사악은 그 곳을 떠나 그랄 골짜기에 천막을 쳐 자리잡고","이삭이 그 곳을 떠나 그랄 골짜기에 장막을 치고 거기 거류하며","이삭이 그곳을 떠나 그랄 골짜기에 장막을 치고 거기 우거하며","그래서 이삭은 식구들을 이끌고 그곳을 떠나 그랄 계곡에 자리를 잡고 천막을 쳤다. 그는 거기서 한동안 살면서","Isaac left there and camped in the Wadi Gerar where he stayed.","And Isaac departed thence, and pitched his tent in the valley of Gerar, and dwelt there.","So Isaac moved away from there and encamped in the Valley of Gerar and settled there.","Et ille discedens tentoria fixit ad torrentem Gerarae habitavitque ibi.","וילך משם יצחק ויחן בנחל גרר וישב שם׃"],["1","26","18","이사악은 자기 아버지 아브라함 시대에 팠던 우물들을 다시 팠다. 이것들은 아브라함이 죽은 뒤에 필리스티아인들이 막아 버린 우물들이다. 이사악은 그 우물들의 이름을 자기 아버지가 부르던 이름 그대로 불렀다.","아버지 아브라함이 팠던 우물들을 다시 팠다. 이 우물들은 아브라함이 죽은 뒤에 불레셋 사람들이 메워버렸던 우물들이다. 이사악은 그 우물들을 아버지가 부르던 이름 그대로 불렀다.","그 아버지 아브라함 때에 팠던 우물들을 다시 팠으니 이는 아브라함이 죽은 후에 블레셋 사람이 그 우물들을 메웠음이라 이삭이 그 우물들의 이름을 그의 아버지가 부르던 이름으로 불렀더라","그 아비 아브라함 때에 팠던 우물들을 다시 팠으니 이는 아브라함 죽은 후에 블레셋 사람이 그 우물들을 메웠음이라 이삭이 그 우물들의 이름을 그 아비의 부르던 이름으로 불렀더라","아버지 아브라함이 살아 있을 때 파놓았던 우물들을 다시 팠다. 아브라함이 죽은 뒤 블레셋 사람들이 그 우물을 모두 메워 버렸기 때문이다. 우물들을 다시 판 이삭은 그 우물들을 자기 아버지가 부르던 이름 그대로 불렀다.","Isaac reopened the wells which his father’s servants had dug back in the days of his father Abraham and which the Philistines had stopped up after Abraham’s death; he gave them names like those that his father had given them.","And Isaac digged again the wells of water, which they had digged in the days of Abraham his father; for the Philistines had stopped them after the death of Abraham: and he called their names after the names by which his father had called them.","Isaac reopened the wells that had been dug in the time of his father Abraham, which the  Philistines had stopped up after Abraham died, and he gave them the same names his father had  given them.","Rursum fodit puteos, quos foderant in diebus patris sui Abraham et quos, illo mortuo, obstruxerant Philisthim. Appellavitque eos eisdem nominibus, quibus ante pater vocaverat.","וישב יצחק ויחפר את בארת המים אשר חפרו בימי אברהם אביו ויסתמום פלשתים אחרי מות אברהם ויקרא להן שמות כשמת אשר קרא להן אביו׃"],["1","26","19","이사악의 종들이 그 골짜기를 파다가, 생수가 솟는 우물을 발견하였다.","이사악의 종들은 그 골짜기에 우물을 파다가 물이 콸콸 솟는 샘 줄기를 찾았다.","이삭의 종들이 골짜기를 파서 샘 근원을 얻었더니","이삭의 종들이 골짜기에 파서 샘 근원을 얻었더니","이삭의 종들은 그 계곡에 우물을 파 물길을 찾아내었다.","But when Isaac’s servants dug in the wadi and reached spring water in their well,","And Isaac's servants digged in the valley, and found there a well of springing water.","Isaac's servants dug in the valley and discovered a well of fresh water there.","Foderunt servi Isaac in torrente et reppererunt ibi puteum aquae vivae.","ויחפרו עבדי יצחק בנחל וימצאו שם באר מים חיים׃"],["1","26","20","그러자 그라르의 목자들이 그 물을 자기네 것이라고 하면서, 이사악의 목자들에게 시비를 걸었다. 그리하여 우물을 두고 싸웠다 해서 그 우물의 이름을 에섹이라 하였다.","그런데 그랄에 사는 목자들이 그 물을 저희 것이라고 하면서 이사악의 목자들에게 싸움을 걸어왔다. 우물을 두고 싸움이 벌어졌다고 해서 이사악은 그 우물을 에섹이라고 불렀다.","그랄 목자들이 이삭의 목자와 다투어 이르되 이 물은 우리의 것이라 하매 이삭이 그 다툼으로 말미암아 그 우물 이름을 에섹이라 하였으며","그랄 목자들이 이삭의 목자와 다투어 가로되 이 물은 우리의 것이라 하매 이삭이 그 다툼을 인하여 그 우물 이름을 1)에섹이라 하였으며 다툼","그런데 그랄 땅에 사는 목자들이 이삭의 목자들과 서로 싸우며 그 우물이 자기 것이라고 우기곤 하였다. 그래서 이삭은 그 우물을 \"다툼\"이라는 뜻으로 에섹이라 지어 불렀다.","the shepherds of Gerar argued with Isaac’s shepherds, saying, “The water belongs to us!” So he named the well Esek, because they had quarreled there.","And the herdmen of Gerar did strive with Isaac's herdmen, saying, The water is ours: and he called the name of the well Esek; because they strove with him.","But the herdsmen of Gerar quarreled with Isaac's herdsmen and said, \"The water is ours!\" So  he named the well Esek, because they disputed with him.","Sed et ibi iurgium fuit pastorum Gerarae adversus pastores Isaac dicentium:  “Nostra est aqua! “. Quam ob rem nomen putei vocavit Esec (id est Iurgium), quia iurgati sunt cum eo.","ויריבו רעי גרר עם רעי יצחק לאמר לנו המים ויקרא שם הבאר עשק כי התעשקו עמו׃"],["1","26","21","이사악의 종들이 또 다른 우물을 팠더니, 그라르의 목자들이 그것에 대해서도 시비를 걸었다. 그래서 그 이름을 시트나라 하였다.","또 다른 우물을 팠더니, 그들은 그 우물도 탐이 나서 또 싸움을 걸어왔다. 그래서 그 이름을 시트나라 하였다.","또 다른 우물을 팠더니 그들이 또 다투므로 그 이름을 싯나라 하였으며","또 다른 우물을 팠더니 그들이 또 다투는고로 그 이름을 2)싯나라 하였으며 대적함","이삭의 종들은 다른 곳에 가서 또 우물을 팠다. 그런데도 여전히 우물 때문에 목자들끼리 싸움이 잦았다. 그래서 이삭은 그 우물을 \"적의\"라는 뜻으로 싯나라 지어 불렀다.","Then they dug another well, and they argued over that one too; so he named it Sitnah.","And they digged another well, and strove for that also: and he called the name of it Sitnah.","Then they dug another well, but they quarreled over that one also; so he named it Sitnah.","Foderunt autem et alium puteum, et pro illo quoque rixati sunt; appellavitque eum Sitna (id est Inimicitias).","ויחפרו באר אחרת ויריבו גם עליה ויקרא שמה שטנה׃"],["1","26","22","이사악이 그곳에서 자리를 옮겨 또 다른 우물을 팠는데, 그것에 대해서는 아무도 시비를 걸지 않았다. 그래서 그는 “이제 주님께서 우리에게 넓은 곳을 마련해 주셨으니, 우리가 이 땅에서 퍼져 나갈 수 있게 되었다.” 하면서, 그 우물 이름을 르호봇이라 하였다.","그는 자리를 옮겨 우물을 또 하나 팠다. 그러나 이번만은 그 우물을 두고 싸움을 걸어오지 않았다. 그래서 이사악은 그 우물을 르호봇이라 부르며 \"마침내 야훼께서 우리 앞을 활짝 열어주셔서 우리도 이 땅에서 번성하게 되었다.\" 하고 소리쳤다.","이삭이 거기서 옮겨 다른 우물을 팠더니 그들이 다투지 아니하였으므로 그 이름을 르호봇이라 하여 이르되 이제는 여호와께서 우리를 위하여 넓게 하셨으니 이 땅에서 우리가 번성하리로다 하였더라","이삭이 거기서 옮겨 다른 우물을 팠더니 그들이 다투지 아니하였으므로 그 이름을 3)르호봇이라 하여 가로되 이제는 여호와께서 우리의 장소를 넓게 하셨으니 이 땅에서 우리가 번성하리로다 하였더라 장소가 넓음","그래서 이삭은 또 장소를 옮겨 다른 곳에 우물을 팠다. 그랬더니 이제는 목자들끼리 우물 때문에 다투는 일이 없었다. 그래서 이삭은 그 우물을 \"장소가 넓다\"라는 뜻으로 르호봇이라 지어 불렀다. 그리고 \"여호와께서 우리가 사는 땅을 넓게 해주셔서 이제는 우리가 마음놓고 널리 퍼져 나가겠구나\" 하고 말하였다.","So he moved on from there and dug still another well, but over this one they did not argue. He named it Rehoboth, and said, “Because the LORD has now given us ample room, we shall flourish in the land.”","And he removed from thence, and digged another well; and for that they strove not: and he called the name of it Rehoboth; and he said, For now the LORD hath made room for us, and we shall be fruitful in the land.","He moved on from there and dug another well, and no one quarreled over it. He named it  Rehoboth, saying, \"Now the LORD has given us room and we will flourish in the land.\"","Profectus inde fodit alium puteum, pro quo non contenderunt; itaque vocavit nomen eius Rehoboth (id est Latitudinem) dicens:  “Nunc dilatavit nos Dominus, et crescemus in terra “.","ויעתק משם ויחפר באר אחרת ולא רבו עליה ויקרא שמה רחבות ויאמר כי עתה הרחיב יהוה לנו ופרינו בארץ׃"],["1","26","23","그는 그곳을 떠나 브에르 세바로 올라갔는데,","그는 거기에서 브엘세바로 올라갔는데,","이삭이 거기서부터 브엘세바로 올라갔더니","이삭이 거기서부터 브엘세바로 올라갔더니","이삭이 거기서 떠나 브엘세바로 올라갔다.","From there Isaac went up to Beer-sheba.","And he went up from thence to Beersheba.","From there he went up to Beersheba.","Ascendit autem ex illo loco in Bersabee,","ויעל משם באר שבע׃"],["1","26","24","그날 밤 주님께서 그에게 나타나 말씀하셨다. “나는 너의 아버지 아브라함의 하느님이다. 내가 너와 함께 있으니 두려워하지 마라. 나의 종 아브라함을 보아서, 내가 너에게 복을 내리고 네 후손의 수를 불어나게 하겠다.”","그 날 밤 야훼께서 그에게 나타나시어 말씀하셨다. \"나는 네 아비 아브라함의 하느님이다. 그러니 두려워하지 마라. 내가 너와 함께 있다. 나의 심복 아브라함을 보아 너에게 복을 내려 네 자손이 불어나게 하리라.\"","그 밤에 여호와께서 그에게 나타나 이르시되 나는 네 아버지 아브라함의 하나님이니 두려워하지 말라 내 종 아브라함을 위하여 내가 너와 함께 있어 네게 복을 주어 네 자손이 번성하게 하리라 하신지라","그 밤에 여호와께서 그에게 나타나 가라사대 나는 네 아비 아브라함의 하나님이니 두려워 말라 내 종 아브라함을 위하여 내가 너와 함께 있어 네게 복을 주어 네 자손으로 번성케 하리라 하신지라","그 첫날밤에 여호와께서 그에게 나타나 이렇게 말씀하셨다. \"나는 네 아비 아브라함의 하나님이다. 내가 너와 함께 있으니 조금도 두려워하지 말아라. 내가 내 종 아브라함에게 약속한 대로 네게 복을 주어 네 자손이 번성하도록 하겠다.\"","The same night the LORD appeared to him and said: I am the God of Abraham, your father. Do not fear, for I am with you. I will bless you and multiply your descendants for the sake of Abraham, my servant.","And the LORD appeared unto him the same night, and said, I am the God of Abraham thy father: fear not, for I am with thee, and will bless thee, and multiply thy seed for my servant Abraham's sake.","That night the LORD appeared to him and said, \"I am the God of your father Abraham. Do not  be afraid, for I am with you; I will bless you and will increase the number of your descendants  for the sake of my servant Abraham.\"","ubi apparuit ei Dominus in ipsa nocte dicens:  “Ego sum Deus Abraham patris tui. Noli timere, quia tecum sum; benedicam tibi et multiplicabo semen tuum propter servum meum Abraham “.","וירא אליו יהוה בלילה ההוא ויאמר אנכי אלהי אברהם אביך אל תירא כי אתך אנכי וברכתיך והרביתי את זרעך בעבור אברהם עבדי׃"],["1","26","25","그는 그곳에 제단을 쌓고 주님의 이름을 받들어 불렀다. 이사악은 그곳에 천막을 치고 그의 종들은 그곳에서도 우물을 팠다.","그는 거기에 제단을 쌓아 야훼의 이름을 불러 예배하고 그 곳에 천막을 쳤다. 그의 종들은 거기에서도 우물을 팠다.","이삭이 그 곳에 제단을 쌓고, 여호와의 이름을 부르며 거기 장막을 쳤더니 이삭의 종들이 거기서도 우물을 팠더라","이삭이 그곳에 단을 쌓아 여호와의 이름을 부르고 거기 장막을 쳤더니 그 종들이 거기서도 우물을 팠더라","이삭이 그곳에 제단을 쌓고 여호와께 경배하였다. 그가 그곳에 장막을 치자 그의 종들이 거기서도 우물을 팠다.","So Isaac built an altar there and invoked the LORD by name. After he had pitched his tent there, Isaac’s servants began to dig a well nearby.","And he builded an altar there, and called upon the name of the LORD, and pitched his tent there: and there Isaac's servants digged a well.","Isaac built an altar there and called on the name of the LORD. There he pitched his tent,  and there his servants dug a well.","Itaque aedificavit ibi altare et, invocato nomine Domini, extendit tabernaculum, et servi Isaac foderunt ibi puteum.","ויבן שם מזבח ויקרא בשם יהוה ויט שם אהלו ויכרו שם עבדי יצחק באר׃"],["1","26","26","아비멜렉이 친구 아후잣과 자기 군대의 장수 피콜과 함께 그라르에서 이사악에게로 왔다.","어느 날, 아비멜렉이 친구 아후삿과 군사령관 비골을 데리고 그랄에서 이사악을 찾아왔다.","아비멜렉이 그 친구 아훗삿과 군대 장관 비골과 더불어 그랄에서부터 이삭에게로 온지라","아비멜렉이 그 친구 아훗삿과 군대장관 비골로 더불어 그랄에서부터 이삭에게로 온지라","어느 날 아비멜렉이 그의 고문관 아훗삿과 군대사령관 비골과 함께 그랄에서 이삭을 찾아왔다.","Then Abimelech came to him from Gerar, with Ahuzzath, his councilor, and Phicol, the general of his army.","Then Abimelech went to him from Gerar, and Ahuzzath one of his friends, and Phichol the chief captain of his army.","Meanwhile, Abimelech had come to him from Gerar, with Ahuzzath his personal adviser and  Phicol the commander of his forces.","Abimelech autem venit ad eum de Geraris et Ochozath amicus illius et Phicol dux militum,","ואבימלך הלך אליו מגרר ואחזת מרעהו ופיכל שר צבאו׃"],["1","26","27","이사악이 그들에게 “그대들은 나를 미워하여 쫓아내고서, 무슨 일로 나에게 왔소?” 하고 물으니,","이사악이 그들에게 \"내가 미워서 쫓아낼 때는 언제고, 왜 나를 찾아오셨습니까?\" 하고 물으니","이삭이 그들에게 이르되 너희가 나를 미워하여 나에게 너희를 떠나게 하였거늘 어찌하여 내게 왔느냐","이삭이 그들에게 이르되 너희가 나를 미워하여 나로 너희를 떠나가게 하였거늘 어찌하여 내게 왔느냐","그러자 이삭은 \"그대가 나를 보기 싫어하여 나를 떠나 보내고서는 또 무슨 볼일이 있어서 나를 찾아왔소?\" 하고 퉁명스럽게 물었다.","Isaac asked them, “Why have you come to me, since you hate me and have driven me away from you?”","And Isaac said unto them, Wherefore come ye to me, seeing ye hate me, and have sent me away from you?","Isaac asked them, \"Why have you come to me, since you were hostile to me and sent me away?\"","et locutus est eis Isaac:  “Quid venistis ad me hominem, quem odistis et expulistis a vobis? “.","ויאמר אלהם יצחק מדוע באתם אלי ואתם שנאתם אתי ותשלחוני מאתכם׃"]]