[["9","25","21","다윗이 말하였다. “내가 광야에서 나발에게 속한 것을 모두 지켜 주어, 그에게 속한 것 가운데 아무것도 잃지 않게 해 주었지만 헛일이었다. 그는 나에게 선을 악으로 갚았다.","다윗은 단단히 벼르고 있었다. \"내가 광야에서 이자의 재산을 지켜 무엇 하나 손실이 나지 않게 해주었지만, 다 부질없는 짓이었다. 모처럼 잘해 주었더니 이렇게 악으로 갚는구나.","다윗이 이미 말하기를 내가 이 자의 소유물을 광야에서 지켜 그 모든 것을 하나도 손실이 없게 한 것이 진실로 허사라 그가 악으로 나의 선을 갚는도다","다윗이 이미 말하기를 내가 이 자의 소유물을 광야에서 지켜 그 모든 것을 하나도 손실이 없게 한것이 진실로 허사라 그가 악으로 나의 선을 갚는도다","다윗은 점점 더 화가나서 속으로 벼르며 언덕을 내려오고 있었다. \"그런 비열한 놈을 어디 내가 그냥두는가 보아라! 나는 저 들녘에서 그의 가축이라면 밤낮을 가리지 않고 잘지 켜 주어 양새끼 한 마리도 잃어버리지 않게 하고, 그에게 손해를 끼친 일이란 하나도 없는데, 그것이 이제는 모두 헛일이 되었다! 그는 나의 선을 악으로 갚는구나.","David had just been saying: “Indeed, it was in vain that I guarded all this man’s possessions in the wilderness, so that nothing of his was missing. He has repaid good with evil.","Now David had said, Surely in vain have I kept all that this fellow hath in the wilderness, so that nothing was missed of all that pertained unto him: and he hath requited me evil for good.","David had just said, \"It's been useless--all my watching over this fellow's property in the desert so that nothing of his was missing. He has paid me back evil for good.","Et aiebat David:  “Vere frustra servavi omnia, quae huius erant in deserto, et non periit quidquam de cunctis, quae ad eum pertinebant; et reddidit mihi malum pro bono.","ודוד אמר אך לשקר שמרתי את כל אשר לזה במדבר ולא נפקד מכל אשר לו מאומה וישב לי רעה תחת טובה׃"],["9","25","22","내가 내일 아침까지 그에게 속한 모든 사람 가운데 벽에 오줌을 누는 자 하나라도 남겨 둔다면, 하느님께서 다윗에게 벌을 내리시고 또 내리셔도 좋다.”","내가 내일 아침까지 사내녀석들을 하나라도 남겨둔다면 하느님께 무슨 벌이라도 받으리라.\"","내가 그에게 속한 모든 남자 가운데 한 사람이라도 아침까지 남겨 두면 하나님은 다윗에게 벌을 내리시고 또 내리시기를 원하노라 하였더라","내가 그에게 속한 모든것 중 한 남자라도 아침까지 남겨두면 하나님은 1)다윗에게 벌을 내리시고 또 내리시기를 원하노라 하였더라 히, 다윗의 원수에게","내가 내일 아침까지 그녀석의 패거리 중에 단 한 사내라도 살려 둔다면 내가 마땅히 하나님께 어떤 형벌이라도 달게 받겠다\"","May God do thus to David, and more, if by morning I leave a single male alive among all those who belong to him.”","So and more also do God unto the enemies of David, if I leave of all that pertain to him by the morning light any that pisseth against the wall.","May God deal with David, be it ever so severely, if by morning I leave alive one male of all who belong to him!\"","Haec faciat Deus inimicis David et haec addat, si reliquero de omnibus, quae ad eum pertinent, usque mane quidquid masculini sexus “.","כה יעשה אלהים לאיבי דוד וכה יסיף אם אשאיר מכל אשר לו עד הבקר משתין בקיר׃"],["9","25","23","아비가일은 다윗을 보자, 나귀에서 얼른 내려와 다윗 앞에서 얼굴을 땅에 대고 엎드려 절하였다.","아비가일은 다윗을 보자 나귀에서 급히 내려 땅바닥에 엎드려 절하였다.","아비가일이 다윗을 보고 급히 나귀에서 내려 다윗 앞에 엎드려 그의 얼굴을 땅에 대니라","아비가일이 다윗을 보고 급히 나귀에서 내려 다윗의 앞에 엎드려 그 얼굴을 땅에 대니라","그런데 아비가일과 다윗이 산모퉁이를 돌면서 갑자기 서로 마주치자, 아비가일이 즉시 나귀에서 내려 다윗에게 절하였다.","As soon as Abigail saw David, she dismounted quickly from the donkey and, falling down, bowed low to the ground before David in homage.","And when Abigail saw David, she hasted, and lighted off the ass, and fell before David on her face, and bowed herself to the ground,","When Abigail saw David, she quickly got off her donkey and bowed down before David with her face to the ground.","Cum autem vidisset Abigail David, festinavit et descendit de asino et procidit coram David super faciem suam et adoravit super terram.","ותרא אביגיל את דוד ותמהר ותרד מעל החמור ותפל לאפי דוד על פניה ותשתחו ארץ׃"],["9","25","24","그러고 나서 다윗의 발 앞에 엎드린 채 애원하였다. “나리, 죄는 바로 저에게 있습니다. 당신 여종이 나리께 말씀드리는 것을 허락하여 주시고, 부디 당신 여종의 말에 귀 기울여 주십시오.","그리고 다윗의 발 앞에 엎드린 채 애원하였다. \"나리, 죄는 저에게 있습니다. 이 비천한 계집종이 아뢰는 말씀에 귀기울여 주십시오.","그가 다윗의 발에 엎드려 이르되 내 주여 원하건대 이 죄악을 나 곧 내게로 돌리시고 여종에게 주의 귀에 말하게 하시고 이 여종의 말을 들으소서","그가 다윗의 발에 엎드려 가로되 내 주여 청컨대 이 죄악을 나 곧 내게로 돌리시고 여종으로 주의 귀에 말하게 하시고 이 여종의 말을 들으소서","그리고 다윗의 발 앞에 엎드려 이렇게 애원하였다. \"내 주여, 이번 일은 모두 저의 불찰로 일어났습니다. 그러니 우선 이 여종에게 해명할 기회를 주십시오!","As she fell at his feet she said: “My lord, let the blame be mine. Please let your maidservant speak to you; listen to the words of your maidservant.","And fell at his feet, and said, Upon me, my lord, upon me let this iniquity be: and let thine handmaid, I pray thee, speak in thine audience, and hear the words of thine handmaid.","She fell at his feet and said: \"My lord, let the blame be on me alone. Please let your servant speak to you; hear what your servant has to say.","Et cecidit ad pedes eius et dixit:  “In me sit, domine mi, haec iniquitas; loquatur, obsecro, ancilla tua in auribus tuis, et audi verba famulae tuae.","ותפל על רגליו ותאמר בי אני אדני העון ותדבר נא אמתך באזניך ושמע את דברי אמתך׃"],["9","25","25","나리께서는 나발이라는 고약한 사람에게는 마음을 쓰지 마십시오. 그는 나발이라는 이름 그대로 어리석은 사람입니다. 당신 여종은 나리가 보내신 젊은이들을 보지 못했습니다.","부탁합니다. 우리 몹쓸 영감에게는 마음 쓰시지 마십시오. 그 사람은 나발이라는 이름 그대로 정말 미련한 사람입니다. 이 계집종은 나리께서 보내신 사람을 만나지 못했습니다.","원하옵나니 내 주는 이 불량한 사람 나발을 개의치 마옵소서 그의 이름이 그에게 적당하니 그의 이름이 나발이라 그는 미련한 자니이다 여종은 내 주께서 보내신 소년들을 보지 못하였나이다","원하옵나니 내 주는 이 불량한 사람 나발을 개의치 마옵소서 그 이름이 그에게 적당하니 그 이름이 나발이라 그는 미련한 자니이다 여종은 내 주의 보내신 소년들을 보지 못하였나이다","내 주께서는 나의 어리석은 남편 나발에게 어떤 억울한 일을 당하셨더라도 개의치 마십시오! 그는 ㄴ) 나발이란 이름 그대로 어리석고 미련한 사람입니다! 불행하게도 내 주의 부하들이 왔을 때에 이 여종이 그곳에 없어서 만나 뵙지를 못하였습니다. (ㄴ. \"미련한, 눈치 없는, 무식한, 천한\"이라는 뜻이다)","My lord, do not pay any attention to that scoundrel Nabal, for he is just like his name. His name means fool, and he acts the fool. I, your maidservant, did not see the young men whom my lord sent.","Let not my lord, I pray thee, regard this man of Belial, even Nabal: for as his name is, so is he; Nabal is his name, and folly is with him: but I thine handmaid saw not the young men of my lord, whom thou didst send.","May my lord pay no attention to that wicked man Nabal. He is just like his name--his name is Fool, and folly goes with him. But as for me, your servant, I did not see the men my master sent.","Ne ponat, oro, dominus meus cor suum super virum istum iniquum Nabal, quia secundum nomen suum stultus est, et est stultitia cum eo; ego autem ancilla tua non vidi pueros domini mei, quos misisti.","אל נא ישים אדני את לבו אל איש הבליעל הזה על נבל כי כשמו כן הוא נבל שמו ונבלה עמו ואני אמתך לא ראיתי את נערי אדני אשר שלחת׃"],["9","25","26","나리, 살아 계신 주님과 나리의 목숨을 두고 맹세합니다만, 주님께서는 나리께서 사람의 피를 흘리시고 손수 복수하시는 일을 막아 주셨습니다. 그러니 이제 나리의 원수들과 나리께 해를 끼치려고 하는 자들은 나발같이 되기를 빕니다.","나리께서는 홧김에 기어이 피를 보려고 하시지만 야훼께서 그런 일이 없도록 막아주셔서 나리께서 손수 원수를 갚지 않도록 해주셨습니다. 그러니 이제 나리께서 망하시는 것을 보겠다는 나리의 원수들은 나발처럼 될 것입니다. 이것은 야훼께서 살아 계시고 나리께서 살아 계시는 만큼 확실합니다.","내 주여 여호와께서 살아 계심을 두고 맹세하노니 내 주도 살아 계시거니와 내 주의 손으로 피를 흘려 친히 보복하시는 일을 여호와께서 막으셨으니 내 주의 원수들과 내 주를 해하려 하는 자들은 나발과 같이 되기를 원하나이다","내 주여 여호와께서 사시고 내 주도 살아계시거니와 내 주의 손으로 피를 흘려 친히 보수하시는 일을 여호와께서 막으셨으니 내 주의 원수들과 내 주를 해하려 하는 자들은 나발과 같이 되기를 원하나이다","그러나 이렇게 늦게라도 이 여종이 내 주께 나아와 만나게 된 것을 여호와의 도우심으로 여겨 주십시오! 내 주께서 오늘 원수를 갚느라고 피 흘리지 못하게 막아주신 분은 분명히 여호와이시기 때문입니다. 나발은 이제 중한 죄를 벗지 못하여 곧 죽을 것이고, 내 주를 해치려고 하는 모든 원수도 나발과 같이 되기를 바랍니다.","Now, therefore, my lord, as the LORD lives, and as you live, the LORD has kept you from shedding blood and from avenging yourself by your own hand. May your enemies and those who seek to harm my lord become as Nabal!","Now therefore, my lord, as the LORD liveth, and as thy soul liveth, seeing the LORD hath withholden thee from coming to shed blood, and from avenging thyself with thine own hand, now let thine enemies, and they that seek evil to my lord, be as Nabal.","\"Now since the LORD has kept you, my master, from bloodshed and from avenging yourself with your own hands, as surely as the LORD lives and as you live, may your enemies and all who intend to harm my master be like Nabal.","Nunc ergo, domine mi, vivit Dominus, et vivit anima tua, quia Dominus prohibuit te, ne venires in sanguine et salvares te manu tua; et nunc fiant sicut Nabal inimici tui et qui quaerunt domino meo malum.","ועתה אדני חי יהוה וחי נפשך אשר מנעך יהוה מבוא בדמים והושע ידך לך ועתה יהיו כנבל איביך והמבקשים אל אדני רעה׃"],["9","25","27","여기 당신 여종이 나리께 가져온 이 선물은 나리의 뒤를 따르는 젊은이들에게 드리는 것입니다.","여기 계집종이 가져온 적은 선물이 있습니다. 나리의 뒤를 따르는 젊은이들에게 주십시오.","여종이 내 주께 가져온 이 예물을 내 주를 따르는 이 소년들에게 주게 하시고","여종이 내 주에게 가져온 이 예물로 내 주를 좇는 이 소년들에게 주게 하시고","이제 비오니, 이 여종이 내 주께 가져온 선물을 받으시고, 내 주를 따르는 부하들에게 나누어 주십시오!","Accept this gift, then, which your maidservant has brought for my lord, and let it be given to the young men who follow my lord.","And now this blessing which thine handmaid hath brought unto my lord, let it even be given unto the young men that follow my lord.","And let this gift, which your servant has brought to my master, be given to the men who follow you.","Quapropter suscipe benedictionem hanc, quam attulit ancilla tua domino meo, et da pueris, qui sequuntur dominum meum.","ועתה הברכה הזאת אשר הביא שפחתך לאדני ונתנה לנערים המתהלכים ברגלי אדני׃"],["9","25","28","당신 여종의 잘못을 제발 용서해 주십시오. 나리께서는 주님의 전쟁을 치르고 계시니, 주님께서 정녕 나리께 튼튼한 집안을 세워 주실 것입니다. 나리께서는 한평생 어떤 재난도 겪지 않으실 것입니다.","이 계집의 말이 마음에 거슬리더라도 제발 용서해 주십시오. 야훼께서 앞장서시는 싸움을 나리께서 싸우셨으니 야훼께서 나리의 집안을 정녕 튼튼히 세워주실 것입니다. 나리께서는 한평생 어떤 재난도 겪지 않으실 것입니다.","주의 여종의 허물을 용서하여 주옵소서 여호와께서 반드시 내 주를 위하여 든든한 집을 세우시리니 이는 내 주께서 여호와의 싸움을 싸우심이요 내 주의 일생에 내 주에게서 악한 일을 찾을 수 없음이니이다","주의 여종의 허물을 사하여 주옵소서 여호와께서 반드시 내 주를 위하여 든든한 집을 세우시리니 이는 내 주께서 여호와의 싸움을 싸우심이요 내 주의 일생에 내 주에게서 악한 일을 찾을 수 없음이니이다","제가 감히 이렇게 내 주의 길을 막고 서서 간청을 드리니, 부디 내 주께 순종하는 이 전심을 보시고 그 허물을 용서하십시오! 여호와께서 전쟁하실 때에는 언제나 내 주를 들어 쓰셨습니다. 이제 주께서는 틀림없이 왕이 되셔서 영구한 왕가를 이루실 것이며, 어느 누구도 내 주께 불의나 죄악이 있다고 평생토록 비난하지 못할 것입니다.","Please forgive the offense of your maidservant, for the LORD shall certainly establish a lasting house for my lord, because my lord fights the battles of the LORD. Let no evil be found in you your whole life long.","I pray thee, forgive the trespass of thine handmaid: for the LORD will certainly make my lord a sure house; because my lord fighteth the battles of the LORD, and evil hath not been found in thee all thy days.","Please forgive your servant's offense, for the LORD will certainly make a lasting dynasty for my master, because he fights the LORD'S battles. Let no wrongdoing be found in you as long as you live.","Aufer iniquitatem famulae tuae. Faciens enim faciet Dominus domino meo domum fidelem, quia proelia Domini dominus meus proeliatur; malitia ergo non inveniatur in te omnibus diebus vitae tuae.","שא נא לפשע אמתך כי עשה יעשה יהוה לאדני בית נאמן כי מלחמות יהוה אדני נלחם ורעה לא תמצא בך מימיך׃"],["9","25","29","나리를 쫓아다니며 나리의 목숨을 노리는 사람이 있다 하더라도, 주 나리의 하느님 앞에서 나리 목숨은 생명의 보자기에 감싸일 것입니다. 그러나 그분께서는 나리 원수들의 목숨을 팔맷돌처럼 팽개치실 것입니다.","나리를 쫓아다니며 죽이려는 사람이 있다 하여도 나리의 하느님 야훼께서 나리 목숨을 보물처럼 감싸주시고 그 대신 원수의 목숨은 팔매돌처럼 팽개치실 것입니다.","사람이 일어나서 내 주를 쫓아 내 주의 생명을 찾을지라도 내 주의 생명은 내 주의 하나님 여호와와 함께 생명 싸개 속에 싸였을 것이요 내 주의 원수들의 생명은 물매로 던지듯 여호와께서 그것을 던지시리이다","사람이 일어나서 내 주를 쫓아 내 주의 생명을 찾을찌라도 내 주의 생명은 내 주의 하나님 여호와와 함께 생명싸개 속에 싸였을 것이요 내 주의 원수들의 생명은 물매로 던지듯 여호와께서 그것을 던지시리이다","어느 누가 내 주를 죽이려고 쫓아다니더라도, 내 주께서는 아무 해도 입지 않으실 것입니다. 왜냐하면 여호와께서 보석을 주머니에 잘 보관하는 슬기로운 부자처럼 내 주의 생명을 그토록 귀중하게 보관하실 것이기 때문입니다. 그리고 내 주를 죽이려고 쫓아다니는 원수들의 생명을 여호와께서 물매주머니에 담아 팽개쳐 버리듯이 던지실 것입니다.","If any adversary pursues you to seek your life, may the life of my lord be bound in the bundle of the living in the care of the LORD your God; may God hurl out the lives of your enemies as from the hollow of a sling.","Yet a man is risen to pursue thee, and to seek thy soul: but the soul of my lord shall be bound in the bundle of life with the LORD thy God; and the souls of thine enemies, them shall he sling out, as out of the middle of a sling.","Even though someone is pursuing you to take your life, the life of my master will be bound securely in the bundle of the living by the LORD your God. But the lives of your enemies he will hurl away as from the pocket of a sling.","Si enim surrexerit aliquando homo persequens te et quaerens animam tuam, erit anima domini mei custodita in fasciculo vitae apud Dominum Deum tuum; sed inimicorum tuorum animam ipse iaciat in impetu et circulo fundae.","ויקם אדם לרדפך ולבקש את נפשך והיתה נפש אדני צרורה בצרור החיים את יהוה אלהיך ואת נפש איביך יקלענה בתוך כף הקלע׃"],["9","25","30","이제 주님께서 나리께 약속하신 복을 그대로 이루어 주시어 나리를 이스라엘의 영도자로 세우실 터인데,","야훼께서 약속하신 온갖 복된 일을 이루시어 나리를 이스라엘의 수령으로 세우실 터인데,","여호와께서 내 주에 대하여 하신 말씀대로 모든 선을 내 주에게 행하사 내 주를 이스라엘의 지도자로 세우실 때에","여호와께서 내 주에 대하여 하신 말씀대로 모든 선을 내 주에게 행하사 내 주를 이스라엘의 지도자로 세우신 때에","이리하여 여호와께서 약속하신 대로 내 주께서 이스라엘을 다스릴 왕이 되시면,","And when the LORD fulfills for my lord the promise of success he has made concerning you, and appoints you as ruler over Israel,","And it shall come to pass, when the LORD shall have done to my lord according to all the good that he hath spoken concerning thee, and shall have appointed thee ruler over Israel;","When the LORD has done for my master every good thing he promised concerning him and has appointed him leader over Israel,","Cum ergo fecerit Dominus domino meo omnia, quae locutus est, bona de te et constituerit te ducem super Israel,","והיה כי יעשה יהוה לאדני ככל אשר דבר את הטובה עליך וצוך לנגיד על ישראל׃"],["9","25","31","지금 정당한 이유 없이 피를 흘리며 몸소 복수하시다가, 나리께서 후회하시거나 양심의 가책을 받으시는 일이 없기를 바랍니다. 주님께서 나리께 복을 내려 주실 때, 당신 여종을 기억하여 주십시오.”","이런 실수를 해서 두고두고 마음에 걸리는 일이 없도록 하십시오. 손수 원수를 갚느라고 공연히 피 흘리는 일은 없도록 하십시오. 야훼께서 나리의 운을 터주시는 날 이 계집종을 잊지 말아주십시오.\"","내 주께서 무죄한 피를 흘리셨다든지 내 주께서 친히 보복하셨다든지 함으로 말미암아 슬퍼하실 것도 없고 내 주의 마음에 걸리는 것도 없으시리니 다만 여호와께서 내 주를 후대하실 때에 원하건대 내 주의 여종을 생각하소서 하니라","내 주께서 무죄한 피를 흘리셨다든지 내 주께서 친히 보수하셨다든지 함을 인하여 슬퍼하실 것도 없고 내 주의 마음에 걸리는 것도 없으시리니 다만 여호와께서 내 주를 후대하신 때에 원컨대 내 주의 여종을 생각하소서","공연히 피흘리거나 손수 원수 갚으신 일로 후회하거나 양심의 가책을 느끼실 필요가 없을 것입니다. 여호와께서 내 주를 그토록 좋은 자리로 인도해 주실 때에 부디, 이 여종도 기억해 주시기 바랍니다.\"","you shall not have any regrets or burdens on your conscience, my lord, for having shed innocent blood or for having rescued yourself. When the LORD bestows good on my lord, remember your maidservant.”","That this shall be no grief unto thee, nor offence of heart unto my lord, either that thou hast shed blood causeless, or that my lord hath avenged himself: but when the LORD shall have dealt well with my lord, then remember thine handmaid.","my master will not have on his conscience the staggering burden of needless bloodshed or of having avenged himself. And when the LORD has brought my master success, remember your servant.\"","non erit tibi hoc in singultum et in scrupulum cordis domino meo, quod effuderis sanguinem innoxium et ipse te ultus fueris; et cum benefecerit Dominus domino meo, recordaberis ancillae tuae “.","ולא תהיה זאת לך לפוקה ולמכשול לב לאדני ולשפך דם חנם ולהושיע אדני לו והיטב יהוה לאדני וזכרת את אמתך׃"],["9","25","32","다윗이 아비가일에게 말하였다. “오늘 그대를 보내시어 이렇게 만나게 해 주셨으니, 주 이스라엘의 하느님을 찬미할 뿐이오.","다윗이 아비가일에게 말하였다. \"오늘 그대를 보내시어 이렇게 만나게 해주셨으니, 이스라엘의 하느님 야훼를 찬양할 뿐이오.","다윗이 아비가일에게 이르되 오늘 너를 보내어 나를 영접하게 하신 이스라엘의 하나님 여호와를 찬송할지로다","다윗이 아비가일에게 이르되 오늘날 너를 보내어 나를 영접케 하신 이스라엘의 하나님 여호와를 찬송할찌로다","다윗은 이미 노기가 풀려 아비가일에게 이와 같이 말하였다. \"이스라엘의 하나님 여호와께서 이토록 위급한 때에 그대를 보내주셨으니 그분께 찬양을 드립니다!","David said to Abigail: “Blessed is the LORD, the God of Israel, who sent you to meet me today.","And David said to Abigail, Blessed be the LORD God of Israel, which sent thee this day to meet me:","David said to Abigail, \"Praise be to the LORD, the God of Israel, who has sent you today to meet me.","Et ait David ad Abigail:  “Benedictus Dominus, Deus Israel, qui misit te hodie in occursum meum. Et benedicta prudentia tua,","ויאמר דוד לאביגל ברוך יהוה אלהי ישראל אשר שלחך היום הזה לקראתי׃"],["9","25","33","오늘 내가 사람의 피를 흘리고 내 손으로 직접 복수하는 일을 그대가 막아 주었으니, 그대와 그대 분별력에 축복을 드리오.","그대는 사리를 참 잘 판단하였소. 하마터면 내 손이 원수를 갚으려다가 피를 볼 뻔했는데 오늘 이렇게 말려주어서 정말 고맙소.","또 네 지혜를 칭찬할지며 또 네게 복이 있을지로다 오늘 내가 피를 흘릴 것과 친히 복수하는 것을 네가 막았느니라","또 네 지혜를 칭찬할찌며 또 네게 복이 있을찌로다 오늘날 내가 피를 흘릴 것과 친히 보수하는 것을 네가 막았느니라","그리고 이토록 슬기롭고 신중하게 행동하여 나의 큰 허물을 미리 막아준 그대의 슬기에 찬양하며, 감사를 드립니다. 그렇지 않았더라면 내가 직접 원수를 갚느라고 수많은 사람을 죽일 뻔하였습니다. 그랬더라면 내가 얼마나 무서운 죄를 지었겠습니까!","Blessed is your good judgment and blessed are you yourself. Today you have prevented me from shedding blood and rescuing myself with my own hand.","And blessed be thy advice, and blessed be thou, which hast kept me this day from coming to shed blood, and from avenging myself with mine own hand.","May you be blessed for your good judgment and for keeping me from bloodshed this day and from avenging myself with my own hands.","et benedicta tu, quae prohibuisti me hodie, ne irem ad sanguinem et ulciscerer me manu mea.","וברוך טעמך וברוכה את אשר כלתני היום הזה מבוא בדמים והשע ידי לי׃"],["9","25","34","그대를 해치지 않도록 나를 막아 주신, 살아 계신 주 이스라엘의 하느님을 두고 분명히 맹세하지만, 그대가 급히 와서 나를 만나지 않았던들, 나발에게는 내일 아침이 밝을 때까지 벽에 오줌을 누는 자 하나도 남지 못할 뻔했소.”","그대가 재빨리 나를 만나주지 않았던들 나발 집안에서는 모든 사내가 내일 아침까지 죽고 말았을 것이오. 그대를 해치지 않도록 나를 막아주신 이스라엘의 하느님 야훼께서 살아 계시는 것이 틀림없듯이 정녕 그렇게 되었을 것이오.\"","나를 막아 너를 해하지 않게 하신 이스라엘의 하나님 여호와의 살아 계심을 두고 맹세하노니 네가 급히 와서 나를 영접하지 아니하였더면 밝는 아침에는 과연 나발에게 한 남자도 남겨 두지 아니하였으리라 하니라","나를 막아 너를 해하지 않게 하신 이스라엘의 하나님 여호와의 사심으로 맹세하노니 네가 급히 와서 나를 영접지 아니하였더면 밝는 아침에는 과연 나발에게 한 남자도 남겨두지 아니하였으리라","그대에게 아무 해도 입히지 못하도록 나를 미리 막아주신 이스라엘의 하나님 여호와의 이름을 걸고 확실히 말하지만, 그대가 이렇게 급히 와서 나를 맞이하지 않았더라면, 나발의 집안에서는 내일 아침이 밝을 때까지 살아 남을 자가 하나도 없었을 것입니다.\"","Otherwise, as the LORD, the God of Israel, lives, who has kept me from harming you, if you had not come so promptly to meet me, by dawn Nabal would not have had so much as one male left alive.”","For in very deed, as the LORD God of Israel liveth, which hath kept me back from hurting thee, except thou hadst hasted and come to meet me, surely there had not been left unto Nabal by the morning light any that pisseth against the wall.","Otherwise, as surely as the LORD, the God of Israel, lives, who has kept me from harming you, if you had not come quickly to meet me, not one male belonging to Nabal would have been left alive by daybreak.\"","Alioquin, vivit Dominus, Deus Israel, qui prohibuit me malum facere tibi, nisi cito venisses in occursum mihi, non remansisset Nabal usque ad lucem matutinam quidquid masculini sexus “.","ואולם חי יהוה אלהי ישראל אשר מנעני מהרע אתך כי לולי מהרת ותבאתי לקראתי כי אם נותר לנבל עד אור הבקר משתין בקיר׃"],["9","25","35","다윗은 여자가 가져온 것을 그 손에서 받으며 말하였다. “이보시오, 내가 그대의 말에 귀 기울여 그대의 청을 들어주었으니, 평안히 집으로 돌아가시오.”","다윗은 그 여자가 가져온 것을 받고 말하였다. \"댁으로 평안히 돌아가시오. 내가 그대의 말을 듣고 요청을 들어주었소!\"","다윗이 그가 가져온 것을 그의 손에서 받고 그에게 이르되 네 집으로 평안히 올라가라 내가 네 말을 듣고 네 청을 허락하노라","다윗이 그가 가져온 것을 그의 손에서 받고 그에게 이르되 네 집으로 평안히 올라가라 내가 네 말을 듣고 네 청을 허락하노라","또한 다윗은 아비가일의 선물을 받고 이렇게 말하였다. \"그대가 내게 요청한 것은 내가 모두 들어주었으니 안심하고 집으로 돌아가시오!\"","David then took from her what she had brought him and said to her: “Go to your home in peace! See, I have listened to your appeal and have granted your request.”","So David received of her hand that which she had brought him, and said unto her, Go up in peace to thine house; see, I have hearkened to thy voice, and have accepted thy person.","Then David accepted from her hand what she had brought him and said, \"Go home in peace. I have heard your words and granted your request.\"","Suscepit ergo David de manu eius omnia, quae attulerat ei, dixitque ei:  “Vade pacifice in domum tuam. Ecce audivi vocem tuam et honoravi faciem tuam “.","ויקח דוד מידה את אשר הביאה לו ולה אמר עלי לשלום לביתך ראי שמעתי בקולך ואשא פניך׃"],["9","25","36","아비가일이 나발에게 돌아와 보니, 나발은 집에서 임금이나 차릴 만한 잔치를 벌여 놓고, 흥에 겨워 취할 대로 취해 있었다. 아비가일은 아침이 밝아 올 때까지 크건 작건 그 일에 대해 알려 주지 않았다.","그리하여 아비가일이 집으로 돌아와 보니 나발은 왕이나 차릴 만한 잔치를 베풀고 흥에 겨워 취할 대로 취해 있었다. 아내는 날이 샐 때까지 그 일을 입 밖에 내지 않았다.","아비가일이 나발에게로 돌아오니 그가 왕의 잔치와 같은 잔치를 그의 집에 배설하고 크게 취하여 마음에 기뻐하므로 아비가일이 밝는 아침까지는 아무 말도 하지 아니하다가","아비가일이 나발에게로 돌아오니 그가 왕의 잔치 같은 잔치를 그 집에 배설하고 대취하여 마음에 기뻐하므로 아비가일이 밝는 아침까지는 다소간 말하지 아니하다가","아비가일이 집에 돌아와보니, 나발이 자기의 일꾼들과 술잔치를 벌이고 앉아 있었는데, 그는 자신이 마치 왕이라도 된 것처럼 호화로운 잔치를 벌이고 있었다. 그는 기분이 무척 좋아보였으나 너무 취해서 이미 제정신이 아니었다. 그래서 아비가일은 날이 밝을 때까지 나발에게 아무 말도 하지 않았다.","When Abigail came to Nabal, he was hosting a banquet in his house like that of a king, and Nabal was in a festive mood and very drunk. So she said not a word to him until daybreak the next morning.","And Abigail came to Nabal; and, behold, he held a feast in his house, like the feast of a king; and Nabal's heart was merry within him, for he was very drunken: wherefore she told him nothing, less or more, until the morning light.","When Abigail went to Nabal, he was in the house holding a banquet like that of a king. He was in high spirits and very drunk. So she told him nothing until daybreak.","Venit autem Abigail ad Nabal; et ecce erat ei convivium in domo eius quasi convivium regis, et cor Nabal iucundum; erat enim ebrius nimis. Et non indicavit ei verbum pusillum aut grande usque in mane.","ותבא אביגיל אל נבל והנה לו משתה בביתו כמשתה המלך ולב נבל טוב עליו והוא שכר עד מאד ולא הגידה לו דבר קטן וגדול עד אור הבקר׃"],["9","25","37","아침에 나발이 술에서 깨어났을 때, 그의 아내가 나발에게 그동안의 일을 알려 주었다. 그러자 나발은 심장이 멎으면서 돌처럼 굳어 버렸다.","그러다가 아침이 되어 술이 깬 뒤, 나발은 아내의 이야기를 듣고 그만 실신하여 돌처럼 굳어져버렸다.","아침에 나발이 포도주에서 깬 후에 그의 아내가 그에게 이 일을 말하매 그가 낙담하여 몸이 돌과 같이 되었더니","아침에 나발이 포도주가 깬 후에 그 아내가 그에게 이 일을 고하매 그가 2)낙담하여 몸이 돌과 같이 되었더니 히, 마음이 죽어","다음날 아침이 되어 나발이 술에서 깨어나자, 아비가일이 그동안에 있었던 일을 그에게 이야기하였다. 나발은 그 이야기를 듣다가 갑자기 실신하여 더 이상 몸을 움직이지 못하고 돌처럼 굳어졌다.","But then, when Nabal was sober, his wife told him what had happened. At this his heart died within him, and he became like a stone.","But it came to pass in the morning, when the wine was gone out of Nabal, and his wife had told him these things, that his heart died within him, and he became as a stone.","Then in the morning, when Nabal was sober, his wife told him all these things, and his heart failed him and he became like a stone.","Diluculo autem, cum digessisset vinum Nabal, haec indicavit ei uxor sua; et emortuum est cor eius intrinsecus, et factus est quasi lapis.","ויהי בבקר בצאת היין מנבל ותגד לו אשתו את הדברים האלה וימת לבו בקרבו והוא היה לאבן׃"],["9","25","38","열흘쯤 지나서 주님께서 나발을 치시니, 그가 죽었다.","열흘쯤 지나서 나발은 야훼께 벌을 받아 죽고 말았다.","한 열흘 후에 여호와께서 나발을 치시매 그가 죽으니라","한 열흘 후에 여호와께서 나발을 치시매 그가 죽으니라","열흘이 지났을 때 주께서 그를 치자 그는 죽고 말았다.","About ten days later the LORD struck Nabal and he died.","And it came to pass about ten days after, that the LORD smote Nabal, that he died.","About ten days later, the LORD struck Nabal and he died.","Cumque pertransissent decem dies, percussit Dominus Nabal, et mortuus est.","ויהי כעשרת הימים ויגף יהוה את נבל וימת׃"],["9","25","39","나발이 죽었다는 소식을 전해 듣고, 다윗은 이렇게 말하였다. “주님께서는 찬미받으소서! 주님께서는 내가 나발에게서 받은 모욕을 갚아 주시고, 당신 종이 악을 저지르지 못하도록 막아 주셨다. 게다가 주님께서는 나발이 자기의 악을 되받게 하셨다.” 그러고 나서 다윗은 아비가일을 아내로 삼으려고, 사람을 보내어 그 뜻을 전하였다.","나발의 죽음을 전해 듣고 다윗은 야훼를 찬양하였다. \"야훼는 찬양을 받으실 분이시라. 나를 욕한 나발을 당신께서 몸소 문책하시고 나로 하여금 죄를 짓지 못하게 막아주셨다. 야훼께서는 나발의 죄를 본인에게 갚아주셨다.\" 그리고 다윗은 사람을 아비가일에게 보내어 자기 아내가 되어달라고 청하였다.","나발이 죽었다 함을 다윗이 듣고 이르되 나발에게 당한 나의 모욕을 갚아 주사 종으로 악한 일을 하지 않게 하신 여호와를 찬송할지로다 여호와께서 나발의 악행을 그의 머리에 돌리셨도다 하니라 다윗이 아비가일을 자기 아내로 삼으려고 사람을 보내어 그에게 말하게 하매","다윗이 나발의 죽었다 함을 듣고 가로되 나발에게 당한 나의 욕을 신설하사 종으로 악한 일을 하지 않게 하신 여호와를 찬송할찌로다 여호와께서 나발의 악행을 그 머리에 돌리셨도다 하니라 다윗이 아비가일로 자기 아내를 삼으려고 보내어 그에게 말하게 하매","나발이 죽었다는 소문이 다윗에게 들려 오자 다윗은 이렇게 말하였다. \"감사와 찬양을 받으실 분은 언제나 여호와이십니다! 내가 터무니없이 나발에게 수치를 당하였으나 여호와께서 그 억울함을 당장 풀어 주시고 그 원수도 갚아 주셨습니다. 내가 분을 참지 못하고 서슴없이 죄를 범하는 일도 여호와께서 미리 막아 주셨습니다. 나발의 악한 행실을 그 자신에게로 되돌리신 분도 여호와이십니다.\" 그리고 다윗은 곧 아비가일에게 사람을 보내어 자기의 아내가 되어 달라고 청혼하였다.","Hearing that Nabal was dead, David said: “Blessed be the LORD, who has defended my cause against the insult from Nabal, and who restrained his servant from doing evil, but has repaid Nabal for his evil deeds.” David then sent a proposal of marriage to Abigail.","And when David heard that Nabal was dead, he said, Blessed be the LORD, that hath pleaded the cause of my reproach from the hand of Nabal, and hath kept his servant from evil: for the LORD hath returned the wickedness of Nabal upon his own head. And David sent and communed with Abigail, to take her to him to wife.","When David heard that Nabal was dead, he said, \"Praise be to the LORD, who has upheld my cause against Nabal for treating me with contempt. He has kept his servant from doing wrong and has brought Nabal's wrongdoing down on his own head.\" Then David sent word to Abigail, asking her to become his wife.","Quod cum audisset David mortuum Nabal, ait:  “Benedictus Dominus, qui iudicavit causam opprobrii mei de manu Nabal et servum suum custodivit a malo et malitiam Nabal reddidit Dominus in caput eius “. Misit ergo David et locutus est ad Abigail, ut sumeret eam sibi in uxorem.","וישמע דוד כי מת נבל ויאמר ברוך יהוה אשר רב את ריב חרפתי מיד נבל ואת עבדו חשך מרעה ואת רעת נבל השיב יהוה בראשו וישלח דוד וידבר באביגיל לקחתה לו לאשה׃"],["9","25","40","다윗의 부하들이 카르멜에 있는 아비가일을 찾아 가서 그에게 이렇게 말하였다. “다윗 어르신께서 부인을 아내로 삼으시려고 저희를 보내셨습니다.”","다윗의 부하들이 가르멜로 아비가일을 찾아가서 그 뜻을 전하였다. \"다윗 어른께서 댁을 아내로 맞으시려고 저희를 보내시어 모셔 오라 하셨습니다.\"","다윗의 전령들이 갈멜에 가서 아비가일에게 이르러 그에게 말하여 이르되 다윗이 당신을 아내로 삼고자 하여 우리를 당신께 보내더이다 하니","다윗의 사환들이 갈멜에 가서 아비가일에게 이르러 그에게 일러 가로되 다윗이 당신을 아내로 삼고자 하여 우리를 당신께 보내더이다","다윗의 종들이 갈멜에 있는 아비가일에게 찾아가 이같이 말하였다. \"다윗 어른께서 댁을 모셔다가 아내로 삼으시려고 저희를 보냈습니다.\"","When David’s servants came to Abigail in Carmel, they said to her, “David has sent us to make his proposal of marriage to you.”","And when the servants of David were come to Abigail to Carmel, they spake unto her, saying, David sent us unto thee, to take thee to him to wife.","His servants went to Carmel and said to Abigail, \"David has sent us to you to take you to become his wife.\"","Et venerunt pueri David ad Abigail in Carmel et locuti sunt ad eam dicentes:  “David misit nos ad te, ut accipiat te sibi in uxorem “.","ויבאו עבדי דוד אל אביגיל הכרמלה וידברו אליה לאמר דוד שלחנו אליך לקחתך לו לאשה׃"],["9","25","41","아비가일은 일어나 얼굴을 땅에 대고 엎드려 절한 다음, “이 종은 나리 부하들의 발을 씻어 주는 계집종입니다.” 하고 말하였다.","이 말을 듣고 아비가일은 일어나 얼굴을 땅에 대고 엎드려 대답하였다. \"계집종은 분부대로 하겠습니다. 나리의 신하들의 발이라도 씻어드리겠습니다.\"","아비가일이 일어나 몸을 굽혀 얼굴을 땅에 대고 이르되 내 주의 여종은 내 주의 전령들의 발 씻길 종이니이다 하고","그가 일어나 몸을 굽혀 얼굴을 땅에 대고 가로되 내 주의 여종은 내 주의 사환들의 발 씻길 종이니이다 하고","그러자 아비가일이 일어나 땅에 엎드려 절을 한 다음에 이렇게 말하였다. \"이 몸은 내 주의 여종이니 내 주를 섬기는 종들의 발이라도 기꺼이 씻어주겠습니다.\"","Rising and bowing to the ground, she answered, “Let your maidservant be the slave who washes the feet of my lord’s servants.”","And she arose, and bowed herself on her face to the earth, and said, Behold, let thine handmaid be a servant to wash the feet of the servants of my lord.","She bowed down with her face to the ground and said, \"Here is your maidservant, ready to serve you and wash the feet of my master's servants.\"","Quae consurgens adoravit prona in terram et ait:  “Ecce famula tua sit in ancillam, ut lavet pedes servorum domini mei “.","ותקם ותשתחו אפים ארצה ותאמר הנה אמתך לשפחה לרחץ רגלי עבדי אדני׃"],["9","25","42","아비가일은 서둘러 일어나 나귀에 올랐다. 그의 여종 다섯도 함께 따라나섰다. 이렇게 아비가일은 다윗의 심부름꾼들을 따라가서, 다윗의 아내가 되었다.","그리고 아비가일은 서둘러 나귀를 타고 길을 떠났다. 여종 다섯이 뒤를 따르고 다윗의 신하들이 앞장 섰다. 이렇게 해서 아비가일은 다윗의 아내가 되었다.","아비가일이 급히 일어나서 나귀를 타고 그를 뒤따르는 처녀 다섯과 함께 다윗의 전령들을 따라가서 다윗의 아내가 되니라","급히 일어나서 나귀를 타고 따르는 처녀 다섯과 함께 다윗의 사자들을 따라가서 다윗의 아내가 되니라","아비가일이 서둘러 떠날 채비를 하고 나귀를 타자 그녀의 몸종 다섯이 뒤따랐다. 아비가일은 이렇게 다윗의 종들을 따라가서 그의 아내가 되었다.","She got up immediately, mounted a donkey, and followed David’s messengers, with her five maids attending her. She became his wife.","And Abigail hasted, and arose and rode upon an ass, with five damsels of hers that went after her; and she went after the messengers of David, and became his wife.","Abigail quickly got on a donkey and, attended by her five maids, went with David's messengers and became his wife.","Et festinavit et surrexit Abigail et ascendit super asinum, et quinque puellae ierunt cum ea pedisequae eius; et secuta est nuntios David et facta est illi uxor.","ותמהר ותקם אביגיל ותרכב על החמור וחמש נערתיה ההלכות לרגלה ותלך אחרי מלאכי דוד ותהי לו לאשה׃"],["9","25","43","다윗은 이미 이즈르엘의 아히노암을 아내로 맞았기 때문에, 두 아내를 거느리게 되었다.","다윗은 이미 이즈르엘의 아히노암을 아내로 맞았었기 때문에 두 아내를 거느리게 되었다.","다윗이 또 이스르엘 아히노암을 아내로 맞았더니 그들 두 사람이 그의 아내가 되니라","다윗이 또 이스르엘 아히노암을 취하였더니 그들 두 사람이 자기 아내가 되니라","다윗은 이미 이스르엘 여인 아히노암을 아내로 삼고 있어서 이제는 그의 아내가 둘이 되었다.","David also married Ahinoam of Jezreel. Thus both of them were his wives.","David also took Ahinoam of Jezreel; and they were also both of them his wives.","David had also married Ahinoam of Jezreel, and they both were his wives.","Sed et Achinoam accepit David de Iezrahel, et fuit utraque uxor eius.","ואת אחינעם לקח דוד מיזרעאל ותהיין גם שתיהן לו לנשים׃"],["9","25","44","사울은 다윗의 아내인 자기 딸 미칼을 갈림 출신 라이스의 아들 팔티에게 주었다.","사울은 다윗에게 시집보냈던 딸 미갈을 갈림 출신 라이스의 아들 발티에게 주었다.","사울이 그의 딸 다윗의 아내 미갈을 갈림에 사는 라이스의 아들 발디에게 주었더라","사울이 그 딸 다윗의 아내 미갈을 갈림에 사는 라이스의 아들 3)발디에게 주었더라발디엘 [삼하 3:15]","본래 다윗의 아내는 사울의 딸 미갈이었으나 사울이 그녀를 갈림 사람 라이스의 아들 발디에게 다시 주었기 때문이다.","But Saul gave David’s wife Michal, Saul’s own daughter, to Palti, son of Laish, who was from Gallim.","But Saul had given Michal his daughter, David's wife, to Phalti the son of Laish, which was of Gallim.","But Saul had given his daughter Michal, David's wife, to Paltiel son of Laish, who was from Gallim.","Saul autem dedit Michol filiam suam uxorem David Phalti filio Lais, qui erat de Gallim.","ושאול נתן את מיכל בתו אשת דוד לפלטי בן ליש אשר מגלים׃"],["9","26","1","지프 사람들이 기브아에 있는 사울에게 가서 말하였다. “다윗이 여시몬 맞은쪽 하킬라 언덕에 숨어 있는 것이 확실합니다.”","지브 사람들이 기브아로 사울을 찾아가 아뢰었다. \"다윗이 여시몬 맞은편 하길라 언덕에 숨어 있는 것이 확실합니다.\"","십 사람이 기브아에 와서 사울에게 말하여 이르되 다윗이 광야 앞 하길라 산에 숨지 아니하였나이까 하매","십 사람이 기브아에 와서 사울에게 이르러 가로되 다윗이 광야 앞 하길라산에 숨지 아니하였나이까","십 광야에 사는 몇몇 사람이 기브아에 있는 사울을 찾아와서 다윗이 숨어 있는 곳을 밀고하였다. \"다윗은 유다 광야의 남쪽에 있는 하길라산 속에 숨어 있습니다.\"","Men from Ziph came to Saul in Gibeah, reporting that David was hiding on the hill of Hachilah at the edge of Jeshimon.","And the Ziphites came unto Saul to Gibeah, saying, Doth not David hide himself in the hill of Hachilah, which is before Jeshimon?","The Ziphites went to Saul at Gibeah and said, \"Is not David hiding on the hill of Hakilah, which faces Jeshimon?\"","Et venerunt Ziphaei ad Saul in Gabaa dicentes:  “Ecce David absconditus est in colle Hachila, quae est ex adverso solitudinis “.","ויבאו הזפים אל שאול הגבעתה לאמר הלוא דוד מסתתר בגבעת החכילה על פני הישימן׃"],["9","26","2","사울은 곧 이스라엘에서 뽑은 부하 삼천 명을 거느리고 지프 광야에 있는 다윗을 찾아 그곳으로 내려가,","사울은 곧 이스라엘 정병 삼천을 거느리고 다윗을 찾아 지브 광야로 내려갔다.","사울이 일어나 십 광야에서 다윗을 찾으려고 이스라엘에서 택한 사람 삼천 명과 함께 십 광야로 내려가서","사울이 일어나 십 황무지에서 다윗을 찾으려고 이스라엘에서 택한 사람 삼천과 함께 십 황무지로 내려가서","그러자 사울은 즉각 이스라엘에서 특공대원 3천 명을 골라 다윗을 잡아죽이려고 십 광야를 향하여 출전하였다.","So Saul went down to the wilderness of Ziph with three thousand of the best warriors of Israel, to search for David in the wilderness of Ziph.","Then Saul arose, and went down to the wilderness of Ziph, having three thousand chosen men of Israel with him, to seek David in the wilderness of Ziph.","So Saul went down to the Desert of Ziph, with his three thousand chosen men of Israel, to search there for David.","Et surrexit Saul et descendit in desertum Ziph, et cum eo tria milia virorum de electis Israel, ut quaereret David in deserto Ziph.","ויקם שאול וירד אל מדבר זיף ואתו שלשת אלפים איש בחורי ישראל לבקש את דוד במדבר זיף׃"],["9","26","3","여시몬 맞은쪽 하킬라 언덕 길가에 진을 쳤다. 다윗은 광야에서 지내고 있다가, 사울이 자기 뒤를 쫓아 광야로 온 것을 알게 되었다.","사울은 여시몬 맞은편 하길라 언덕 길가에 진을 쳤다. 다윗은 그 곳 광야에 머물러 있다가 사울이 자기를 찾아 광야로 왔다는 것을 알게 되었다.","사울이 광야 앞 하길라 산 길 가에 진 치니라 다윗이 광야에 있더니 사울이 자기를 따라 광야로 들어옴을 알고","광야 앞 하길라산 길 가에 진 치니라 다윗이 황무지에 있더니 사울이 자기를 따라 황무지로 들어옴을 깨닫고","사울은 하길라산 위에 올라가 그곳의 길가에 진을 쳤다. 이때에 다윗은 바로 그 광야에 숨어 있었기 때문에 사울이 출전한 것을 곧 알게 되었다.","Saul camped beside the road on the hill of Hachilah, at the edge of Jeshimon. David, who was living in the wilderness, saw that Saul had come into the wilderness after him","And Saul pitched in the hill of Hachilah, which is before Jeshimon, by the way. But David abode in the wilderness, and he saw that Saul came after him into the wilderness.","Saul made his camp beside the road on the hill of Hakilah facing Jeshimon, but David stayed in the desert. When he saw that Saul had followed him there,","Et castrametatus est Saul in colle Hachila, quae erat ex adverso solitudinis in via. David autem habitabat in deserto; videns autem quod venisset Saul post se in desertum,","ויחן שאול בגבעת החכילה אשר על פני הישימן על הדרך ודוד ישב במדבר וירא כי בא שאול אחריו המדברה׃"],["9","26","4","다윗은 정찰대를 보내어 사울이 분명히 와 있다는 사실을 알아낸 다음,","다윗은 정찰대를 파견하여 사울이 맞은편에 와 있는 것을 알아내고","이에 다윗이 정탐꾼을 보내어 사울이 과연 이른 줄 알고","이에 탐정을 보내어 사울이 과연 이른줄 알고","그래서 다윗은 정찰대를 보내 사울의 진영을 확인하였다.","and sent out scouts, who confirmed Saul’s arrival.","David therefore sent out spies, and understood that Saul was come in very deed.","he sent out scouts and learned that Saul had definitely arrived.","misit exploratores et didicit quod illuc venisset certissime.","וישלח דוד מרגלים וידע כי בא שאול אל נכון׃"],["9","26","5","일어나 사울이 진을 친 곳으로 갔다. 그는 사울과, 네르의 아들인 군대의 장수 아브네르가 자고 있는 곳을 보아 두었다. 사울은 진지 한가운데에서 자고, 그의 주변에는 군사들이 야영하고 있었다.","사울이 진을 치고 있는 곳으로 가보니 사울이 넬의 아들 아브넬 사령관과 함께 누워 있었다. 사울은 전군이 둘러 진치고 있는 원형 진지 한가운데서 자고 있었던 것이다.","다윗이 일어나 사울이 진 친 곳에 이르러 사울과 넬의 아들 군사령관 아브넬이 머무는 곳을 본즉 사울이 진영 가운데에 누웠고 백성은 그를 둘러 진 쳤더라","일어나 사울의 진 친 곳에 이르러 사울과 넬의 아들 군대장관 아브넬의 유하는 곳을 본즉 사울이 진 가운데 누웠고 백성은 그를 둘러 진 쳤더라","그러고는 자신도 직접 나서서 사울의 진영을 둘러보았다. 사울의 부하들은 거대한 원형 꼴로 진을 쳤으며, 그 한가운데서 사울이 자기의 군사령관 아브넬과 함께 누워서 쉬고 있었다.","David then went to the place where Saul was encamped and saw the spot where Saul and his general, Abner, son of Ner, had their sleeping quarters. Saul was lying within the camp, and all his soldiers were bivouacked around him.","And David arose, and came to the place where Saul had pitched: and David beheld the place where Saul lay, and Abner the son of Ner, the captain of his host: and Saul lay in the trench, and the people pitched round about him.","Then David set out and went to the place where Saul had camped. He saw where Saul and Abner son of Ner, the commander of the army, had lain down. Saul was lying inside the camp, with the army encamped around him.","Et surrexit David et venit ad locum, ubi erat Saul. Cumque vidisset locum, in quo dormiebat Saul et Abner filius Ner princeps militiae eius, Saulem dormientem in carragine et reliquum vulgus per circuitum eius,","ויקם דוד ויבא אל המקום אשר חנה שם שאול וירא דוד את המקום אשר שכב שם שאול ואבנר בן נר שר צבאו ושאול שכב במעגל והעם חנים סביבתו׃"],["9","26","6","다윗은 히타이트 사람 아히멜렉과, 요압의 동기며 츠루야의 아들인 아비사이에게, “누가 나와 함께 사울의 진영으로 내려가겠느냐?” 하고 물었다. “제가 장군님을 따라 내려가겠습니다.” 하고 아비사이가 대답하였다.","다윗은 헷 사람 아히멜렉과 스루야의 아들 요압의 형제인 아비새에게 누가 자기와 함께 사울의 진으로 내려가겠느냐고 물었다. \"제가 내려가겠습니다.\" 하고 아비새가 나섰다.","이에 다윗이 헷 사람 아히멜렉과 스루야의 아들 요압의 아우 아비새에게 물어 이르되 누가 나와 더불어 진영에 내려가서 사울에게 이르겠느냐 하니 아비새가 이르되 내가 함께 가겠나이다","이에 다윗이 헷 사람 아히멜렉과 스루야의 아들 요압의 아우 아비새에게 물어 가로되 누가 나로 더불어 진에 내려가서 사울에게 이르겠느냐 아비새가 가로되 내가 함께 가겠나이다","다윗은 헷 사람 아히멜렉과 스루야의 아들이며 요압의 아우인 아비새에게 이같이 물었다. \"여기까지는 너희 두 사람이 나를 따라왔으나, 이제는 한 사람만 나와 함께 저 진지로 잠입해 들어가자! 누가 따라가겠느냐?\" 아비새가 나서서 \"제가 내려가겠습니다\" 하고 대답하였다.","David asked Ahimelech the Hittite, and Abishai, son of Zeruiah and brother of Joab, “Who will go down into the camp with me to Saul?” Abishai replied, “I will.”","Then answered David and said to Ahimelech the Hittite, and to Abishai the son of Zeruiah, brother to Joab, saying, Who will go down with me to Saul to the camp? And Abishai said, I will go down with thee.","David then asked Ahimelech the Hittite and Abishai son of Zeruiah, Joab's brother, \"Who will go down into the camp with me to Saul?\" \"I'll go with you,\" said Abishai.","ait David ad Achimelech Hetthaeum et Abisai filium Sarviae fratrem Ioab dicens:  “Quis descendet mecum ad Saul in castra? “. Dixitque Abisai:  “Ego descendam tecum “.","ויען דוד ויאמר אל אחימלך החתי ואל אבישי בן צרויה אחי יואב לאמר מי ירד אתי אל שאול אל המחנה ויאמר אבישי אני ארד עמך׃"],["9","26","7","다윗은 아비사이를 데리고 밤을 타서 군대가 있는 곳으로 다가갔다. 그때 사울은 진지 안에서 머리맡 땅바닥에 창을 꽂아 놓고 잠들어 있었다. 아브네르와 그의 군사들도 사울을 둘러싸고 잠들어 있었다.","다윗은 그를 데리고 밤을 타서 적진으로 들어갔다. 그 곳에 이르러 그는 사울이 그 원형진지 안에서 머리맡에 창을 꽂아놓고 잠들어 있는 것을 보았다. 아브넬이 거느린 군대도 사울을 둘러싸고 누워 자고 있었다.","다윗과 아비새가 밤에 그 백성에게 나아가 본즉 사울이 진영 가운데 누워 자고 창은 머리 곁 땅에 꽂혀 있고 아브넬과 백성들은 그를 둘러 누웠는지라","다윗과 아비새가 밤에 그 백성에게 나아가 본즉 사울이 진 가운데 누워 자고 창은 머리 곁 땅에 꽂혔고 아브넬과 백성들은 그를 둘러 누웠는지라","그들은 날이 어두워질 때까지 산에서 기다리고 있다가 한밤중이 되자 사울의 진영으로 잠입하였는데 아브넬과 사울은 물론이요, 그의 부하들까지도 모두 깊은 잠에 빠져 있었다. 그런데 잠자는 사울의 머리맡에는 창이 땅바닥에 꽂혀 있었다.","So David and Abishai reached Saul’s soldiers by night, and there was Saul lying asleep within the camp, his spear thrust into the ground at his head and Abner and his troops sleeping around him.","So David and Abishai came to the people by night: and, behold, Saul lay sleeping within the trench, and his spear stuck in the ground at his bolster: but Abner and the people lay round about him.","So David and Abishai went to the army by night, and there was Saul, lying asleep inside the camp with his spear stuck in the ground near his head. Abner and the soldiers were lying around him.","Venerunt ergo David et Abisai ad populum nocte et invenerunt Saul iacentem et dormientem in carragine et hastam fixam in terra ad caput eius, Abner autem et populum dormientes in circuitu eius.","ויבא דוד ואבישי אל העם לילה והנה שאול שכב ישן במעגל וחניתו מעוכה בארץ מראשתו ואבנר והעם שכבים סביבתו׃"],["9","26","8","아비사이가 다윗에게 말하였다. “하느님께서 오늘 원수를 장군님 손에 넘기셨으니, 이 창으로 그를 단번에 땅에 박아 놓겠습니다. 두 번 찌를 것도 없습니다.”","이것을 보고 아비새가 다윗에게 말하였다. \"하느님께서는 오늘 이 원수를 장군님 손에 부치셨으니 여기 이 창으로 그를 단번에 땅에 박아놓겠습니다. 두 번 찌를 것도 없습니다.\"","아비새가 다윗에게 이르되 하나님이 오늘 당신의 원수를 당신의 손에 넘기셨나이다 그러므로 청하오니 내가 창으로 그를 찔러서 단번에 땅에 꽂게 하소서 내가 그를 두 번 찌를 것이 없으리이다 하니","아비새가 다윗에게 이르되 하나님이 오늘날 당신의 원수를 당신의 손에 붙이셨나이다 그러므로 청하오니 나로 창으로 그를 찔러서 단번에 땅에 꽂게 하소서 내가 그를 두번 찌를 것이 없으리이다","아비새가 다윗에게 이같이 속삭였다. \"여호와께서 오늘 이 원수를 장군님의 손에 넘겨 주셨습니다! 제가 원수의 창으로 그를 찔러 땅바닥에 박아놓겠습니다. 한번만 내려꽂으면 그만입니다!\"","Abishai whispered to David: “God has delivered your enemy into your hand today. Let me nail him to the ground with one thrust of the spear; I will not need to strike him twice!”","Then said Abishai to David, God hath delivered thine enemy into thine hand this day: now therefore let me smite him, I pray thee, with the spear even to the earth at once, and I will not smite him the second time.","Abishai said to David, \"Today God has delivered your enemy into your hands. Now let me pin him to the ground with one thrust of my spear; I won't strike him twice.\"","Dixitque Abisai ad David:  “Conclusit Deus hodie inimicum tuum in manus tuas; nunc ergo perfodiam eum lancea in terra semel, et secundo opus non erit “.","ויאמר אבישי אל דוד סגר אלהים היום את אויבך בידך ועתה אכנו נא בחנית ובארץ פעם אחת ולא אשנה לו׃"],["9","26","9","그러나 다윗이 아비사이를 타일렀다. “그분을 해쳐서는 안 된다. 누가 감히 주님의 기름부음받은이에게 손을 대고도 벌받지 않을 수 있겠느냐?”","다윗이 아비새를 타일렀다. \"그렇게 해치워서는 안 된다. 누가 감히 야훼께서 기름 부어 세우신 어른에게 손을 대고 죄를 받지 않겠느냐?\"","다윗이 아비새에게 이르되 죽이지 말라 누구든지 손을 들어 여호와의 기름 부음 받은 자를 치면 죄가 없겠느냐 하고","다윗이 아비새에게 이르되 죽이지 말라 누구든지 손을 들어 여호와의 기름 부음을 받은 자를 치면 죄가 없겠느냐","그러나 다윗이 말렸다. \"그에게 함부로 손대지 말아라! 그는 여호와께서 기름 부어 세우신 왕이기 때문에, 네가 그를 죽이는 날에는 벌을 받게 된다\"","But David said to Abishai, “Do not harm him, for who can lay a hand on the LORD’s anointed and remain innocent?","And David said to Abishai, Destroy him not: for who can stretch forth his hand against the LORD's anointed, and be guiltless?","But David said to Abishai, \"Don't destroy him! Who can lay a hand on the LORD'S anointed and be guiltless?","Et dixit David ad Abisai:  “Ne interficias eum; quis enim extendit manum suam in christum Domini et innocens erit? “.","ויאמר דוד אל אבישי אל תשחיתהו כי מי שלח ידו במשיח יהוה ונקה׃"],["9","26","10","다윗은 다시 말을 이었다. “살아 계신 주님을 두고 맹세하는데, 주님께서 그분을 치실 것이다. 그래서 그분은 자기 때가 되어서 돌아가시거나 싸움터에 내려가 사라지실 것이다.","다윗은 다시 말을 이었다. \"사울은 어차피 야훼께 얻어 맞을 분이다. 때가 되어서 죽든지 싸움터에 내려가 최후를 마치든지 할 분이다.","다윗이 또 이르되 여호와께서 살아 계심을 두고 맹세하노니 여호와께서 그를 치시리니 혹은 죽을 날이 이르거나 또는 전장에 나가서 망하리라","또 가로되 여호와께서 사시거니와 여호와께서 그를 치시리니 혹 죽을 날이 이르거나 혹 전장에 들어가서 망하리라","결국 다윗은 아비새가 그를 해치지 못하도록 일부러 이런 말을 한 것이다. \"살아 계신 여호와를 두고 내가 확실히 단언하지만 그는 우리가 손대어 죽일 사람이 아니다. 그에게 형벌을 내리실 분은 오직 여호와뿐이시다. 여호와께서는 그를 나발처럼 쳐죽이시거나 죽을 날이 되어서 죽게 하시거나 전쟁터에 나가서 잡혀 죽게 하실 것이다.","As the LORD lives,” David declared, “only the LORD can strike him: either when the time comes for him to die, or when he goes out and perishes in battle.","David said furthermore, As the LORD liveth, the LORD shall smite him; or his day shall come to die; or he shall descend into battle, and perish.","As surely as the LORD lives,\" he said, \"the LORD himself will strike him; either his time will come and he will die, or he will go into battle and perish.","Et dixit David:  “Vivit Dominus quia Dominus percutiet eum, aut dies eius veniet, ut moriatur, aut in proelium descendens peribit.","ויאמר דוד חי יהוה כי אם יהוה יגפנו או יומו יבוא ומת או במלחמה ירד ונספה׃"],["9","26","11","주님께서는 내가 주님의 기름부음받은이에게 손을 대지 못하게 하셨다. 그러니 그의 머리맡에 있는 창과 물병만 가지고 나가자.”","내가 야훼께서 기름 부어 세우신 어른에게 손을 댔다가는 야훼께 벌을 받으리라. 그러니 그의 머리맡에 있는 창과 물병만 가지고 가자.\"","내가 손을 들어 여호와의 기름 부음 받은 자를 치는 것을 여호와께서 금하시나니 너는 그의 머리 곁에 있는 창과 물병만 가지고 가자 하고","내가 손을 들어 여호와의 기름 부음을 받은 자를 치는 것을 여호와께서 금하시나니 너는 그의 머리 곁에 있는 창과 물병만 가지고 가자 하고","그러므로 여호와께서 기름부어 세우신 왕에게 내가 손을 들어 쳐죽이는 일은 그분이 직접 막아 주시기를 원한다. 그러므로 이제 우리는 그의 머리맡에 있는 창과 물병만 가지고 어서 빠져 나가자!\"","But the LORD forbid that I lay a hand on the LORD’s anointed! Now take the spear at his head and the water jug, and let us be on our way.”","The LORD forbid that I should stretch forth mine hand against the LORD's anointed: but, I pray thee, take thou now the spear that is at his bolster, and the cruse of water, and let us go.","But the LORD forbid that I should lay a hand on the LORD'S anointed. Now get the spear and water jug that are near his head, and let's go.\"","Propitius mihi sit Dominus, ne extendam manum meam in christum Domini. Nunc igitur tolle hastam, quae est ad caput eius, et scyphum aquae, et abeamus “.","חלילה לי מיהוה משלח ידי במשיח יהוה ועתה קח נא את החנית אשר מראשתו ואת צפחת המים ונלכה לנו׃"],["9","26","12","다윗은 사울의 머리맡에서 창과 물병을 가지고 나왔다. 주님께서 그들 위에 깊은 잠을 쏟으시어 그들이 모두 잠들었기 때문에, 다윗을 본 사람도 알아채거나 잠을 깬 사람도 없었다.","다윗은 사울의 머리맡에서 창과 물병을 가지고 빠져 나왔다. 야훼께서 그들을 모두 깊이 잠들게 하셨으므로 다윗을 본 사람도, 눈치챈 사람도 없었다.","다윗이 사울의 머리 곁에서 창과 물병을 가지고 떠나가되 아무도 보거나 눈치 채지 못하고 깨어 있는 사람도 없었으니 이는 여호와께서 그들을 깊이 잠들게 하셨으므로 그들이 다 잠들어 있었기 때문이었더라","다윗이 사울의 머리 곁에서 창과 물병을 가지고 떠나가되 깨든지 이를 보든지 알든지 하는 사람이 없었으니 이는 여호와께서 그들로 깊이 잠들게 하셨으므로 그들이 다 잠이었더라","그리고 다윗은 그 두 가지 물건만 가지고 아비새와 함께 사울의 진영에서 무사히 빠져나왔다. 그러나 이것을 본 사람도 없고, 잠에서 깬 사람도 없었다. 여호와께서 그들에게 깊은 잠을 내리셔서, 그들은 모두 갈비뼈를 빼가도 모를 정도로 깊은 잠에 빠져 있었기 때문이다.","So David took the spear and the water jug from their place at Saul’s head, and they withdrew without anyone seeing or knowing or awakening. All remained asleep, because a deep slumber from the LORD had fallen upon them.","So David took the spear and the cruse of water from Saul's bolster; and they gat them away, and no man saw it, nor knew it, neither awaked: for they were all asleep; because a deep sleep from the LORD was fallen upon them.","So David took the spear and water jug near Saul's head, and they left. No one saw or knew about it, nor did anyone wake up. They were all sleeping, because the LORD had put them into a deep sleep.","Tulit ergo David hastam et scyphum aquae, qui erat ad caput Saul, et abierunt; et non erat quisquam, qui videret et intellegeret et vigilaret, sed omnes dormiebant, quia sopor Domini irruerat super eos.","ויקח דוד את החנית ואת צפחת המים מראשתי שאול וילכו להם ואין ראה ואין יודע ואין מקיץ כי כלם ישנים כי תרדמת יהוה נפלה עליהם׃"],["9","26","13","다윗은 맞은쪽으로 건너가 상대와 거리를 멀리 두고 산꼭대기에 서서,","다윗은 건너편으로 건너가 멀리 산꼭대기에 서서","이에 다윗이 건너편으로 가서 멀리 산 꼭대기에 서니 거리가 멀더라","이에 다윗이 건너편으로 가서 멀리 산꼭대기에 서니 상거가 멀더라","다윗은 골짜기를 건너서 맞은편에 있는 산으로 올라갔다. 그리고 사울의 진지에서 안전할 정도로 멀리 떨어진 곳에 멈추어 섰다.","Crossing over to an opposite slope, David stood on a distant hilltop. With a great distance between them","Then David went over to the other side, and stood on the top of an hill afar off; a great space being between them:","Then David crossed over to the other side and stood on top of the hill some distance away; there was a wide space between them.","Cumque transisset David ex adverso et stetisset in vertice montis de longe, et esset grande intervallum inter eos,","ויעבר דוד העבר ויעמד על ראש ההר מרחק רב המקום ביניהם׃"],["9","26","14","군대를 향하여 네르의 아들 아브네르에게 소리쳤다. “아브네르야, 대답하지 못하겠느냐?” 아브네르가 “임금님을 부르는 너는 도대체 누구냐?” 하며 대꾸하자,","적군을 향하여 넬의 아들 아브넬에게 소리쳤다. \"아브넬아, 내 말이 들리지 않느냐?\" 아브넬이 \"왕께서 계신 데다 대고 소리치는 자가 누구냐?\" 하며 대꾸하자","다윗이 백성과 넬의 아들 아브넬을 대하여 외쳐 이르되 아브넬아 너는 대답하지 아니하느냐 하니 아브넬이 대답하여 이르되 왕을 부르는 너는 누구냐 하더라","다윗이 백성과 넬의 아들 아브넬을 대하여 외쳐 가로되 아브넬아 너는 대답지 아니하느냐 아브넬이 대답하여 가로되 왕을 부르는 너는 누구냐","다윗은 골짜기 건너편 산 위에 있는 사울의 진지를 향하여 크게 외쳤다. \"아브넬아 네가 거기 있느냐? 너는 대답도 못하느냐?\" 아브넬이 대답을 하였다. \"임금님께서 주무시는데, 어느 놈이 감히 소리를 지르느냐?\"","David called to the army and to Abner, son of Ner, “Will you not answer, Abner?” Then Abner shouted back, “Who is it that calls me?”","And David cried to the people, and to Abner the son of Ner, saying, Answerest thou not, Abner? Then Abner answered and said, Who art thou that criest to the king?","He called out to the army and to Abner son of Ner, \"Aren't you going to answer me, Abner?\" Abner replied, \"Who are you who calls to the king?\"","clamavit David ad populum et ad Abner filium Ner dicens:  “Nonne respondebis, Abner? “. Et respondens Abner ait:  “Quis es tu? Clamasti ad regem! “.","ויקרא דוד אל העם ואל אבנר בן נר לאמר הלוא תענה אבנר ויען אבנר ויאמר מי אתה קראת אל המלך׃"],["9","26","15","다윗이 아브네르를 꾸짖었다. “너는 대장부가 아니냐? 이스라엘에 너만 한 자가 또 어디 있느냐? 그런데 어찌하여 너는 이쪽 군사 하나가 너의 주군이신 임금님을 해치려고 들어갔는데도, 너의 주군이신 임금님을 지켜 드리지 못하였느냐?","다윗이 호통을 쳤다. \"너는 사내 대장부가 아니냐? 이스라엘에 너 같은 사내 대장부가 또 어디 있느냐? 그런데 이 쪽에서 군인 하나가 네 상전인 왕을 해하려고 들어갔는데도 네 상전인 왕을 지키지 못하다니","다윗이 아브넬에게 이르되 네가 용사가 아니냐 이스라엘 가운데에 너 같은 자가 누구냐 그러한데 네가 어찌하여 네 주 왕을 보호하지 아니하느냐 백성 가운데 한 사람이 네 주 왕을 죽이려고 들어갔었느니라","다윗이 아브넬에게 이르되 네가 용사가 아니냐 이스라엘 중에 너 같은 자가 누구냐 그러한데 네가 어찌하여 네 주 왕을 보호하지 아니하느냐 백성 중 한 사람이 네 주 왕을 죽이려고 들어갔었느니라","다윗이 아브넬에게 호통을 치기 시작하였다. \"너는 그래도 용사가 아니더냐? 도대체 이스라엘에서 너처럼 용감한 사람이 또 있더냐? 그런 네가 어째서 네 주 왕을 똑바로 지키지 못하였더냐? 방금 네 왕을 죽이려고 그 진지에 들어갔다가 나온 사람이 있다.","David said to Abner: “Are you not a man? Who in Israel is your equal? Why were you not guarding your lord the king when one of his subjects came to assassinate the king, your lord?","And David said to Abner, Art not thou a valiant man? and who is like to thee in Israel? wherefore then hast thou not kept thy lord the king? for there came one of the people in to destroy the king thy lord.","David said, \"You're a man, aren't you? And who is like you in Israel? Why didn't you guard your lord the king? Someone came to destroy your lord the king.","Et ait David ad Abner:  “Numquid non vir tu es? Et quis alius similis tui in Israel? Quare ergo non custodisti dominum tuum regem? Ingressus est enim unus de turba, ut interficeret regem dominum tuum.","ויאמר דוד אל אבנר הלוא איש אתה ומי כמוך בישראל ולמה לא שמרת אל אדניך המלך כי בא אחד העם להשחית את המלך אדניך׃"],["9","26","16","너는 이번에 책임을 다하지 못하였다. 살아 계신 주님을 두고 맹세하는데, 너희는 주님의 기름부음받은이인 너희 주군을 지켜 드리지 못하였으니 죽어 마땅하다. 그분의 머리맡에 있던 창과 물병이 어디 있는지 당장 찾아보아라.”","네가 어찌 이럴 수 있느냐? 너희는 야훼께서 기름 부어 세우신 상전을 지키지 못했으니 너야말로 죽어 마땅한 놈이다. 왕의 머리맡에 있던 창과 물병이 어디 갔는지 당장 찾아보아라.\"","네가 행한 이 일이 옳지 못하도다 여호와께서 살아 계심을 두고 맹세하노니 여호와의 기름 부음 받은 너희 주를 보호하지 아니하였으니 너희는 마땅히 죽을 자이니라 이제 왕의 창과 왕의 머리 곁에 있던 물병이 어디 있나 보라 하니","네 행한 이 일이 선치 못하도다 여호와께서 사시거니와 여호와의 기름 부음 받은 너희 주를 보호하지 아니하였으니 너희는 마땅히 죽을 자니라 이제 왕의 창과 왕의 머리 곁에 있던 물병이 어디 있나 보라","너는 아주 수치스러운 일을 저지르고 말았다. 여호와께서 기름 부어 왕으로 세우신 너희의 주를 똑바로 지키지 못하였으니, 이제 너는 죽어 마땅한 자이다. 왕의 머리맡에 있던 창과 물병이 없어졌을 것이니 어서 찾아보아라!\"","What you have done is not right. As the LORD lives, you people deserve death because you have not guarded your lord, the anointed of the LORD. Go, look: where are the king’s spear and the water jug that was at his head?”","This thing is not good that thou hast done. As the LORD liveth, ye are worthy to die, because ye have not kept your master, the LORD's anointed. And now see where the king's spear is, and the cruse of water that was at his bolster.","What you have done is not good. As surely as the LORD lives, you and your men deserve to die, because you did not guard your master, the LORD'S anointed. Look around you. Where are the king's spear and water jug that were near his head?\"","Non est bonum hoc, quod fecisti. Vivit Dominus quoniam filii mortis estis vos, qui non custodistis dominum vestrum, christum Domini. Nunc ergo vide, ubi sit hasta regis et ubi scyphus aquae, qui erat ad caput eius “.","לא טוב הדבר הזה אשר עשית חי יהוה כי בני מות אתם אשר לא שמרתם על אדניכם על משיח יהוה ועתה ראה אי חנית המלך ואת צפחת המים אשר מראשתו׃"],["9","26","17","사울이 다윗의 목소리를 알아듣고 물었다. “내 아들 다윗아, 이것이 네 목소리냐?” 다윗은 “제 목소리입니다. 저의 주군이신 임금님!” 하고 대답하였다.","사울이 다윗의 목소리를 알아보고 물었다. \"내 아들 다윗아, 이것이 네 목소리가 아니냐?\" 다윗은 \"그렇습니다, 임금님.\" 하면서","사울이 다윗의 음성을 알아 듣고 이르되 내 아들 다윗아 이것이 네 음성이냐 하는지라 다윗이 이르되 내 주 왕이여 내 음성이니이다 하고","사울이 다윗의 음성을 알아 듣고 가로되 내 아들 다윗아 이것이 네 음성이냐 다윗이 가로되 내 주 왕이여 내 음성이니이다","사울이 다윗의 목소리를 알아 듣고 \"내 아들 다윗아, 이것이 정말로 네 목소리냐?\" 하고 외쳤다. 다윗이 \"정말로 그렇습니다! 내 주 임금님!\" 하고 대답하였다.","Saul recognized David’s voice and asked, “Is that your voice, David my son?” David answered, “Yes, my lord the king.”","And Saul knew David's voice, and said, Is this thy voice, my son David? And David said, It is my voice, my lord, O king.","Saul recognized David's voice and said, \"Is that your voice, David my son?\" David replied, \"Yes it is, my lord the king.\"","Cognovit autem Saul vocem David et dixit:  “Num vox tua haec est, fili mi David? “. Et ait David:  “Vox mea, domine mi rex “.","ויכר שאול את קול דוד ויאמר הקולך זה בני דוד ויאמר דוד קולי אדני המלך׃"],["9","26","18","그가 다시 말하였다. “그런데 어찌하여 주군께서는 이 종을 뒤쫓으십니까? 제가 무슨 짓을 했단 말입니까? 제 손으로 지은 죄악이 도대체 무엇입니까?","말하였다. \"임금님께서 소자를 추적하시다니 웬일이십니까? 제가 무슨 짓을 했단 말씀입니까? 무슨 흉계라도 꾸몄다는 말씀입니까?","또 이르되 내 주는 어찌하여 주의 종을 쫓으시나이까 내가 무엇을 하였으며 내 손에 무슨 악이 있나이까","또 가로되 내 주는 어찌하여 주의 종을 쫓으시나이까 내가 무엇을 하였으며 내 손에 무슨 악이 있나이까","다윗은 사울을 향하여 날카로운 항의를 해댔다. \"임금님께서는 도대체 무엇 때문에 저를 사냥하듯이 계속 쫓고 계십니까? 도대체 제가 임금님께 무슨 잘못을 저질렀습니까? 제 손으로 지은 죄가 무엇입니까?","He continued: “Why does my lord pursue his servant? What have I done? What evil am I planning?","And he said, Wherefore doth my lord thus pursue after his servant? for what have I done? or what evil is in mine hand?","And he added, \"Why is my lord pursuing his servant? What have I done, and what wrong am I guilty of?","Et ait:  “Quam ob causam dominus meus persequitur servum suum? Quid feci? Aut quod est in manu mea malum?","ויאמר למה זה אדני רדף אחרי עבדו כי מה עשיתי ומה בידי רעה׃"],["9","26","19","저의 주군이신 임금님께서는 이제 이 종의 말을 들어 주십시오. 만일 주님께서 임금님을 부추기시어 저를 치시려는 것이라면, 저는 기꺼이 그분께 바치는 예물이 되겠습니다. 그러나 만일 사람들이 그렇게 하였다면, 그들은 주님 앞에서 저주를 받아야 합니다. 제가 주님의 상속 재산을 더 이상 받아 누리지 못하도록, ‘가서 다른 신들을 섬겨라.’ 하면서, 그들이 오늘 저를 쫓아내는 것이기 때문입니다.","임금님께서는 이제 소자가 아뢰는 말씀을 들어주십시오. 만일 소자가 임금님의 손에 죽는 것이 야훼의 뜻이라면 저는 기꺼이 제물이 되겠습니다. 그러나 만일 이것이 사람의 생각이라면 그들이 야훼께 저주를 받을 것입니다. 그들은 지금 야훼께서 주신 이 땅에서 나를 쫓아내려는 것입니다. 가서 다른 신이나 섬기라고 하는 것입니다.","원하건대 내 주 왕은 이제 종의 말을 들으소서 만일 왕을 충동시켜 나를 해하려 하는 이가 여호와시면 여호와께서는 제물을 받으시기를 원하나이다마는 만일 사람들이면 그들이 여호와 앞에 저주를 받으리니 이는 그들이 이르기를 너는 가서 다른 신들을 섬기라 하고 오늘 나를 쫓아내어 여호와의 기업에 참여하지 못하게 함이니이다","청컨대 내 주 왕은 이제 종의 말을 들으소서 만일 왕을 격동시켜 나를 해하려 하는 이가 여호와시면 여호와께서는 제물을 받으시기를 원하나이다마는 만일 인자들이면 그들이 여호와 앞에 저주를 받으리니 이는 그들이 이르기를 너는 가서 다른 신들을 섬기라 하고 오늘날 나를 쫓아내어 여호와의 기업에 붙지 못하게 함이니이다","임금님이시여, 이제 이 종의 말에 귀기울여 주십시오. 만일 여호와께서 임금님의 마음을 충동해서 저를 원수로 여기고 쫓아다니게 하신다면, 저는 기꺼이 여호와께 바치는 향기로운 제물이 되어 죽겠습니다. 그러나 만일 사람들이 임금님의 마음을 자극시켜서 죄도 없는 저를 잡아 죽이게 한다면, 여호와께서 그들을 벌하실 것입니다. 그들은 여호와께서 유업으로 주신 이 땅에서 나를 내쫓아 하나님의 백성 가운데서 쫓겨나게 하고, 저 낯선 세상에서 헛된 신들이나 섬기도록 나를 몰아붙이는 자들이기 때문에, 여호와께서 오히려 그들에게 저주를 내리실 것입니다.","Please, now, let my lord the king listen to the words of his servant. If the LORD has incited you against me, may an offering please the LORD. But if it is the people who have done so, may they be cursed before the LORD. They have driven me away so that today I have no share in the LORD’s heritage, but am told: ‘Go serve other gods!’","Now therefore, I pray thee, let my lord the king hear the words of his servant. If the LORD have stirred thee up against me, let him accept an offering: but if they be the children of men, cursed be they before the LORD; for they have driven me out this day from abiding in the inheritance of the LORD, saying, Go, serve other gods.","Now let my lord the king listen to his servant's words. If the LORD has incited you against me, then may he accept an offering. If, however, men have done it, may they be cursed before the LORD! They have now driven me from my share in the LORD'S inheritance and have said, 'Go, serve other gods.'","Nunc ergo audiat, oro, dominus meus rex verba servi sui: Si Dominus incitat te adversum me, odoretur sacrificium; si autem filii hominum, maledicti sint in conspectu Domini, quia eiecerunt me hodie, ut non habitem in hereditate Domini dicentes: “Vade, servi diis alienis”.","ועתה ישמע נא אדני המלך את דברי עבדו אם יהוה הסיתך בי ירח מנחה ואם בני האדם ארורים הם לפני יהוה כי גרשוני היום מהסתפח בנחלת יהוה לאמר לך עבד אלהים אחרים׃"],["9","26","20","그러니 이제 제가 주님 앞에서 멀리 떨어진 채, 땅에 피를 흘리지 않게 해 주십시오. 이스라엘 임금님께서 정녕 산에 있는 자고새를 뒤쫓듯이, 벼룩 한 마리를 찾아 나서셨으니 말입니다.”","이제 야훼 앞을 벗어난 이 땅에 제 피를 흘려야만 되겠습니까? 이스라엘 왕께서 산으로 꿩을 잡으러 나서듯이 벼룩 한 마리를 찾아 나서신 것입니까?\"","그런즉 청하건대 여호와 앞에서 먼 이 곳에서 이제 나의 피가 땅에 흐르지 말게 하옵소서 이는 산에서 메추라기를 사냥하는 자와 같이 이스라엘 왕이 한 벼룩을 수색하러 나오셨음이니이다","그런즉 청컨대 여호와 앞에서 먼 이곳에서 이제 나의 피로 땅에 흐르지 말게 하옵소서 이는 산에서 메추라기를 사냥하는 자와 같이 이스라엘 왕이 한 벼룩을 수색하러 나오셨음이니이다","그러므로 임금님, 제가 여호와 곁에서 멀리 떠난 이 타향에서 죽는 일이 없도록 도와주십시오. 한 나라의 임금님께서 무엇 때문에 꿩 한 마리를 잡으려고 온 산을 헤매는 사냥꾼처럼 행동하십니까? 이러다가는 이스라엘의 임금님께서 벼룩 한 마리를 잡기 위해서도 출동하시는 날이 오겠습니다!\"","Do not let my blood spill on the ground far from the presence of the LORD. For the king of Israel has come out to seek a single flea as if he were hunting partridge in the mountains.”","Now therefore, let not my blood fall to the earth before the face of the LORD: for the king of Israel is come out to seek a flea, as when one doth hunt a partridge in the mountains.","Now do not let my blood fall to the ground far from the presence of the LORD. The king of Israel has come out to look for a flea--as one hunts a partridge in the mountains.\"","Et nunc non effundatur sanguis meus in terra longe a facie Domini; quia egressus est rex Israel, ut quaerat pulicem unum, sicut persequitur quis perdicem in montibus “.","ועתה אל יפל דמי ארצה מנגד פני יהוה כי יצא מלך ישראל לבקש את פרעש אחד כאשר ירדף הקרא בהרים׃"],["9","26","21","그러자 사울이 다윗에게 말하였다. “내가 잘못했다. 내 아들 다윗아, 돌아오너라. 네가 오늘 내 목숨을 소중하게 보아 주었으니, 내가 다시는 너에게 해를 끼치지 않겠다. 내가 정말 어리석은 짓을 하여 매우 큰 실수를 저질렀구나.”","그러자 사울은 \"내가 잘못했다. 내 아들 다윗아, 돌아오너라. 네가 오늘 내 목숨을 그렇게 소중하게 보아주었는데, 내가 어찌 다시 너를 해치겠느냐? 내가 미치지 않고서야 이렇게 엄청난 잘못을 저지를 수 있겠느냐?\" 하면서 사과하였다.","사울이 이르되 내가 범죄하였도다 내 아들 다윗아 돌아오라 네가 오늘 내 생명을 귀하게 여겼은즉 내가 다시는 너를 해하려 하지 아니하리라 내가 어리석은 일을 하였으니 대단히 잘못되었도다 하는지라","사울이 가로되 내가 범죄하였도다 내 아들 다윗아 돌아오라 네가 오늘 내 생명을 귀중히 여겼은즉 내가 다시는 너를 해하려 하지 아니하리라 내가 어리석은 일을 하였으니 대단히 잘못 되었도다","사울이 대답하였다. \"내가 잘못하였으니 내 아들 다윗아, 이제 내게로 돌아오너라. 네가 오늘 내 생명을 귀중하게 여기고 아껴주었으니, 나도 네게 더 이상 해를 입히지 않겠다. 내가 얼마나 어리석은 짓을 하였는지 이제는 분명히 깨달았다. 내가 네게 아주 큰 죄를 지었구나!\"","Then Saul said: “I have done wrong. Come back, David, my son! I will not harm you again, because you considered my life precious today even though I have been a fool and have made a serious mistake.”","Then said Saul, I have sinned: return, my son David: for I will no more do thee harm, because my soul was precious in thine eyes this day: behold, I have played the fool, and have erred exceedingly.","Then Saul said, \"I have sinned. Come back, David my son. Because you considered my life precious today, I will not try to harm you again. Surely I have acted like a fool and have erred greatly.\"","Et ait Saul:  “Peccavi. Revertere, fili mi David; nequaquam enim ultra malefaciam tibi, eo quod pretiosa fuerit anima mea in oculis tuis hodie; apparet quod stulte egerim et erraverim multum nimis “.","ויאמר שאול חטאתי שוב בני דוד כי לא ארע לך עוד תחת אשר יקרה נפשי בעיניך היום הזה הנה הסכלתי ואשגה הרבה מאד׃"],["9","26","22","다윗이 응답하였다. “여기 임금님의 창이 있습니다. 젊은이 하나가 건너와 가져가게 하십시오.","다윗이 대답하였다. \"여기 임금님의 창이 있습니다. 부하 하나를 보내시어 가져가십시오.","다윗이 대답하여 이르되 왕은 창을 보소서 한 소년을 보내어 가져가게 하소서","다윗이 대답하여 가로되 왕은 창을 보소서 한 소년을 보내어 가져가게 하소서","다윗이 이렇게 대답하였다. \"이것을 보십시오! 이것이 임금님의 창입니다. 군인 한 사람을 보내어 가져가게 하십시오.","But David answered: “Here is the king’s spear. Let an attendant come over to get it.","And David answered and said, Behold the king's spear! and let one of the young men come over and fetch it.","\"Here is the king's spear,\" David answered. \"Let one of your young men come over and get it.","Et respondens David ait:  “Ecce hasta regis; transeat unus de pueris et tollat eam.","ויען דוד ויאמר הנה החנית המלך ויעבר אחד מהנערים ויקחה׃"],["9","26","23","주님은 누구에게나 그 의로움과 진실을 되갚아 주시는 분이십니다. 오늘 주님께서 임금님을 제 손에 넘겨주셨지만, 저는 주님의 기름부음받은이에게 손을 대려 하지 않았습니다.","야훼께서는 누구든지 참되게 살기만 하면 그대로 갚아주시는 분이십니다. 오늘 야훼께서 임금님을 제 손에 부치셨지만 저는 손을 댈 마음이 없었습니다. 임금님은 야훼께서 기름 부어 세우신 분이 아니십니까?","여호와께서 사람에게 그의 공의와 신실을 따라 갚으시리니 이는 여호와께서 오늘 왕을 내 손에 넘기셨으되 나는 손을 들어 여호와의 기름 부음을 받은 자 치기를 원하지 아니하였음이니이다","여호와께서 각 사람에게 그 의와 신실을 갚으시리니 이는 여호와께서 오늘날 왕을 내 손에 붙이셨으되 나는 손을 들어 여호와의 기름 부음을 받은 자 치기를 원치 아니하였음이니이다","여호와께서는 모든 사람의 의롭고 진실한 행동에 따라서 그대로 갚아주시기 때문에, 비록 여호와께서 오늘 임금님을 제 손에 넘겨주셨어도 저는 그분께서 기름 부어 세우신 임금님을 함부로 손대어 죽이지 않았습니다.","The LORD repays everyone’s righteousness and faithfulness. Although the LORD delivered you into my hands today, I could not lay a hand on the LORD’s anointed.","The LORD render to every man his righteousness and his faithfulness; for the LORD delivered thee into my hand to day, but I would not stretch forth mine hand against the LORD's anointed.","The LORD rewards every man for his righteousness and faithfulness. The LORD delivered you into my hands today, but I would not lay a hand on the LORD'S anointed.","Dominus autem retribuet unicuique secundum iustitiam suam et fidem; tradidit enim te Dominus hodie in manu mea, et nolui extendere manum meam in christum Domini.","ויהוה ישיב לאיש את צדקתו ואת אמנתו אשר נתנך יהוה היום ביד ולא אביתי לשלח ידי במשיח יהוה׃"],["9","26","24","이렇게 제가 오늘 임금님의 목숨을 귀중하게 보아 드렸으니, 주님께서도 제 목숨을 귀중하게 보아 주시어 온갖 재앙에서 건져 주시기를 바랍니다.”","이렇게 제가 임금님의 목숨을 귀중하게 보아드렸으니, 야훼께서도 제 목숨을 귀하게 여기시어 온갖 재난에서 구해 주실 것입니다.\"","오늘 왕의 생명을 내가 중히 여긴 것 같이 내 생명을 여호와께서 중히 여기셔서 모든 환난에서 나를 구하여 내시기를 바라나이다 하니라","오늘날 왕의 생명을 내가 중히 여긴것 같이 내 생명을 여호와께서 중히 여기셔서 모든 환난에서 나를 구하여 내시기를 바라나이다","그러므로 오늘 제가 의롭고 진실한 행동을 존중하여 임금님의 생명을 아껴 준 것같이, 여호와께서도 제게 의롭고 진실한 상급을 주셔서 저의 생명을 아껴 주시고, 어떠한 궁지에서도 건져내 주실 것임을 똑똑히 알아두십시오!\"","Just as I regarded your life as precious today, so may the LORD regard my life as precious and deliver me from all dangers.”","And, behold, as thy life was much set by this day in mine eyes, so let my life be much set by in the eyes of the LORD, and let him deliver me out of all tribulation.","As surely as I valued your life today, so may the LORD value my life and deliver me from all trouble.\"","Et sicut magnificata est anima tua hodie in oculis meis, sic magnificetur anima mea in oculis Domini, et liberet me de omni angustia “.","והנה כאשר גדלה נפשך היום הזה בעיני כן תגדל נפשי בעיני יהוה ויצלני מכל צרה׃"],["9","26","25","사울이 다윗에게 말하였다. “내 아들 다윗아, 복을 받아라. 너는 하고자 하는 일을 반드시 해낼 수 있을 것이다.” 다윗은 자기 갈 길을 가고, 사울도 제자리로 돌아갔다.","사울이 다윗에게 말하였다. \"내 아들 다윗아, 너야말로 훌륭하구나. 네가 하려고 하면 무슨 일인들 못하겠느냐?\" 다윗은 자기의 갈 길을 가고 사울은 궁으로 돌아갔다.","사울이 다윗에게 이르되 내 아들 다윗아 네게 복이 있을지로다 네가 큰 일을 행하겠고 반드시 승리를 얻으리라 하니라 다윗은 자기 길로 가고 사울은 자기 곳으로 돌아가니라","사울이 다윗에게 이르되 내 아들 다윗아 네게 복이 있을찌로다 네가 큰 일을 행하겠고 반드시 승리를 얻으리라 하니라 다윗은 자기 길로 가고 사울은 자기 곳으로 돌아가니라","사울이 말하였다. \"내 아들 다윗아, 하나님께서 네 편에 서 계시니 무엇을 하든지 너는 성공할 것이다.\" 그러고 나서 그들은 서로 헤어졌다. 다윗은 부하들과 함께 다시 자기 갈 길로 가고 사울은 왕궁으로 돌아갔다.","Then Saul said to David: “Blessed are you, my son David! You shall certainly succeed in whatever you undertake.” David went his way, and Saul returned to his place.","Then Saul said to David, Blessed be thou, my son David: thou shalt both do great things, and also shalt still prevail. So David went on his way, and Saul returned to his place.","Then Saul said to David, \"May you be blessed, my son David; you will do great things and surely triumph.\" So David went on his way, and Saul returned home.","Ait ergo Saul ad David:  “Benedictus tu, fili mi David; et quidem faciens facies et potens poteris “. Abiit autem David in viam suam, et Saul reversus est in locum suum.","ויאמר שאול אל דוד ברוך אתה בני דוד גם עשה תעשה וגם יכל תוכל וילך דוד לדרכו ושאול שב למקומו׃"],["9","27","1","다윗이 마음속으로 생각하였다. ‘내가 이러다가 언젠가는 사울의 손에 망할 것이다. 그러니 필리스티아인들의 땅으로 가 목숨을 건지는 것보다 더 좋은 방법이 없다. 사울은 나를 이스라엘 영토 안에서만 찾다가 마침내 단념하고 말겠지. 그러면 나는 그 손에서 목숨을 건지게 될 것이다.’","다윗은 속으로 생각하였다. \"나는 언제고 사울의 손에 죽을 것이다. 그러니 불레셋 땅으로 망명하는 것이 상책이겠다. 사울은 나를 이스라엘 안에서만 찾다가 결국 단념하고 말겠지. 그러면 나는 그 손에서 벗어나게 될 것이다.\"","다윗이 그 마음에 생각하기를 내가 후일에는 사울의 손에 붙잡히리니 블레셋 사람들의 땅으로 피하여 들어가는 것이 좋으리로다 사울이 이스라엘 온 영토 내에서 다시 나를 찾다가 단념하리니 내가 그의 손에서 벗어나리라 하고","다윗이 그 마음에 생각하기를 내가 후일에는 사울의 손에 망하리니 블레셋 사람의 땅으로 피하여 들어가는 것이 상책이로다 사울이 이스라엘 온 경내에서 나를 수색하다가 절망하리니 내가 그 손에서 벗어나리라 하고","다윗은 이제 사울의 의도를 명백히 알고 속으로 생각하였다. \"이러다가는 내가 어느 날에든 결국 사울의 손에 붙잡혀 죽고 말 것인데, 이제는 블레셋 족속에게로 망명하는 것이 상책이겠다. 내가 이스라엘 땅에 머물러 있는 한 사울은 계속 나를 찾아다니겠지만 적어도 내가 블레셋 땅으로 몸을 피하면 결국 나를 포기하겠지.\"","David said to himself: “I shall perish some day at the hand of Saul. I have no choice but to escape to the land of the Philistines; then Saul will give up his continual search for me throughout the land of Israel, and I will be out of his reach.”","And David said in his heart, I shall now perish one day by the hand of Saul: there is nothing better for me than that I should speedily escape into the land of the Philistines; and Saul shall despair of me, to seek me any more in any coast of Israel: so shall I escape out of his hand.","But David thought to himself, \"One of these days I will be destroyed by the hand of Saul. The best thing I can do is to escape to the land of the Philistines. Then Saul will give up searching for me anywhere in Israel, and I will slip out of his hand.\"","Et ait David in corde suo:  “Aliquando incidam in uno die in manu Saul; nonne melius est ut fugiam et salver in terra Philisthinorum, ut desperet Saul cessetque me quaerere in cunctis finibus Israel? Fugiam ergo manus eius “.","ויאמר דוד אל לבו עתה אספה יום אחד ביד שאול אין לי טוב כי המלט אמלט אל ארץ פלשתים ונואש ממני שאול לבקשני עוד בכל גבול ישראל ונמלטתי מידו׃"],["9","27","2","다윗은 일어나 자기를 따르는 부하 육백 명과 함께 갓 임금, 마옥의 아들 아키스에게 넘어갔다.","이렇게 생각하고 다윗은 생사를 같이하던 부하 육백 명을 거느리고 길을 떠나 갓으로 가서 마옥의 아들 아기스 왕에게 몸을 의탁하였다.","다윗이 일어나 함께 있는 사람 육백 명과 더불어 가드 왕 마옥의 아들 아기스에게로 건너가니라","일어나 함께 있는 육백인으로 더불어 가드 왕 마옥의 아들 아기스에게로 건너가니라","그래서 다윗은 부하 600명을 거느리고 국경선을 넘어 가드 왕 아기스에게로 갔다. 그는 마옥의 아들이었다.","Accordingly, David departed with his six hundred soldiers and went over to Achish, son of Maoch, king of Gath.","And David arose, and he passed over with the six hundred men that were with him unto Achish, the son of Maoch, king of Gath.","So David and the six hundred men with him left and went over to Achish son of Maoch king of Gath.","Et surrexit David et abiit ipse et sescenti viri cum eo ad Achis filium Maoch regem Geth.","ויקם דוד ויעבר הוא ושש מאות איש אשר עמו אל אכיש בן מעוך מלך גת׃"],["9","27","3","이렇게 하여 다윗과 그 부하들은 저마다 가족을 데리고, 갓에 있는 아키스와 더불어 살게 되었다. 다윗이 거느리고 간 두 아내는 이즈르엘 여자 아히노암과 나발의 아내였던 카르멜 여자 아비가일이었다.","다윗 일행은 각자 가족을 동반하고 갓으로 가서 아기스에게 몸붙여 살게 되었다. 다윗이 거느리고 간 두 아내는 이즈르엘 여자 아히노암과 나발의 아내였던 가르멜 여자 아비가일이었다.","다윗과 그의 사람들이 저마다 가족을 거느리고 가드에서 아기스와 동거하였는데 다윗이 그의 두 아내 이스르엘 여자 아히노암과 나발의 아내였던 갈멜 여자 아비가일과 함께 하였더니","다윗과 그의 사람들이 각기 가족을 거느리고 가드에서 아기스와 동거하였는데 다윗이 그 두 아내 이스르엘 여자 아히노암과 나발의 아내 되었던 갈멜 여자 아비가일과 함께 하였더니","아기스는 그들에게 가드의 성안에 있는 집들을 내주면서 살게 하였는데, 다윗과 그의 부하들은 모두 가족을 거느리고 거기서 살았다. 다윗은 이때에 두 아내를 거느리고 있었는데, 하나는 이스르엘 여인 아히노암이고, 또 하나는 나발의 아내였던 갈멜 여인 아비가일이었다.","David and his men lived in Gath with Achish; each one had his family, and David had his two wives, Ahinoam from Jezreel and Abigail, the widow of Nabal from Carmel.","And David dwelt with Achish at Gath, he and his men, every man with his household, even David with his two wives, Ahinoam the Jezreelitess, and Abigail the Carmelitess, Nabal's wife.","David and his men settled in Gath with Achish. Each man had his family with him, and David had his two wives: Ahinoam of Jezreel and Abigail of Carmel, the widow of Nabal.","Et habitavit David cum Achis in Geth ipse et viri eius unusquisque cum domo sua; David et duae uxores eius, Achinoam Iezrahelites et Abigail uxor Nabal de Carmel.","וישב דוד עם אכיש בגת הוא ואנשיו איש וביתו דוד ושתי נשיו אחינעם היזרעאלית ואביגיל אשת נבל הכרמלית׃"],["9","27","4","사울은 다윗이 갓으로 달아났다는 소식을 전해 듣고 다시는 그를 찾지 않았다.","사울은 다윗이 갓으로 망명했다는 말을 듣고 다시는 찾아 나서지 않았다.","다윗이 가드에 도망한 것을 어떤 사람이 사울에게 전하매 사울이 다시는 그를 수색하지 아니하니라","다윗이 가드에 도망한 것을 혹이 사울에게 고하매 사울이 다시는 그를 수색하지 아니하니라","다윗이 가드로 도망갔다는 사실이 사울에게 전해지자 사울은 이때부터 다윗을 찾아다니는 일을 중단하였다.","When Saul learned that David had fled to Gath, he no longer searched for him.","And it was told Saul that David was fled to Gath: and he sought no more again for him.","When Saul was told that David had fled to Gath, he no longer searched for him.","Et nuntiatum est Saul quod fugisset David in Geth, et non addidit ultra ut quaereret eum.","ויגד לשאול כי ברח דוד גת ולא יוסף עוד לבקשו׃"],["9","27","5","다윗이 아키스에게 청하였다. “제가 임금님 눈에 드신다면, 지방 성읍들 가운데 한 곳을 저에게 주시어 거기에서 살게 해 주십시오. 제가 어찌 왕도에서 임금님과 함께 살 수 있겠습니까?”","다윗이 아기스에게 청하였다. \"소인에게 은혜를 베풀어 소인이 가서 살 지방 도시 하나를 내어주십시오. 소인이 어찌 왕도에 감히 함께 머물러 있겠습니까?\"","다윗이 아기스에게 이르되 바라건대 내가 당신께 은혜를 입었다면 지방 성읍 가운데 한 곳을 내게 주어 내가 살게 하소서 당신의 종이 어찌 당신과 함께 왕도에 살리이까 하니","다윗이 아기스에게 이르되 내가 당신께 은혜를 받았거든 1)지방 성읍 중 한 곳을 주어 나로 거하게 하소서 당신의 종이 어찌 당신과 함께 왕도에 거하리이까 들","얼마 지나서 다윗은 아기스에게 이같이 간청하였다. \"임금님께서 저를 신임하시고 제게 은혜를 베풀어 주시려면, 제게 이 나라의 지방 성읍 중에서 하나를 따로 떼어 주셔서 제가 부하들과 함께 그곳에서 살 수 있도록 해주십시오. 제가 어떻게 감히 임금님과 함께 이 왕의 도성에서 살 수 있겠습니까?\"","David said to Achish: “If I meet with your approval, let me have a place to live in one of the country towns. Why should your servant live with you in the royal city?”","And David said unto Achish, If I have now found grace in thine eyes, let them give me a place in some town in the country, that I may dwell there: for why should thy servant dwell in the royal city with thee?","Then David said to Achish, \"If I have found favor in your eyes, let a place be assigned to me in one of the country towns, that I may live there. Why should your servant live in the royal city with you?\"","Dixit autem David ad Achis:  “Si inveni gratiam in oculis tuis, detur mihi locus in una urbium regionis huius, ut habitem ibi. Cur enim manet servus tuus in civitate regis tecum? “.","ויאמר דוד אל אכיש אם נא מצאתי חן בעיניך יתנו לי מקום באחת ערי השדה ואשבה שם ולמה ישב עבדך בעיר הממלכה עמך׃"],["9","27","6","아키스는 그날로 치클락을 다윗에게 주었다. 그리하여 치클락이 오늘날까지 유다 임금들의 차지가 된 것이다.","아기스는 그 날로 시글락을 다윗에게 맡겼다. 그리하여 시글락이 이 날까지 유다 왕실에 속하게 된 것이다.","아기스가 그 날에 시글락을 그에게 주었으므로 시글락이 오늘까지 유다 왕에게 속하니라","아기스가 그 날에 시글락을 그에게 주었으므로 시글락이 오늘까지 유다 왕에게 속하니라","그러자 아기스는 오래 생각해 볼 것도 없이 그날에 유다의 최남단에 있는 성읍 시글락을 다윗의 소유로 내주었다. 그래서 시글락은 오늘날까지 유다 왕실의 영지가 되었다.","That same day Achish gave him Ziklag, which has, therefore, belonged to the kings of Judah up to the present time.","Then Achish gave him Ziklag that day: wherefore Ziklag pertaineth unto the kings of Judah unto this day.","So on that day Achish gave him Ziklag, and it has belonged to the kings of Judah ever since.","Dedit itaque ei Achis in die illa Siceleg; propter quam causam facta est Siceleg regum Iudae usque in diem hanc.","ויתן לו אכיש ביום ההוא את צקלג לכן היתה צקלג למלכי יהודה עד היום הזה׃"],["9","27","7","다윗이 필리스티아인들의 지방에서 산 기간은 일 년 사 개월이었다.","다윗은 그 불레셋 지방에서 일 년 사 개월 동안 살았다.","다윗이 블레셋 사람들의 지방에 산 날 수는 일 년 사 개월이었더라","다윗이 블레셋 사람의 1)지방에 거한 날 수는 일년 넉달이었더라 들","그러나 다윗이 블레셋 족속의 땅에 거주한 기간은 모두 1년 4개월에 불과하였다.","In all, David lived a year and four months in Philistine territory.","And the time that David dwelt in the country of the Philistines was a full year and four months.","David lived in Philistine territory a year and four months.","Fuit autem numerus dierum, quibus habitavit David in regione Philisthinorum, annus et quattuor menses.","ויהי מספר הימים אשר ישב דוד בשדה פלשתים ימים וארבעה חדשים׃"],["9","27","8","다윗은 부하들을 거느리고 올라가 그수르족과 게레즈족과 아말렉족을 습격하였다. 그들은 텔람에서 수르를 거쳐 이집트 땅에 이르는 지역의 주민들이었다.","다윗은 부하들을 거느리고 그술족과 기르스족과 아말렉족이 있는 곳으로 올라가 그들을 털곤 하였다. 그들은 옛날부터 수르와 이집트로 가는 길목의 지방에 살고 있었다.","다윗과 그의 사람들이 올라가서 그술 사람과 기르스 사람과 아말렉 사람을 침노하였으니 그들은 옛적부터 술과 애굽 땅으로 지나가는 지방의 주민이라","다윗과 그의 사람들이 올라가서 그술 사람과 기르스 사람과 아말렉 사람을 침로하였으니 그들은 옛적부터 술과 애굽 땅으로 지나가는 지방의 거민이라","다윗은 부하들을 거느리고 시글락으로 올라가서는 블레셋 족속과 친근한 소수 민족들을 은밀히 정벌하였다. 그들은 주로 유다 남쪽에 사는 이웃 민족들로서, 들라임에서부터 술 광야와 애굽 국경선에 이르는 전지역에 거주하는 그술 족속과 기르스 족속과 아말렉 족속이었다. 다윗은 그들을 정벌하기 위하여 시글락에서 끊임없이 출전하였다.","David and his men went out on raids against the Geshurites, Girzites, and Amalekites—peoples living in the land between Telam, on the approach to Shur, and the land of Egypt.","And David and his men went up, and invaded the Geshurites, and the Gezrites, and the Amalekites: for those nations were of old the inhabitants of the land, as thou goest to Shur, even unto the land of Egypt.","Now David and his men went up and raided the Geshurites, the Girzites and the Amalekites. (From ancient times these peoples had lived in the land extending to Shur and Egypt.)","Et ascendit David et viri eius et agebant praedas de Gesuri et de Gerzi et de Amalecitis; hae enim gentes habitabant terram, quae est a Telem in via Sur et usque ad terram Aegypti.","ויעל דוד ואנשיו ויפשטו אל הגשורי והגרזי והעמלקי כי הנה ישבות הארץ אשר מעולם בואך שורה ועד ארץ מצרים׃"],["9","27","9","다윗이 그 지역을 칠 때는 남자든 여자든 아무도 살려 두지 않았다. 그런 다음 양과 소와 나귀와 낙타와 옷가지들을 빼앗아 아키스에게 돌아오곤 하였다.","다윗이 그 지방으로 쳐들어가 남녀를 가리지 않고 죽이고 나서 양과 소와 나귀와 낙타와 옷가지들을 약탈하여 돌아오자","다윗이 그 땅을 쳐서 남녀를 살려두지 아니하고 양과 소와 나귀와 낙타와 의복을 빼앗아 가지고 돌아와 아기스에게 이르매","다윗이 그 땅을 쳐서 남녀를 살려두지 아니하고 양과 소와 나귀와 약대와 의복을 취하고 돌아와서 아기스에게 이르매","다윗은 어느 곳으로 정벌을 나가든지 남녀를 가리지 않고 전부 몰살시켰다. 그러나 양이나 소나 나귀나 낙타 같은 짐승과 의복은 전부 약탈해서 아기스에게 전리품으로 가져다 주었다.","In attacking the land David would not leave a man or woman alive, but would carry off sheep, oxen, donkeys, camels, and clothes. Then he would return to Achish,","And David smote the land, and left neither man nor woman alive, and took away the sheep, and the oxen, and the asses, and the camels, and the apparel, and returned, and came to Achish.","Whenever David attacked an area, he did not leave a man or woman alive, but took sheep and cattle, donkeys and camels, and clothes. Then he returned to Achish.","Et percutiebat David omnem terram nec relinquebat viventem virum et mulierem; tollensque oves et boves et asinos et camelos et vestes revertebatur et veniebat ad Achis.","והכה דוד את הארץ ולא יחיה איש ואשה ולקח צאן ובקר וחמרים וגמלים ובגדים וישב ויבא אל אכיש׃"],["9","27","10","아키스가 “오늘은 누구를 털었소?” 하고 물으면, 다윗은 “유다의 네겝입니다.” 하거나 “여라흐므엘족의 네겝입니다.” 또는 “카인족의 네겝입니다.” 하고 대답하곤 하였다.","아기스가 \"오늘 누구를 털어가지고 오는 길이오?\" 하고 물었다. \"유다 남부와 여라므엘족이 사는 지방 남부, 켄족이 사는 지방 남부를 털어왔습니다.\" 하고 다윗은 대답하였다.","아기스가 이르되 너희가 오늘은 누구를 침노하였느냐 하니 다윗이 이르되 유다 네겝과 여라무엘 사람의 네겝과 겐 사람의 네겝이니이다 하였더라","아기스가 가로되 너희가 오늘은 누구를 침로하였느냐 다윗이 가로되 유다 남방과 여라무엘 사람의 남방과 겐 사람의 남방이니이다","그럴 때마다 아기스는 항상 다윗에게 이같이 물었다. \"너희가 오늘은 또 어디로 가서 약탈을 하였느냐?\" 그러면 다윗이 언제나 모호하게 대답하기를 \"유다 남쪽으로 들어갔습니다!\" 또는 \"여라무엘 족속의 남쪽으로 들어갔습니다!\" 또는 \"겐 족속의 남쪽으로 들어갔습니다!\" 하고 얼버무렸다.","who would ask, “Against whom did you raid this time?” David would reply, “Against the Negeb of Judah,” or “Against the Negeb of Jerahmeel,” or “Against the Negeb of the Kenites.”","And Achish said, Whither have ye made a road to day? And David said, Against the south of Judah, and against the south of the Jerahmeelites, and against the south of the Kenites.","When Achish asked, \"Where did you go raiding today?\" David would say, \"Against the Negev of Judah\" or \"Against the Negev of Jerahmeel\" or \"Against the Negev of the Kenites.\"","Dicebat autem ei Achis:  “In quem irruistis hodie? “. Respondebatque David:  “Contra Nageb Iudae vel contra Nageb Ierameel vel contra Nageb Ceni “.","ויאמר אכיש אל פשטתם היום ויאמר דוד על נגב יהודה ועל נגב הירחמאלי ואל נגב הקיני׃"],["9","27","11","다윗은 “저들이 우리를 두고 ‘다윗이 이러저러한 일을 하였다.’고 말하게 해서는 안 되겠다.” 하며, 남자든 여자든 모두 죽이고 아무도 갓으로 데려오지 않았다. 다윗은 필리스티아인들의 지방에 머물러 있는 동안 내내 이렇게 하였다.","다윗이 남녀를 하나도 갓으로 끌어오지 않고 모두 죽인 것은 자기가 한 일을 고해 바치지 못하게 하려는 것이었다. 다윗은 불레셋 지방에 머물러 있는 동안 줄곧 이렇게 해 왔다.","다윗이 그 남녀를 살려서 가드로 데려가지 아니한 것은 그의 생각에 그들이 우리에게 대하여 이르기를 다윗이 행한 일이 이러하니라 하여 블레셋 사람들의 지방에 거주하는 동안에 이같이 행하는 습관이 있었다 할까 두려워함이었더라","다윗이 그 남녀를 살려 가드로 데려가지 아니한 것은 그의 생각에 그들이 우리에게 대하여 이르기를 다윗의 행사가 이러하여 블레셋 사람의 지방에 거하는 동안에 이같이 행하는 습관이 있다 할까 두려워함이었더라","그 당시 가드에는 노예 시장이 있었으나 다윗은 사람을 포로로 잡아오거나 살려둔 일이 없었다. 혹시 그들이 가드에 오면, 다윗이 실제로 행한 일을 아기스왕에게 알려줄 위험이 있었기 때문이다. 그래서 다윗은 블레셋 족속의 지역에 거주하는 동안 언제나 그와 같이 정벌한 지역의 사람은 모조리 죽이고 짐승과 물건만 약탈해 가지고 돌아왔다.","David never left a man or woman alive to be brought to Gath. He thought, “They will betray us and say, ‘This is what David did.’” This was his custom as long as he lived in Philistine territory.","And David saved neither man nor woman alive, to bring tidings to Gath, saying, Lest they should tell on us, saying, So did David, and so will be his manner all the while he dwelleth in the country of the Philistines.","He did not leave a man or woman alive to be brought to Gath, for he thought, \"They might inform on us and say, 'This is what David did.'\" And such was his practice as long as he lived in Philistine territory.","Viro et mulieri non parcebat David nec adducebat in Geth dicens:  “Ne forte loquantur adversum nos: “Haec fecit David” “. Et hoc erat decretum illi omnibus diebus, quibus habitavit in regione Philisthinorum.","ואיש ואשה לא יחיה דוד להביא גת לאמר פן יגדו עלינו לאמר כה עשה דוד וכה משפטו כל הימים אשר ישב בשדה פלשתים׃"],["9","27","12","그러나 아키스는 “다윗이 제 백성 이스라엘에게 미움을 사서 이제는 영영 내 종이 되겠구나.” 하며 다윗을 믿었다.","아기스는 그런 줄도 모르고 \"다윗이 제 동족 이스라엘에게서 미움을 사고는 이제 아주 내 종이 되었구나.\" 하며 다윗을 철석같이 믿게 되었다.","아기스가 다윗을 믿고 말하기를 다윗이 자기 백성 이스라엘에게 심히 미움을 받게 되었으니 그는 영원히 내 부하가 되리라고 생각하니라","아기스가 다윗을 믿고 말하기를 다윗이 자기 백성 이스라엘에게 심히 미움을 받게 하였으니 그는 영영히 내 사역자가 되리라 하니라","아기스는 이런 줄도 모르고 다윗이야말로 신임할 만한 사람이라고 속단하였다. 그는 이렇게 판단하였기 때문이다. \"다윗이 그토록 자기 동족을 약탈하여 미움받게 되었으니, 그는 영영 내 종이 될 수밖에 없다.\"","Achish trusted David, thinking, “His people Israel must certainly detest him. I shall have him as my vassal forever.”","And Achish believed David, saying, He hath made his people Israel utterly to abhor him; therefore he shall be my servant for ever.","Achish trusted David and said to himself, \"He has become so odious to his people, the Israelites, that he will be my servant forever.\"","Credidit ergo Achis David dicens:  “Valde odiosum se fecit populo suo Israel; erit igitur mihi servus sempiternus “.","ויאמן אכיש בדוד לאמר הבאש הבאיש בעמו בישראל והיה לי לעבד עולם׃"],["9","28","1","그 무렵 필리스티아인들이 이스라엘을 치려고 전투에 필요한 부대를 소집하였다. 아키스가 다윗에게 말하였다. “그대는 부하들을 거느리고 나와 함께 출전하게 될 터이니 그리 아시오.”","불레셋 군이 이스라엘을 치려고 동원령을 내린 때였다. 아기스가 다윗에게 일렀다. \"그대는 부하를 거느리고 우리 대열에 끼여 같이 출전하게 될 터이니 그리 아시오.\"","그 때에 블레셋 사람들이 이스라엘과 싸우려고 군대를 모집한지라 아기스가 다윗에게 이르되 너는 밝히 알라 너와 네 사람들이 나와 함께 나가서 군대에 참가할 것이니라","그 때에 블레셋 사람이 이스라엘을 쳐서 싸우려고 군대를 모집한지라 아기스가 다윗에게 이르되 너는 밝히 알라 너와 네 사람들이 나와 한가지로 나가서 군대에 참가할 것이니라","그 즈음에 블레셋 족속이 또다시 모든 군대를 모아 이스라엘을 공격하려고 하였다. 아기스는 다윗에게도 공격에 가담할 것을 명하였다. \"그대가 이번에 부하들을 거느리고 나와 함께 출전하여, 우리 편에서 싸워야 한다는 것을 알고 있는가?\"","In those days the Philistines mustered their military forces to fight against Israel. So Achish said to David, “You realize, of course, that you and your warriors must march out for battle with me.”","And it came to pass in those days, that the Philistines gathered their armies together for warfare, to fight with Israel. And Achish said unto David, Know thou assuredly, that thou shalt go out with me to battle, thou and thy men.","In those days the Philistines gathered their forces to fight against Israel. Achish said to David, \"You must understand that you and your men will accompany me in the army.\"","Factum est autem in diebus illis, congregaverunt Phili sthim agmina sua, ut praepararentur ad bellum contra Israel. Dixitque Achis ad David:  “Sciens nunc scito quoniam mecum egredieris in castris tu et viri tui “.","ויהי בימים ההם ויקבצו פלשתים את מחניהם לצבא להלחם בישראל ויאמר אכיש אל דוד ידע תדע כי אתי תצא במחנה אתה ואנשיך׃"],["9","28","2","다윗이 아키스에게 대답하였다. “알겠습니다. 임금님께서는 이 종이 무엇을 할는지 아시게 될 것입니다.” 그러자 아키스는 다윗에게 “그렇게만 된다면, 나는 그대를 평생 나의 경호원으로 삼겠소.” 하고 말하였다.","다윗이 \"알았습니다. 분부만 내리시면 그대로 하겠습니다.\" 하고 선뜻 대답하자 아기스는 다윗에게 \"그렇다면, 나는 장군을 나의 종신호위대장으로 삼겠소.\" 하였다.","다윗이 아기스에게 이르되 그러면 당신의 종이 행할 바를 아시리이다 하니 아기스가 다윗에게 이르되 그러면 내가 너를 영원히 내 머리 지키는 자를 삼으리라 하니라","다윗이 아기스에게 이르되 그러면 당신이 종의 행할 바를 아시리이다 아기스가 다윗에게 이르되 그러면 내가 너로 영영히 내 머리 지키는 자를 삼으리라 하니라","다윗이 서슴없이 대답하였다. \"물론입니다! 제가 임금님을 얼마나 충성스럽게 섬기는가를 이제야 비로소 보시게 되었습니다.\" 그러자 아기스는 \"내가 그대를 이번 싸움이 계속되는 동안 내 머리를 지키는 자로 삼겠소.\" 하고 다윗을 그 자리에서 자신의 경호대장으로 임명하였다.","David answered Achish, “Good! Now you shall learn what your servant can do.” Then Achish said to David, “I shall appoint you as my permanent bodyguard.”","And David said to Achish, Surely thou shalt know what thy servant can do. And Achish said to David, Therefore will I make thee keeper of mine head for ever.","David said, \"Then you will see for yourself what your servant can do.\" Achish replied, \"Very well, I will make you my bodyguard for life.\"","Dixitque David ad Achis:  “Ideo tu quoque scies, quae facturus est servus tuus “. Et ait Achis ad David:  “Ideo custodem capitis mei ponam te cunctis diebus “.","ויאמר דוד אל אכיש לכן אתה תדע את אשר יעשה עבדך ויאמר אכיש אל דוד לכן שמר לראשי אשימך כל הימים׃"],["9","28","3","사무엘은 이미 죽어, 온 이스라엘이 그의 죽음을 애도하는 가운데 고향 라마에 묻혔다. 한편 사울은 영매와 점쟁이들을 나라에서 몰아내었다.","사무엘은 이미 죽어 이스라엘 온 국민의 애도 속에 고향 라마에 묻혔다. 한편 사울은 혼백을 불러내는 무당과 박수를 나라에서 몰아내었다.","사무엘이 죽었으므로 온 이스라엘이 그를 두고 슬피 울며 그의 고향 라마에 장사하였고 사울은 신접한 자와 박수를 그 땅에서 쫓아내었더라","사무엘이 죽었으므로 온 이스라엘이 그를 애곡하며 그의 본성 라마에 장사하였고 사울은 신접한 자와 박수를 그 땅에서 쫓아 내었었더라","사무엘이 죽어 그의 고향 라마에 장사된지도 이미 오래되었다. 그때에 온 이스라엘 백성은 \"이제는 예언자도 없다.\"고 탄식하면서 그의 죽음을 슬퍼하였다. 공교롭게도 당시에는 사울이 남녀를 가리지 않고 이스라엘에 있는 모든 무당을 죽여 없애 버렸기 때문이다.","Now, Samuel was dead. All Israel had mourned him and buried him in his city, Ramah. Meanwhile Saul had driven mediums and diviners out of the land.","Now Samuel was dead, and all Israel had lamented him, and buried him in Ramah, even in his own city. And Saul had put away those that had familiar spirits, and the wizards, out of the land.","Now Samuel was dead, and all Israel had mourned for him and buried him in his own town of Ramah. Saul had expelled the mediums and spiritists from the land.","Samuel autem mortuus erat; planxeratque eum omnis Israel, et sepelierant eum in Rama urbe sua. Et Saul abstulerat magos et hariolos de terra.","ושמואל מת ויספדו לו כל ישראל ויקברהו ברמה ובעירו ושאול הסיר האבות ואת הידענים מהארץ׃"],["9","28","4","필리스티아인들이 수넴에 모여 와 진을 치자, 사울도 온 이스라엘군을 모아 길보아에 진을 쳤다.","불레셋 군이 수넴에 집결하여 진을 치자 사울도 이스라엘 전군을 길보아에 집결시켜 진을 치기는 했지만","블레셋 사람들이 모여 수넴에 이르러 진 치매 사울이 온 이스라엘을 모아 길보아에 진 쳤더니","블레셋 사람이 모여 수넴에 이르러 진 치매 사울이 온 이스라엘을 모아 길보아에 진 쳤더니","바로 이런 때 블레셋 족속이 전군을 모아 가지고 이스르엘 골짜기까지 올라와 수넴 성읍을 점령하고 그곳에 진을 쳤다. 사울도 즉각 이스라엘의 전군을 집결시켜 길보아산에 진을 쳤다.","The Philistines rallied and, coming to Shunem, they encamped. Saul, too, mustered all Israel; they camped on Gilboa.","And the Philistines gathered themselves together, and came and pitched in Shunem: and Saul gathered all Israel together, and they pitched in Gilboa.","The Philistines assembled and came and set up camp at Shunem, while Saul gathered all the Israelites and set up camp at Gilboa.","Congregatique sunt Philisthim et venerunt et castrametati sunt in Sunam. Congregavit autem et Saul universum Israel, et castrametati sunt in Gelboe.","ויקבצו פלשתים ויבאו ויחנו בשונם ויקבץ שאול את כל ישראל ויחנו בגלבע׃"],["9","28","5","사울은 필리스티아인들의 진영을 보고 두려워서 가슴이 몹시 두근거렸다.","불레셋 진영을 본 사울은 몹시 겁에 질렸다.","사울이 블레셋 사람들의 군대를 보고 두려워서 그의 마음이 크게 떨린지라","사울이 블레셋 사람의 군대를 보고 두려워서 그 마음이 크게 떨린지라","그런데 북서쪽을 가로막으며 진을 친 블레셋 군대를 건너다본 사울은 너무 놀라서 싸울 힘을 잃고 말았다.","When Saul saw the Philistine camp, he grew afraid and lost heart completely.","And when Saul saw the host of the Philistines, he was afraid, and his heart greatly trembled.","When Saul saw the Philistine army, he was afraid; terror filled his heart.","Et vidit Saul castra Philisthim et timuit, et expavit cor eius nimis.","וירא שאול את מחנה פלשתים וירא ויחרד לבו מאד׃"],["9","28","6","그래서 사울은 주님께 여쭈어 보았으나, 주님께서는 꿈으로도, 우림으로도, 예언자를 통해서도 대답해 주시지 않았다.","그래서 사울은 야훼께 어떻게 하면 좋겠는가 여쭈어보았다. 그러나 야훼께서는 꿈으로도, 우림으로도, 예언자로도 대답해 주지 않으셨다.","사울이 여호와께 묻자오되 여호와께서 꿈으로도, 우림으로도, 선지자로도 그에게 대답하지 아니하시므로","사울이 여호와께 묻자오되 여호와께서 꿈으로도, 우림으로도, 선지자로도 그에게 대답지 아니하시므로","그래서 사울은 어찌해야 좋을지 몰라 여호와께 여쭈어 보았다. 그러나 여호와께서는 꿈으로도 예언자를 통해서도 그에게 대답하지 않으셨다. 사울이 놉의 제사장들을 전멸시킬 때에 제사장 아비아달이 하나님의 뜻을 알아내는 에봇을 다윗에게로 가져갔기 때문에 사울에게는 그 우림이라는 제비도 없었다.","He consulted the LORD; but the LORD gave no answer, neither in dreams nor by Urim nor through prophets.","And when Saul enquired of the LORD, the LORD answered him not, neither by dreams, nor by Urim, nor by prophets.","He inquired of the LORD, but the LORD did not answer him by dreams or Urim or prophets.","Consuluitque Dominum, et non respondit ei neque per somnia neque per Urim neque per prophetas.","וישאל שאול ביהוה ולא ענהו יהוה גם בחלמות גם באורים גם בנביאם׃"],["9","28","7","그리하여 사울은 신하들에게 명령하였다. 혼백을 불러 올리는 여자를 하나 찾아내어라. 내가 가서 그 여자에게 물어봐야겠다. 신하들이 사울에게 엔 도르에 혼백을 불러 올리는 여자가 하나 있습니다. 하고 말하였다.","그리하여 사울은 신하들에게 \"혼백을 불러내는 무당을 찾아보아라. 내가 가서 물어봐야 하겠다.\" 하고 영을 내렸다. 신하들이 \"엔도르에 혼백을 불러내는 무당이 있습니다.\" 하고 아뢰자","사울이 그의 신하들에게 이르되 나를 위하여 신접한 여인을 찾으라 내가 그리로 가서 그에게 물으리라 하니 그의 신하들이 그에게 이르되 보소서 엔돌에 신접한 여인이 있나이다","사울이 그 신하들에게 이르되 나를 위하여 신접한 여인을 찾으라 내가 그리로 가서 그에게 물으리라 그 신하들이 그에게 이르되 보소서 엔돌에 신접한 여인이 있나이다","사울은 결국 신하들에게 이런 명령을 내렸다. \"너희는 나를 위하여 죽은 사람을 불러 올릴 수 있는 무녀를 한 사람 찾아보아라. 그런 여자가 나를 도와줄 수 있을지도 모르니, 내가 가서 물어 보겠다\" 신하들이 즉석에서 사울에게 대답하였다. \"엔돌에 그런 무녀가 한사람 있습니다!\" 사울이 그토록 철저하게 귀신 부르는 자들을 제거하였어도 엔돌의 무녀는 왕궁 사람들에게 알려진 채 버젓이 행세하고 있었다.","Then Saul said to his servants, “Find me a medium through whom I can seek counsel.” His servants answered him, “There is a woman in Endor who is a medium.”","Then said Saul unto his servants, Seek me a woman that hath a familiar spirit, that I may go to her, and enquire of her. And his servants said to him, Behold, there is a woman that hath a familiar spirit at Endor.","Saul then said to his attendants, \"Find me a woman who is a medium, so I may go and inquire of her.\" \"There is one in Endor,\" they said.","Dixitque Saul servis suis:  “Quaerite mihi mulierem habentem pythonem, et vadam ad eam et sciscitabor per illam “. Et dixerunt servi eius ad eum:  “Est mulier habens pythonem in Endor “.","ויאמר שאול לעבדיו בקשו לי אשת בעלת אוב ואלכה אליה ואדרשה בה ויאמרו עבדיו אליו הנה אשת בעלת אוב בעין דור׃"],["9","28","8","사울은 자신을 알아보지 못하게 옷을 갈아입고는, 부하 둘을 데리고 밤에 그 여자에게 가서, 나를 위해 혼백을 불러 점을 쳐 주고, 내가 말하는 망령을 불러 올려 주시오. 하고 청하였다.","사울은 남이 알아보지 못하게 옷을 갈아 입고는 두 신하를 데리고 밤에 그 여자를 찾아가서 \"내가 말하는 혼백을 불러내어 내 운수를 보아다오.\" 하고 청하였다.","사울이 다른 옷을 입어 변장하고 두 사람과 함께 갈새 그들이 밤에 그 여인에게 이르러서는 사울이 이르되 청하노니 나를 위하여 신접한 술법으로 내가 네게 말하는 사람을 불러 올리라 하니","사울이 다른 옷을 입어 변장하고 두 사람과 함께 갈쌔 그들이 밤에 그 여인에게 이르러는 사울이 가로되 청하노니 나를 위하여 신접한 술법으로 내가 네게 말하는 사람을 불러올리라","사울이 즉각 다른 옷으로 변장하여 남들이 알아볼 수 없게 꾸민 다음 신하 둘을 데리고 진영을 나섰다. 그들은 이미 점령된 지역의 북쪽에 위치한 엔돌에 이르기 위하여 깜깜한 밤에 산속을 걸었다. 사울은 그 밤에 엔돌의 무녀를 만나 이렇게 간청하였다. \"그대는 죽은 사람의 망령을 불러 올릴 수 있으니, 부디 내 앞날을 점쳐 주시오! 그대가 누구를 불러 올려야 할지는 내가 곧 알려 주겠소.\"","So he disguised himself, putting on other clothes, and set out with two companions. They came to the woman at night, and Saul said to her, “Divine for me; conjure up the spirit I tell you.”","And Saul disguised himself, and put on other raiment, and he went, and two men with him, and they came to the woman by night: and he said, I pray thee, divine unto me by the familiar spirit, and bring me him up, whom I shall name unto thee.","So Saul disguised himself, putting on other clothes, and at night he and two men went to the woman. \"Consult a spirit for me,\" he said, \"and bring up for me the one I name.\"","Mutavit ergo habitum suum vestitusque est aliis vestimentis et abiit ipse et duo viri cum eo; veneruntque ad mulierem nocte, et ait:  “Divina mihi in pythone et suscita mihi, quem dixero tibi “.","ויתחפש שאול וילבש בגדים אחרים וילך הוא ושני אנשים עמו ויבאו אל האשה לילה ויאמר קסומי נא לי באוב והעלי לי את אשר אמר אליך׃"],["9","28","9","그 여자가 사울에게 말하였다. “당신은 사울이 이 나라에서 영매와 점쟁이들을 없애 버린 사실을 잘 아시겠지요. 그런데 어쩌자고 당신은 나의 목에 올가미를 씌워, 나를 죽이려 하시오?”","그 여자가 사울에게 \"당신은 혼백을 불러내는 무당과 박수가 이 땅에서 왕명으로 근절된 것을 모르십니까? 그런데 생사람을 잡으려고 이 목에 올가미를 씌우시는 겁니까?\" 하고 대답하자","여인이 그에게 이르되 네가 사울이 행한 일 곧 그가 신접한 자와 박수를 이 땅에서 멸절시켰음을 아나니 네가 어찌하여 내 생명에 올무를 놓아 나를 죽게 하려느냐 하는지라","여인이 그에게 이르되 네가 사울의 행한 일 곧 그가 신접한 자와 박수를 이 땅에서 멸절시켰음을 아나니 네가 어찌하여 내 생명에 올무를 놓아 나를 죽게 하려느냐","그러나 그 무녀는 이렇게 거절하였다. \"그런 일은 이미 왕명으로 금지되어 있는 것을 당신이 더 잘 알 것이오. 망령을 불러 올리거나 미래를 점쳐 주던 무당과 박수들은 사울왕이 이미 이 나라에서 죄다 죽여 버리지 않았소. 지금 당신은 그저 내 신세를 망쳐 놓으려고 내 목에 올가미를 씌우고 있소\"","But the woman answered him, “You know what Saul has done, how he expelled the mediums and diviners from the land. Then why are you trying to entrap me and get me killed?”","And the woman said unto him, Behold, thou knowest what Saul hath done, how he hath cut off those that have familiar spirits, and the wizards, out of the land: wherefore then layest thou a snare for my life, to cause me to die?","But the woman said to him, \"Surely you know what Saul has done. He has cut off the mediums and spiritists from the land. Why have you set a trap for my life to bring about my death?\"","Et ait mulier ad eum:  “Ecce tu nosti, quanta fecerit Saul et quomodo eraserit magos et hariolos de terra; quare ergo insidiaris animae meae, ut occidar? “.","ותאמר האשה אליו הנה אתה ידעת את אשר עשה שאול אשר הכרית את האבות ואת הידעני מן הארץ ולמה אתה מתנקש בנפשי להמיתני׃"],["9","28","10","사울은 주님의 이름으로 맹세하였다. “주님께서 살아 계시는 한, 이 일로 그대가 벌을 받는 일은 결코 없을 것이오.”","사울은 야훼 앞에서 맹세하였다. \"내가 살아 계신 야훼 앞에서 맹세한다. 이 일로 자네에게 죄가 돌아가는 일은 결코 없으리라.\"","사울이 여호와의 이름으로 그에게 맹세하여 이르되 여호와께서 살아 계심을 두고 맹세하노니 네가 이 일로는 벌을 당하지 아니하리라 하니","사울이 여호와로 그에게 맹세하여 가로되 여호와께서 사시거니와 네가 이 일로는 벌을 당치 아니하리라","무녀의 말에 더욱 애가 탄 사울은 서슴없이 여호와의 이름을 걸고 이렇게 맹세하였다. \"여호와께서 확실히 살아 계시는 한 이 일로는 그대에게 어떤 일도 일어나지 않게 하겠소.\"","But Saul swore to her by the LORD, “As the LORD lives, you shall incur no blame for this.”","And Saul sware to her by the LORD, saying, As the LORD liveth, there shall no punishment happen to thee for this thing.","Saul swore to her by the LORD, \"As surely as the LORD lives, you will not be punished for this.\"","Et iuravit ei Saul in Domino dicens:  “Vivit Dominus quia non veniet tibi quidquam mali propter hanc rem “.","וישבע לה שאול ביהוה לאמר חי יהוה אם יקרך עון בדבר הזה׃"],["9","28","11","그러자 여인이 누구를 불러 올릴까요? 하고 물었다. 그가 사무엘을 불러 올려 주시오. 하고 대답하였다.","그러자 여인이 물었다. \"누구를 불러드릴까요?\" 그가 대답하였다. \"사무엘을 불러다오.\"","여인이 이르되 내가 누구를 네게로 불러 올리랴 하니 사울이 이르되 사무엘을 불러 올리라 하는지라","여인이 가로되 내가 누구를 네게로 불러 올리랴 사울이 가로되 사무엘을 불러 올리라","무녀는 그제야 안심하고 물었다. \"내가 당신에게 누구를 불러 올릴까요?\" 사울이 대답하였다. \"사무엘을 불러 주시오!\"","“Whom do you want me to conjure up?” the woman asked him. “Conjure up Samuel for me,” he replied.","Then said the woman, Whom shall I bring up unto thee? And he said, Bring me up Samuel.","Then the woman asked, \"Whom shall I bring up for you?\" \"Bring up Samuel,\" he said.","Dixitque ei mulier:  “Quem suscitabo tibi? “. Qui ait:  “Samuelem suscita mihi “.","ותאמר האשה את מי אעלה לך ויאמר את שמואל העלי לי׃"],["9","28","12","그 여자는 사무엘을 보고, 큰 소리를 지르며 사울에게 따졌다. “어찌하여 저를 속이셨습니까? 당신은 사울 임금님이 아니십니까?”","그 여자는 사무엘이 나타난 것을 보고 놀라 소리치며 사울에게 물었다. \"어찌하여 저를 속이셨습니까? 당신은 사울 임금님이 아니십니까?\"","여인이 사무엘을 보고 큰 소리로 외치며 사울에게 말하여 이르되 당신이 어찌하여 나를 속이셨나이까 당신이 사울이시니이다","여인이 사무엘을 보고 큰 소리로 외치며 사울에게 말하여 가로되 당신이 어찌하여 나를 속이셨나이까 당신이 사울이시니이다","그 무녀는 사무엘이라는 이름을 듣자 사무엘과 사울의 밀접한 관계 때문에 즉각 사울을 알아보고 놀라서 소리를 질렀다. \"어째서 임금님께서 나를 속이셨습니까? 나는 이제 죽었습니다!\"","When the woman saw Samuel, she shrieked at the top of her voice and said to Saul, “Why have you deceived me? You are Saul!”","And when the woman saw Samuel, she cried with a loud voice: and the woman spake to Saul, saying, Why hast thou deceived me? for thou art Saul.","When the woman saw Samuel, she cried out at the top of her voice and said to Saul, \"Why have you deceived me? You are Saul!\"","Cum autem vidisset mulier Samuelem, exclamavit voce magna et dixit ad Saul:  “Quare imposuisti mihi? Tu es enim Saul! “.","ותרא האשה את שמואל ותזעק בקול גדול ותאמר האשה אל שאול לאמר למה רמיתני ואתה שאול׃"],["9","28","13","임금이 말하였다. “두려워하지 마라. 무엇이 보이느냐?” 그 여자가 사울에게 대답하였다. “땅에서 신령이 올라오는 것이 보입니다.”","왕이 말하였다. \"두려워 마라. 무엇이 보이는지 말만 하여라.\" 그 여자는 \"지하에서 유령이 올라오는 것이 보입니다.\" 하고 대답하였다.","왕이 그에게 이르되 두려워하지 말라 네가 무엇을 보았느냐 하니 여인이 사울에게 이르되 내가 영이 땅에서 올라오는 것을 보았나이다 하는지라","왕이 그에게 이르되 두려워 말라 네가 무엇을 보았느냐 여인이 사울에게 이르되 내가 신이 땅에서 올라오는 것을 보았나이다","그러나 사울은 그녀를 진정시키면서 이렇게 말하였다. \"아무 걱정도 하지 말고, 네게 보이는 것만을 내게 알려 주어라!\" 무녀가 보이는 대로 말하였다. \"땅속에서 올라오는 유령이 보입니다.\"","But the king said to her, “Do not be afraid. What do you see?” “I see a god rising from the earth,” she replied.","And the king said unto her, Be not afraid: for what sawest thou? And the woman said unto Saul, I saw gods ascending out of the earth.","The king said to her, \"Don't be afraid. What do you see?\" The woman said, \"I see a spirit coming up out of the ground.\"","Dixitque ei rex:  “Noli timere. Quid vidisti? “. Et ait mulier ad Saul:  “Hominem divinum vidi ascendentem de terra “.","ויאמר לה המלך אל תיראי כי מה ראית ותאמר האשה אל שאול אלהים ראיתי עלים מן הארץ׃"],["9","28","14","사울이 다시 그 여자에게 “어떤 모습이냐?” 하고 묻자, “겉옷을 휘감은 노인이 올라옵니다.” 하고 그 여자가 대답하였다. 사울은 그가 사무엘인 것을 알고, 얼굴을 땅에 대고 엎드려 절하였다.","사울이 다시 그 여자에게 \"어떤 모습이냐?\" 하고 묻자 \"도포를 입은 노인이 올라옵니다.\" 하고 대답하였다. 이 말에 사울은 그가 사무엘인 줄 알고 얼굴을 땅에 대고 절을 하였다.","사울이 그에게 이르되 그의 모양이 어떠하냐 하니 그가 이르되 한 노인이 올라오는데 그가 겉옷을 입었나이다 하더라 사울이 그가 사무엘인 줄 알고 그의 얼굴을 땅에 대고 절하니라","사울이 그에게 이르되 그 모양이 어떠하냐 그가 가로되 한 노인이 올라 오는데 그가 겉옷을 입었나이다 사울이 그가 사무엘인줄 알고 그 얼굴을 땅에 대고 절하니라","그러나 사울의 눈에는 아무 것도 보이지 않았기 때문에 다시 물었다. \"그 유령이 누구의 모습으로 보이느냐?\" 그녀가 유령의 모습을 자세히 묘사하였다. \"그는 아주 늙은 남자인데, 예언자의 겉옷을 입고 있습니다.\" 그러자 사울은 사무엘의 유령이 올라와 있음을 알아 차리고, 무녀가 바라보는 쪽을 향하여 얼굴이 땅에 닿도록 엎드려 절을 하였다.","“What does he look like?” asked Saul. “An old man is coming up wrapped in a robe,” she replied. Saul knew that it was Samuel, and so he bowed his face to the ground in homage.","And he said unto her, What form is he of? And she said, An old man cometh up; and he is covered with a mantle. And Saul perceived that it was Samuel, and he stooped with his face to the ground, and bowed himself.","\"What does he look like?\" he asked. \"An old man wearing a robe is coming up,\" she said. Then Saul knew it was Samuel, and he bowed down and prostrated himself with his face to the ground.","Dixitque ei:  “Qualis est forma eius? “. Quae ait:  “Vir senex ascendit et ipse amictus est pallio “. Intellexit Saul quod Samuel esset et inclinavit se super faciem suam in terra et adoravit.","ויאמר לה מה תארו ותאמר איש זקן עלה והוא עטה מעיל וידע שאול כי שמואל הוא ויקד אפים ארצה וישתחו׃"],["9","28","15","사무엘이 사울에게 물었다. 왜 나를 불러 올려 귀찮게 하느냐? 사울이 대답하였다. 저에게 매우 어려운 일이 생겼습니다. 필리스티아인들이 저를 치고 있는데, 하느님께서는 저를 떠나셨는지 예언자들을 통해서도, 꿈으로도 저에게 더 이상 대답해 주지 않으십니다. 그래서 제가 무엇을 해야 할지 알려 주십사고 어르신을 부른 것입니다.","사무엘이 사울에게 물었다. \"무슨 일로 나를 불러내어 성가시게 구느냐?\" 사울이 대답하였다. \"매우 어려운 일이 생겼습니다. 불레셋 군이 저를 치려고 진을 쳤는데, 하느님께서는 저를 떠나셨는지 예언자로도, 꿈으로도 저의 물음에 대답해 주시지 않으십니다. 그래서 어떻게 하면 좋을지 몰라 말씀을 듣고자 선생을 모신 것입니다.\"","사무엘이 사울에게 이르되 네가 어찌하여 나를 불러 올려서 나를 성가시게 하느냐 하니 사울이 대답하되 나는 심히 다급하니이다 블레셋 사람들은 나를 향하여 군대를 일으켰고 하나님은 나를 떠나서 다시는 선지자로도, 꿈으로도 내게 대답하지 아니하시기로 내가 행할 일을 알아보려고 당신을 불러 올렸나이다 하더라","사무엘이 사울에게 이르되 네가 어찌하여 나를 불러 올려서 나로 분요케 하느냐 사울이 대답하되 나는 심히 군급하니이다 블레셋 사람은 나를 향하여 군대를 일으켰고 하나님은 나를 떠나서 다시는 선지자로도, 꿈으로도 내게 대답지 아니하시기로 나의 행할 일을 배우려고 당신을 불러 올렸나이다","사무엘이 사정없이 책망하였다. \"네가 왜 나를 불러 올려 쉬지도 못하게 괴롭히느냐? 네가 내게서 무엇을 바라느냐?\" 사울이 대답하였다. \"저는 지금 무서워서 죽을 지경입니다. 블레셋 족속이 저를 치려고 북쪽에까지 밀고 올라와 있는데, 여호와께서는 제게서 아주 떠나 버리셨습니다. 여호와께서 이제는 예언자의 말씀으로도, 꿈으로도 제게 더 이상 대답하지 않으십니다. 제가 이렇게 궁지에 몰려 있어서 어쩔 수없이 당신을 모셔 올리게 되었습니다. 부디, 제가 이제 어떻게 해야 할지를 가르쳐 주십시오!\"","Samuel then said to Saul, “Why do you disturb me by conjuring me up?” Saul replied: “I am in great distress, for the Philistines are waging war against me and God has turned away from me. Since God no longer answers me through prophets or in dreams, I have called upon you to tell me what I should do.”","And Samuel said to Saul, Why hast thou disquieted me, to bring me up? And Saul answered, I am sore distressed; for the Philistines make war against me, and God is departed from me, and answereth me no more, neither by prophets, nor by dreams: therefore I have called thee, that thou mayest make known unto me what I shall do.","Samuel said to Saul, \"Why have you disturbed me by bringing me up?\" \"I am in great distress,\" Saul said. \"The Philistines are fighting against me, and God has turned away from me. He no longer answers me, either by prophets or by dreams. So I have called on you to tell me what to do.\"","Dixit autem Samuel ad Saul:  “Quare inquietasti me, ut suscitarer? “. Et ait Saul:  “Coartor nimis. Siquidem Philisthim pugnant adversum me, et Deus recessit a me et exaudire me noluit neque in manu prophetarum neque per somnia; vocavi ergo te, ut ostenderes mihi quid faciam “.","ויאמר שמואל אל שאול למה הרגזתני להעלות אתי ויאמר שאול צר לי מאד ופלשתים נלחמים בי ואלהים סר מעלי ולא ענני עוד גם ביד הנביאם גם בחלמות ואקראה לך להודיעני מה אעשה׃"],["9","28","16","그러자 사무엘이 말하였다. “주님께서 이미 너를 떠나 네 원수가 되셨는데 어쩌자고 나에게 묻느냐?","사무엘이 입을 열었다. \"야훼께서 이미 너를 떠나 네 원수가 되셨는데 어쩌자고 나에게 묻느냐?","사무엘이 이르되 여호와께서 너를 떠나 네 대적이 되셨거늘 네가 어찌하여 내게 묻느냐","사무엘이 가로되 여호와께서 너를 떠나 네 대적이 되셨거늘 네가 어찌하여 내게 묻느냐","사무엘이 무섭게 책망하였다. \"여호와께서 이미 너를 떠나 네 원수가 된 줄을 잘 알면서 네가 무엇을 더 얻으려고 나까지 찾아와서 물어 보느냐?","To this Samuel said: “But why do you ask me, if the LORD has abandoned you for your neighbor?","Then said Samuel, Wherefore then dost thou ask of me, seeing the LORD is departed from thee, and is become thine enemy?","Samuel said, \"Why do you consult me, now that the LORD has turned away from you and become your enemy?","Et ait Samuel:  “Quid interrogas me, cum Dominus recesserit a te et factus est adversarius tuus?","ויאמר שמואל ולמה תשאלני ויהוה סר מעליך ויהי ערך׃"],["9","28","17","주님께서는 나를 통하여 말씀하신 그대로 너에게 하시어, 이미 이 나라를 네 손에서 빼앗아 네 이웃 다윗에게 주셨다.","너는 야훼의 말씀을 듣지 않았느냐? 야훼께서는 이미 그대로 하셨다. 이미 이 나라를 네 손에서 빼앗아 동족인 다윗에게 주셨다.","여호와께서 나를 통하여 말씀하신 대로 네게 행하사 나라를 네 손에서 떼어 네 이웃 다윗에게 주셨느니라","여호와께서 나로 말씀하신대로 네게 행하사 나라를 네 손에서 떼어 네 이웃 다윗에게 주셨느니라","여호와께서는 이미 내가 세상에 있을 때에 전하였던 예언의 말씀을 이제 그대로 실현하셨다. 여호와께서 이제 이 나라의 왕위를 네 손에서 빼앗아 친구인 다윗에게 주셨다.","The LORD has done to you what he declared through me: he has torn the kingdom from your hand and has given it to your neighbor David.","And the LORD hath done to him, as he spake by me: for the LORD hath rent the kingdom out of thine hand, and given it to thy neighbour, even to David:","The LORD has done what he predicted through me. The LORD has torn the kingdom out of your hands and given it to one of your neighbors--to David.","Fecit enim Dominus, sicut locutus est in manu mea, et scidit regnum de manu tua et dedit illud proximo tuo David,","ויעש יהוה לו כאשר דבר בידי ויקרע יהוה את הממלכה מידך ויתנה לרעך לדוד׃"],["9","28","18","너는 주님의 말씀을 듣지 않고 그분의 타오르는 분노를 아말렉에게 쏟지 않았다. 주님께서 오늘 너에게 이런 일을 하시는 것은 바로 이 때문이다.","너는 야훼의 말씀을 듣지 않았고 그의 진노를 아말렉에게 쏟지 않았다. 야훼께서 오늘 너에게 이렇게 하시는 것은 그 때문이다.","네가 여호와의 목소리를 순종하지 아니하고 그의 진노를 아말렉에게 쏟지 아니하였으므로 여호와께서 오늘 이 일을 네게 행하셨고","네가 여호와의 목소리를 순종치 아니하고 그의 진노를 아말렉에게 쏟지 아니하였으므로 여호와께서 오늘날 이 일을 네게 행하셨고","여호와께서는 일찍이 아말렉 족속을 전멸시켜 버리라고 네게 명령하셨으나 너는 그 말씀에 순종하지 않았다. 너는 그들을 전멸시키지도 않았고, 그들이 기르는 가축을 모조리 죽여 없애지도 않았다.","“Because you disobeyed the LORD’s directive and would not carry out his fierce anger against Amalek, the LORD has done this to you today.","Because thou obeyedst not the voice of the LORD, nor executedst his fierce wrath upon Amalek, therefore hath the LORD done this thing unto thee this day.","Because you did not obey the LORD or carry out his fierce wrath against the Amalekites, the LORD has done this to you today.","quia non oboedisti voci Domini neque fecisti iram furoris eius in Amalec. Idcirco quod pateris, fecit tibi Dominus hodie.","כאשר לא שמעת בקול יהוה ולא עשית חרון אפו בעמלק על כן הדבר הזה עשה לך יהוה היום הזה׃"],["9","28","19","주님께서는 너와 더불어 이스라엘도 필리스티아인들의 손에 넘기시어, 내일이면 너와 네 아들들이 나와 함께 있게 될 것이다. 또한 주님께서는 이스라엘 진영도 필리스티아인들의 손에 넘기실 것이다.”","야훼께서는 너는 물론이요 이스라엘까지도 전부 불레셋 군의 손에 부치셨다. 내일이면 너와 네 아들들이 나와 함께 있게 되리라. 게다가 야훼께서는 이스라엘 군대도 불레셋 군의 손에 부치실 것이다.\"","여호와께서 이스라엘을 너와 함께 블레셋 사람들의 손에 넘기시리니 내일 너와 네 아들들이 나와 함께 있으리라 여호와께서 또 이스라엘 군대를 블레셋 사람들의 손에 넘기시리라 하는지라","여호와께서 이스라엘을 너와 함께 블레셋 사람의 손에 붙이시리니 내일 너와 네 아들들이 나와 함께 있으리라 여호와께서 또 이스라엘 군대를 블레셋 사람의 손에 붙이시리라","그러므로 여호와께서 이제 너를 이스라엘 군대와 함께 블레셋 족속의 손에 붙여 버릴 것이다. 내일이면 너와 네 아들들이 지하로 내려와 나와 함께 있을 것이다.\"","Moreover, the LORD will deliver Israel, and you as well, into the hands of the Philistines. By tomorrow you and your sons will be with me, and the LORD will have delivered the army of Israel into the hands of the Philistines.”","Moreover the LORD will also deliver Israel with thee into the hand of the Philistines: and to morrow shalt thou and thy sons be with me: the LORD also shall deliver the host of Israel into the hand of the Philistines.","The LORD will hand over both Israel and you to the Philistines, and tomorrow you and your sons will be with me. The LORD will also hand over the army of Israel to the Philistines.\"","Et dabit Dominus etiam Israel tecum in manu Philisthim; cras autem tu et filii tui mecum eritis, sed et castra Israel tradet Dominus in manu Philisthim “.","ויתן יהוה גם את ישראל עמך ביד פלשתים ומחר אתה ובניך עמי גם את מחנה ישראל יתן יהוה ביד פלשתים׃"],["9","28","20","그러자 사울은 곧바로 땅바닥에 벌렁 나가떨어졌다. 사무엘의 말에 몹시 겁을 먹은 데다, 밤낮으로 온종일 아무 음식도 먹지 못하여 기운이 없었던 것이다.","이 말을 듣고 사울은 그만 땅바닥에 번듯이 쓰러졌다. 하루 종일, 그리고 밤새도록 아무것도 입에 대지 못해 기운이 빠진데다가 사무엘이 하는 말에 겁을 먹고 기절했던 것이다.","사울이 갑자기 땅에 완전히 엎드러지니 이는 사무엘의 말로 말미암아 심히 두려워함이요 또 그의 기력이 다하였으니 이는 그가 하루 밤낮을 음식을 먹지 못하였음이니라","사울이 갑자기 땅에 온전히 엎드러지니 이는 사무엘의 말을 인하여 심히 두려워함이요 또 그 기력이 진하였으니 이는 그가 종일 종야에 식물을 먹지 못하였음이라","사울은 이런 말씀을 듣자, 충격이 너무나 커서 통나무가 넘어지듯 땅바닥에 쓰러졌다. 그렇잖아도 그는 온종일 아무 것도 먹지 않아서 기진맥진해 있던 참이었다.","Immediately Saul fell full length on the ground, in great fear because of Samuel’s message. He had no strength left, since he had eaten nothing all that day and night.","Then Saul fell straightway all along on the earth, and was sore afraid, because of the words of Samuel: and there was no strength in him; for he had eaten no bread all the day, nor all the night.","Immediately Saul fell full length on the ground, filled with fear because of Samuel's words. His strength was gone, for he had eaten nothing all that day and night.","Statimque Saul cecidit porrectus in terram; extimuerat enim verba Samuel, et robur non erat in eo, quia non comederat panem tota die illa et tota nocte illa.","וימהר שאול ויפל מלא קומתו ארצה וירא מאד מדברי שמואל גם כח לא היה בו כי לא אכל לחם כל היום וכל הלילה׃"],["9","28","21","그 여자가 사울에게 다가와 그가 몹시 놀란 것을 보고 간청하였다. “보십시오, 이 여종은 임금님의 말씀을 따랐습니다. 저에게 이르신 그대로 임금님의 말씀을 목숨을 걸고 따랐습니다.","여자가 가까이 와서 사울이 겁에 질려 있는 것을 보고 간청하였다. \"보십시오. 이 계집종은 임금님의 말씀을 따라 목숨을 걸고 분부대로 하였습니다.","그 여인이 사울에게 이르러 그가 심히 고통 당함을 보고 그에게 이르되 여종이 왕의 말씀을 듣고 내 생명을 아끼지 아니하고 왕이 내게 이르신 말씀을 순종하였사오니","그 여인이 사울에게 이르러 그 심히 고통함을 보고 그에게 이르되 여종이 왕의 말씀을 듣고 나의 생명을 아끼지 아니하고 왕이 내게 이르신 말씀을 청종하였사오니","그 무녀가 사울에게 가까이 가보니, 그는 완전히 기력을 잃어 고통스러워하고 있었다. 그녀는 사울을 위하여 정성스러운 마음으로 아뢰기를 \"임금님! 저는 임금님의 청을 다 들어드렸을 뿐만 아니라 제 생명의 위험까지도 무릅썼습니다.","Then the woman came to Saul and, seeing that he was quite terror-stricken, said to him: “Remember, your maidservant obeyed you: I took my life in my hands and carried out the request you made of me.","And the woman came unto Saul, and saw that he was sore troubled, and said unto him, Behold, thine handmaid hath obeyed thy voice, and I have put my life in my hand, and have hearkened unto thy words which thou spakest unto me.","When the woman came to Saul and saw that he was greatly shaken, she said, \"Look, your maidservant has obeyed you. I took my life in my hands and did what you told me to do.","Accessit itaque mulier ad Saul et vidit quod conturbatus esset valde; dixitque ad eum:  “Ecce audivit ancilla tua vocem tuam, et posui animam meam in manu mea et oboedivi sermonibus tuis, quos locutus es ad me.","ותבוא האשה אל שאול ותרא כי נבהל מאד ותאמר אליו הנה שמעה שפחתך בקולך ואשים נפשי בכפי ואשמע את דבריך אשר דברת אלי׃"],["9","28","22","그러니 이제 임금님께서도 이 여종의 말을 들어 주십시오. 제가 임금님께 음식을 좀 차려 드릴 터이니 잡수십시오. 그래야 임금님께서 길을 가실 때에 기운을 차리실 수 있을 것입니다.”","그러니 이제 임금님께서도 이 계집종이 아뢰는 말씀을 들어주십시오. 변변치 않지만 잡수실 것을 장만하겠습니다. 길을 가시려면 무엇을 좀 드시고 기운을 차리셔야 하지 않겠습니까?\"","그런즉 청하건대 이제 당신도 여종의 말을 들으사 내가 왕 앞에 한 조각 떡을 드리게 하시고 왕은 잡수시고 길 가실 때에 기력을 얻으소서 하니","그런즉 청컨대 이제 여종의 말을 들으사 나로 왕의 앞에 한 조각 떡을 드리게 하시고 왕은 잡수시고 길 가실 때에 기력을 얻으소서","그러니 이 여종이 드리는 간청도 뿌리치지 말아주십시오. 비록 귀한 것은 없지만 제가 임금님께 음식을 대접할 터이니 가실 길을 생각하시어 많이 드시기 바랍니다.\" 하였다.","Now you, in turn, please listen to your maidservant. Let me set out a bit of food for you to eat, so that you are strong enough to go on your way.”","Now therefore, I pray thee, hearken thou also unto the voice of thine handmaid, and let me set a morsel of bread before thee; and eat, that thou mayest have strength, when thou goest on thy way.","Now please listen to your servant and let me give you some food so you may eat and have the strength to go on your way.\"","Nunc igitur audi et tu vocem ancillae tuae, ut ponam coram te buccellam panis, et comedens convalescas, ut possis iter facere “.","ועתה שמע נא גם אתה בקול שפחתך ואשמה לפניך פת לחם ואכול ויהי בך כח כי תלך בדרך׃"],["9","28","23","사울은 “먹지 않겠다!” 하면서 거절하였으나, 신하들이 그 여자와 함께 억지로 권하자, 그들의 말을 들어 땅바닥에서 일어나 침상에 앉았다.","사울은 먹지 않겠다고 고집을 부렸으나, 신하들과 그 여자의 청에 못 이겨 일어나 평상에 앉았다.","사울이 거절하여 이르되 내가 먹지 아니하겠노라 하니라 그의 신하들과 여인이 강권하매 그들의 말을 듣고 땅에서 일어나 침상에 앉으니라","사울이 거절하여 가로되 내가 먹지 아니하겠노라 그 신하들과 여인이 강권하매 그 말을 듣고 땅에서 일어나 침상에 앉으니라","그러나 사울이 아무 것도 먹고 싶지 않다고 거절하자 이번에는 사울의 두 신하들까지 그 무녀와 합세하여 간청하였다. 사울은 그들의 권유에 못이겨 마침내 땅바닥에서 일어나 평상에 앉았다.","But he refused, saying, “I will not eat.” However, when his servants joined the woman in urging him, he listened to their entreaties, got up from the ground, and sat on a couch.","But he refused, and said, I will not eat. But his servants, together with the woman, compelled him; and he hearkened unto their voice. So he arose from the earth, and sat upon the bed.","He refused and said, \"I will not eat.\" But his men joined the woman in urging him, and he listened to them. He got up from the ground and sat on the couch.","Qui renuit et ait:  “Non comedam “. Coegerunt autem eum servi sui et mulier; et tandem, audita voce eorum, surrexit de terra et sedit super lectum.","וימאן ויאמר לא אכל ויפרצו בו עבדיו וגם האשה וישמע לקלם ויקם מהארץ וישב אל המטה׃"],["9","28","24","마침 그 여자 집에는 살진 송아지가 한 마리 있었는데, 그 여자는 서둘러 그것을 잡았다. 그리고 밀가루를 가져다가 누룩을 넣지 않고 반죽하여 빵을 구워서,","여자는 서둘러 집에 있는 살진 송아지를 잡고 또 밀가루를 가져다가 누룩 넣을 새도 없이 빵을 구워서","여인의 집에 살진 송아지가 있으므로 그것을 급히 잡고 가루를 가져다가 뭉쳐 무교병을 만들고 구워서","여인의 집에 살진 송아지가 있으므로 그것을 급히 잡고 가루를 취하여 뭉쳐 무교병을 만들고 구워서","무녀의 집에서는 송아지를 한 마리 키우고 있었는데, 아주 살쪄 있었으므로 그녀는 서둘러 그것을 잡고 밀가루를 반죽해서 누룩을 넣어 부풀릴 사이도 없이 둥글납작한 떡을 구웠다.","The woman had a stall-fed calf in the house, which she now quickly slaughtered. Then taking flour, she kneaded it and baked unleavened bread.","And the woman had a fat calf in the house; and she hasted, and killed it, and took flour, and kneaded it, and did bake unleavened bread thereof:","The woman had a fattened calf at the house, which she butchered at once. She took some flour, kneaded it and baked bread without yeast.","Mulier autem illa habebat vitulum pascualem in domo; et festinavit et occidit eum, tollensque farinam miscuit eam et coxit azyma.","ולאשה עגל מרבק בבית ותמהר ותזבחהו ותקח קמח ותלש ותפהו מצות׃"],["9","28","25","사울과 그의 신하들 앞에 차려 놓았다. 그들은 그것을 먹고 일어나 그 밤으로 길을 떠났다.","사울과 그의 신하들 앞에 차려놓았다. 그들은 그것을 먹고 그 밤으로 길을 떠났다.","사울 앞에와 그의 신하들 앞에 내놓으니 그들이 먹고 일어나서 그 밤에 가니라","사울의 앞에와 그 신하들의 앞에 드리니 그들이 먹고 일어나서 그 밤에 가니라","무녀가 이렇게 급히 음식을 장만하여 사울과 그의 신하들 앞에 차려 놓자 그들은 고기와 떡을 먹은 후에 그날로 돌아갔다.","She set the meal before Saul and his servants, and they ate. Then they got up and left the same night.","And she brought it before Saul, and before his servants; and they did eat. Then they rose up, and went away that night.","Then she set it before Saul and his men, and they ate. That same night they got up and left.","Et posuit ante Saul et ante servos eius. Qui cum comedissent, surrexerunt et abierunt hac eadem nocte.","ותגש לפני שאול ולפני עבדיו ויאכלו ויקמו וילכו בלילה ההוא׃"],["9","29","1","필리스티아인들은 모든 진영을 아펙에 집결시키고, 이스라엘은 이즈르엘에 있는 샘가에 진을 쳤다.","불레셋은 전군을 아벡에 집결시켰고 이스라엘은 이즈르엘에 있는 샘가에 진을 쳤다.","블레셋 사람들은 그들의 모든 군대를 아벡에 모았고 이스라엘 사람들은 이스르엘에 있는 샘 곁에 진 쳤더라","블레셋 사람들은 그 모든 군대를 아벡에 모았고 이스라엘 사람들은 이스르엘에 있는 샘 곁에 진 쳤더라","블레셋 족속이 아직도 욥바에서 가까운 해안 평원에 있는 아벡에 전군대를 집결시키고 있을 때였다. 이스라엘 백성도 길보아산에서 가까운 이스르엘의 샘 곁에 진을 치고 있었다.","Now the Philistines had mustered all their forces in Aphek, and the Israelites were encamped at the spring in Jezreel.","Now the Philistines gathered together all their armies to Aphek: and the Israelites pitched by a fountain which is in Jezreel.","The Philistines gathered all their forces at Aphek, and Israel camped by the spring in Jezreel.","Congregata sunt ergo Philisthim universa agmina in Aphec; sed et Israel castrametatus est super fontem, qui erat in Iezrahel.","ויקבצו פלשתים את כל מחניהם אפקה וישראל חנים בעין אשר ביזרעאל׃"],["9","29","2","필리스티아 통치자들은 수백 명씩, 또는 수천 명씩 거느리고 나아갔고, 다윗과 그 부하들은 아키스와 함께 뒤에서 나아갔다.","불레셋 군 추장들은 백 명씩, 혹은 천 명씩 부대를 편성하였고 다윗의 일행은 아기스와 함께 후방부대를 편성하였다.","블레셋 사람들의 수령들은 수백 명씩 수천 명씩 인솔하여 나아가고 다윗과 그의 사람들은 아기스와 함께 그 뒤에서 나아가더니","블레셋 사람의 장관들은 수백씩 수천씩 영솔하여 나아가고 다윗과 그의 사람들은 아기스와 함께 그 뒤에서 나아가더니","그리고 블레셋 족속의 다섯 왕들은 거기서 각 부대의 사열을 받았는데, 수백 명, 수천 명씩 열을 지어 선 블레셋 군인들이 그들 앞으로 행진을 하였다. 가드 왕 아기스의 군대와 다윗의 군인들은 그 행렬의 맨 끝에서 행진하였다. 그런데 사열받던 지휘관들이 다윗과 그의 부하들을 보고","As the Philistine lords were marching their units of a hundred and a thousand, David and his warriors were marching in the rear guard with Achish.","And the lords of the Philistines passed on by hundreds, and by thousands: but David and his men passed on in the rereward with Achish.","As the Philistine rulers marched with their units of hundreds and thousands, David and his men were marching at the rear with Achish.","Et principes quidem Philisthim incedebant in centuriis et milibus; David autem et viri eius incedebant in novissimo agmine cum Achis.","וסרני פלשתים עברים למאות ולאלפים ודוד ואנשיו עברים באחרנה עם אכיש׃"],["9","29","3","그런데 필리스티아 제후들이 “이 히브리인들은 누구요?” 하고 물었다. 아키스가 필리스티아 제후들에게 대답하였다. “이 사람은 이스라엘 임금 사울의 신하였던 다윗이지 않소? 그가 나와 함께 지낸 지 이미 한두 해가 되었지만, 나에게 망명해 온 날부터 이날까지 나는 그에게서 아무 허물도 찾지 못하였소.”","그런데 불레셋 지휘관들이 \"이 히브리 놈들이 왜 여기에 와 있소?\" 하고 항의하였다. 아기스가 불레셋 지휘관들에게 말하였다. \"그대들도 알다시피 이 사람은 이스라엘 왕 사울의 신하였던 다윗이오. 한두 해 데리고 있어 보았지만, 나에게 망명해 온 날부터 오늘까지 나는 이 사람에게서 아무 허물도 찾지 못하였소.\"","블레셋 사람들의 방백들이 이르되 이 히브리 사람들이 무엇을 하려느냐 하니 아기스가 블레셋 사람들의 방백들에게 이르되 이는 이스라엘 왕 사울의 신하 다윗이 아니냐 그가 나와 함께 있은 지 여러 날 여러 해로되 그가 망명하여 온 날부터 오늘까지 내가 그의 허물을 보지 못하였노라","블레셋 사람의 방백들이 가로되 이 히브리 사람들이 무엇을 하려느냐 아기스가 블레셋 사람의 방백들에게 이르되 이는 이스라엘 왕 사울의 신하 다윗이 아니냐 그가 나와 함께 있은지 여러 날 여러 해로되 그가 망명하여 온 날부터 오늘까지 내가 그의 허물을 보지 못하였노라","아기스에게 항의하였다. \"도대체 저 히브리 사람들이 여기 와서 할 일이 무엇입니까?\" 아기스가 그들에게 말하기를 \"저 사람 다윗이 전에는 이스라엘 왕 사울을 섬겼지만 지금은 여러 해 전부터 나를 섬기고 있소! 게다가 내게로 망명해 온 날부터 오늘까지 아무 흠없이 나를 받들 뿐만 아니라 나 또한 그에게서 아무 허물도 찾지 못하였소!\" 하고 해명하였다.","The Philistine commanders asked, “What are those Hebrews doing here?” Achish answered them: “Why, that is David, the officer of Saul, king of Israel. He has been with me for a year or two, and from the day he came over to me until now I have never found fault in him.”","Then said the princes of the Philistines, What do these Hebrews here? And Achish said unto the princes of the Philistines, Is not this David, the servant of Saul the king of Israel, which hath been with me these days, or these years, and I have found no fault in him since he fell unto me unto this day?","The commanders of the Philistines asked, \"What about these Hebrews?\" Achish replied, \"Is this not David, who was an officer of Saul king of Israel? He has already been with me for over a year, and from the day he left Saul until now, I have found no fault in him.\"","Dixeruntque principes Philisthim:  “Quid sibi volunt Hebraei isti? “. Et ait Achis ad principes Philisthim:  “Nonne iste est David, qui fuit servus Saul regis Israel et est apud me multis diebus vel annis, et non inveni in eo quidquam ex die, qua transfugit ad me, usque ad diem hanc? “.","ויאמרו שרי פלשתים מה העברים האלה ויאמר אכיש אל שרי פלשתים הלוא זה דוד עבד שאול מלך ישראל אשר היה אתי זה ימים או זה שנים ולא מצאתי בו מאומה מיום נפלו עד היום הזה׃"],["9","29","4","그러나 필리스티아 제후들은 아키스에게 화를 내며 말하였다. “그 사람을 돌려보내시오. 그는 임금께서 정해 준 곳으로 돌아가야 하오. 그가 싸움터에서 우리의 적대자가 될지도 모르니, 우리와 함께 싸움터로 내려갈 수는 없소. 이자가 무엇으로 제 주군의 환심을 사겠소? 여기 있는 군사들의 머리를 갖다 바치는 것이 아니겠소?","불레셋 지휘관들이 그에게 화를 내었다. \"이자들을 돌려보내어 당신이 정해 준 곳으로 돌아가게 하시오. 그가 싸움터에서 돌아설지도 모르므로 우리는 그와 함께 출전할 수가 없습니다. 제 상전의 환심을 사려고 무슨 일을 할는지 어찌 알겠소? 여기 있는 우리 군인들의 목을 잘라가지고 갈지도 모르오.","블레셋 사람의 방백들이 그에게 노한지라 블레셋 방백들이 그에게 이르되 이 사람을 돌려보내어 왕이 그에게 정하신 그 처소로 가게 하소서 그는 우리와 함께 싸움에 내려가지 못하리니 그가 전장에서 우리의 대적이 될까 하나이다 그가 무엇으로 그 주와 다시 화합하리이까 이 사람들의 머리로 하지 아니하겠나이까","블레셋 사람의 방백들이 그에게 노한지라 블레셋 방백들이 그에게 이르되 이 사람을 돌려보내어 왕이 그에게 정하신 그 처소로 가게 하소서 그는 우리와 함께 싸움에 내려가지 못하리니 그가 전장에서 우리의 대적이 될까 하나이다 그가 무엇으로 그 주와 다시 화합하리이까 이 사람들의 머리로 하지 아니하겠나이까","그러나 블레셋 족속의 지휘관들은 다윗에 대하여 화를 내면서 아기스에게 이같이 주장하였다. \"그 사람을 당장 돌려보내시오! 당신이 그에게 거주지로 정해 준 곳이 있으니, 당장 그리 보내시오! 그는 절대로 우리와 함께 싸움터에 나갈 수 없는 사람입니다. 만일 그가 우리와 함께 나가 싸운다면 그가 한창 싸움이 치열할 때에 적진으로 넘어갈 것입니다. 그가 우리 군인들의 머리를 잘라다가 자기 왕의 발 앞에 바치는 것보다 더 좋은 기회를 어디서 얻어 섬기던 왕과 화해할 수 있겠습니까? 이 사람이 누구입니까!","But the Philistine commanders were angered at this and said to him: “Send that man back! Let him return to the place you picked out for him. He must not go down into battle with us; during the battle he might become our enemy. For how else can he win back his master’s favor, if not at the expense of our soldiers?","And the princes of the Philistines were wroth with him; and the princes of the Philistines said unto him, Make this fellow return, that he may go again to his place which thou hast appointed him, and let him not go down with us to battle, lest in the battle he be an adversary to us: for wherewith should he reconcile himself unto his master? should it not be with the heads of these men?","But the Philistine commanders were angry with him and said, \"Send the man back, that he may return to the place you assigned him. He must not go with us into battle, or he will turn against us during the fighting. How better could he regain his master's favor than by taking the heads of our own men?","Irati sunt autem adversus eum principes Philisthim et dixerunt ei:  “Revertatur vir iste et sedeat in loco suo, in quo constituisti eum, et non descendat nobiscum in proelium, ne fiat nobis adversarius, cum proeliari coeperimus. Quomodo enim aliter placare poterit dominum suum nisi in capitibus horum virorum?","ויקצפו עליו שרי פלשתים ויאמרו לו שרי פלשתים השב את האיש וישב אל מקומו אשר הפקדתו שם ולא ירד עמנו במלחמה ולא יהיה לנו לשטן במלחמה ובמה יתרצה זה אל אדניו הלוא בראשי האנשים ההם׃"],["9","29","5","그가 바로 사람들이 춤을 추며 ‘사울은 수천을 치셨고 다윗은 수만을 치셨다네.’ 하고 노래하던 그 다윗이 아니오?”","이스라엘 사람들이 춤을 추며 노래할 때, '사울은 수천을 치셨고 다윗은 수만을 치셨다네.' 하던 바로 그 다윗이 아니오?\"","그들이 춤추며 노래하여 이르되 사울이 죽인 자는 천천이요 다윗은 만만이로다 하던 그 다윗이 아니니이까 하니","그들이 춤추며 창화하여 가로되 사울의 죽인 자는 천천이요 다윗은 만만이로다 하던 이 다윗이 아니니이까","이미 \"사울은 수천을 죽였지만 다윗은 수만을 죽였다네!\" 라고 이스라엘 백성들로부터 찬양받던 자가 아닙니까?\"","Is this not the David for whom they sing during their dances, ‘Saul has slain his thousands, David his tens of thousands’?”","Is not this David, of whom they sang one to another in dances, saying, Saul slew his thousands, and David his ten thousands?","Isn't this the David they sang about in their dances: \"'Saul has slain his thousands, and David his tens of thousands'?\"","Nonne iste est David, cui cantabant in choris dicentes: “Percussit Saul milia sua, et David decem milia sua”? “.","הלוא זה דוד אשר יענו לו במחלות לאמר הכה שאול באלפו ודוד ברבבתו׃"],["9","29","6","그러자 아키스는 다윗을 불러 말하였다. “살아 계신 주님을 두고 맹세하는데, 그대는 올곧은 사람이오. 그대가 나에게 온 날부터 이날까지 나는 그대에게서 아무 허물도 찾지 못하였기 때문에, 그대가 나와 함께 출전하는 것이 좋겠다고 생각하였소. 그러나 다른 통치자들 눈에는 그대가 좋게 보이지 않는가 보오.","그래서 아기스는 다윗을 불러 일렀다. \"살아 계신 야훼 앞에서 맹세하오. 장군은 곧은 사람이오. 나에게 온 날부터 이 날까지 나는 장군에게서 아무 허물도 찾지 못하였소. 그래서 장군을 데리고 출전하는 것이 좋겠다고 생각했는데, 다른 추장들이 좋게 보지 않소.","아기스가 다윗을 불러 그에게 이르되 여호와께서 살아 계심을 두고 맹세하노니 네가 정직하여 내게 온 날부터 오늘까지 네게 악이 있음을 보지 못하였으니 나와 함께 진중에 출입하는 것이 내 생각에는 좋으나 수령들이 너를 좋아하지 아니하니","아기스가 다윗을 불러 그에게 이르되 여호와께서 사시거니와 네가 정직하여 내게 온 날부터 오늘까지 네게 악이 있음을 보지 못하였으니 나와 함께 군중에 출입하는 것이 나의 소견에는 좋으나 장관들이 너를 좋아하지 아니하니","아기스는 다윗을 불러 이렇게 말하였다. \"여호와께서 확실히 살아 계심을 걸고 맹세하지만, 그대는 참 믿을 만한 사람이오! 그래서 이번에도 그대와 함께 출전하는 것이 좋겠다고 생각했었소! 그대가 내게로 와있는 동안에 나는 한 번도 그대에게서 무슨 허물이나 거짓을 본 일이 없기 때문이오. 그런데 다른 왕들이 그대를 믿어 주지 않는구료.","So Achish summoned David and said to him: “As the LORD lives, you are honest, and I would want you with me in all my battles. To this day I have found nothing wrong with you since you came to me. But in the view of the chiefs you are not welcome.","Then Achish called David, and said unto him, Surely, as the LORD liveth, thou hast been upright, and thy going out and thy coming in with me in the host is good in my sight: for I have not found evil in thee since the day of thy coming unto me unto this day: nevertheless the lords favour thee not.","So Achish called David and said to him, \"As surely as the LORD lives, you have been reliable, and I would be pleased to have you serve with me in the army. From the day you came to me until now, I have found no fault in you, but the rulers don't approve of you.","Vocavit ergo Achis David et ait ei:  “Vivit Dominus quia rectus es tu, et bonus est in conspectu meo exitus tuus et introitus tuus mecum in castris, et non inveni in te quidquam mali ex die, qua venisti ad me, usque ad diem hanc. Sed principibus non places.","ויקרא אכיש אל דוד ויאמר אליו חי יהוה כי ישר אתה וטוב בעיני צאתך ובאך אתי במחנה כי לא מצאתי בך רעה מיום באך אלי עד היום הזה ובעיני הסרנים לא טוב אתה׃"],["9","29","7","그러니 이제 평안히 돌아가시오. 필리스티아의 통치자들 눈에 거슬리는 일은 하지 않는 것이 좋겠소.”","그러니 이제 편안히 돌아가시오. 불레셋의 추장들 눈 밖에 날 일은 하지 않는 게 좋겠소.\"","그러므로 이제 너는 평안히 돌아가서 블레셋 사람들의 수령들에게 거슬러 보이게 하지 말라 하니라","너는 돌이켜 평안히 가서 블레셋 사람의 장관들에게 거슬려 보이게 말라","그러니 이제 다시 돌아가서 조용히 지내시오. 다른 왕들이 싫어할 일은 하지 마시오\"","Leave peacefully, now, and do nothing that might displease the Philistine chiefs.”","Wherefore now return, and go in peace, that thou displease not the lords of the Philistines.","Turn back and go in peace; do nothing to displease the Philistine rulers.\"","Revertere ergo et vade in pace et non offendes oculos principum Philisthim “.","ועתה שוב ולך בשלום ולא תעשה רע בעיני סרני פלשתים׃"],["9","29","8","다윗이 아키스에게 항의하였다. “제가 무엇을 했다는 말입니까? 임금님 앞에 나아온 날부터 이날까지 이 종에게 무슨 잘못이 있기에, 저의 주군이신 임금님의 원수들과 싸우러 나가지 못하게 하십니까?”","다윗이 아기스에게 항의하였다. \"내가 무엇을 했다는 말입니까? 이 날까지 당신을 모시고 있었는데, 그 동안 나에게 무슨 허물이 있었다고 상전이신 당신의 원수와 싸우러 나가지 못하게 하십니까?\"","다윗이 아기스에게 이르되 내가 무엇을 하였나이까 내가 당신 앞에 오늘까지 있는 동안에 당신이 종에게서 무엇을 보셨기에 내가 가서 내 주 왕의 원수와 싸우지 못하게 하시나이까 하니","다윗이 아기스에게 이르되 내가 무엇을 하였나이까 내가 당신의 앞에 오늘까지 있는 동안에 당신이 종에게서 무엇을 보셨기에 나로 가서 내 주 왕의 원수와 싸우지 못하게 하시나이까","그러나 다윗은 반대하였다. \"제게 무슨 잘못이 있다고 이렇게 부당한 대우를 하십니까? 제가 임금님을 섬기기 시작한 날로부터 오늘에 이르기까지 언제 어디서 무슨 허물이 있었습니까? 도대체 제가 이번에 함께 출전하여 내 주 임금님의 원수들을 쳐부수지 못할 이유가 무엇입니까?\"","But David said to Achish: “What have I done? What fault have you found in your servant from the day I entered your service until today, that I cannot go to fight against the enemies of my lord the king?”","And David said unto Achish, But what have I done? and what hast thou found in thy servant so long as I have been with thee unto this day, that I may not go fight against the enemies of my lord the king?","\"But what have I done?\" asked David. \"What have you found against your servant from the day I came to you until now? Why can't I go and fight against the enemies of my lord the king?\"","Dixitque David ad Achis:  “Quid enim feci, et quid invenisti in me servo tuo a die, qua fui in conspectu tuo, usque in diem hanc, ut non veniam et pugnem contra inimicos domini mei regis? “.","ויאמר דוד אל אכיש כי מה עשיתי ומה מצאת בעבדך מיום אשר הייתי לפניך עד היום הזה כי לא אבוא ונלחמתי באיבי אדני המלך׃"],["9","29","9","아키스가 다윗에게 대답하였다. “내 눈에는 그대가 하느님의 천사처럼 좋은 사람이오. 그 사실을 나는 알고 있소. 그러나 필리스티아 제후들이 ‘그가 우리와 함께 싸우러 나가면 안 되오.’ 하고 말하였소.","그러나 아기스는 다윗을 달랬다. \"내가 보기에 장군은 하늘이 보낸 사람처럼 훌륭한 분이오. 그러나 불레셋 지휘관들이 장군과 함께 싸우러 나가지 못하겠다고 하니,","아기스가 다윗에게 대답하여 이르되 네가 내 목전에 하나님의 전령 같이 선한 것을 내가 아나 블레셋 사람들의 방백들은 말하기를 그가 우리와 함께 전장에 올라가지 못하리라 하니","아기스가 다윗에게 대답하여 가로되 네가 내 목전에 하나님의 사자 같이 선한 것을 내가 아나 블레셋 사람의 방백들은 말하기를 그가 우리와 함께 전장에 올라가지 못하리라 하니","아기스가 다시 설득시켰다. \"나야 그 점을 잘 알고 있소. 내가 보기에도 그대에게는 아무 허물도 없을 뿐만 아니라 하나님의 천사처럼 충성스럽게 여겨질 정도요, 다만 블레셋 족속의 지휘관들이 \"그는 절대로 우리와 함께 싸움터에 나갈 수 없는 사람이오\"하고 결정을 내려 버렸소.","“I recognize,” Achish answered David, “that you are trustworthy, like an angel of God. But the Philistine commanders are saying, ‘He must not go with us into battle.’","And Achish answered and said to David, I know that thou art good in my sight, as an angel of God: notwithstanding the princes of the Philistines have said, He shall not go up with us to the battle.","Achish answered, \"I know that you have been as pleasing in my eyes as an angel of God; nevertheless, the Philistine commanders have said, 'He must not go up with us into battle.'","Respondens autem Achis locutus est ad David:  “Scio quia bonus es tu in oculis meis sicut angelus Dei; sed principes Philisthim dixerunt: “Non ascendet nobiscum in proelium”.","ויען אכיש ויאמר אל דוד ידעתי כי טוב אתה בעיני כמלאך אלהים אך שרי פלשתים אמרו לא יעלה עמנו במלחמה׃"],["9","29","10","그러니 그대는 그대와 함께 온 옛 주군의 부하들과 더불어 아침 일찍 일어나시오. 아침 일찍 일어나 동이 트는 대로 길을 떠나시오.”","장군과 함께 왔던 나의 부하들을 데리고 내일 아침에 일찍 떠나서 내가 정해 준 자리로 가도록 하시오. 나만은 장군을 훌륭하게 보니 공연한 생각을 품지 마시오. 내일 아침 동이 트는 대로 길을 떠나도록 하시오.\"","그런즉 너는 너와 함께 온 네 주의 신하들과 더불어 새벽에 일어나라 너희는 새벽에 일어나서 밝거든 곧 떠나라 하니라","그런즉 너는 너와 함께 온 네 주의 신하들로 더불어 새벽에 일어나라 너희는 새벽에 일어나서 밝거든 곧 떠나라","그러니 그대는 내일 아침 일찍 일어나서 사울을 섬기던 그대의 부하들을 거느리고 날이 밝는 대로 떠나시오!\"","So the first thing tomorrow, you and your lord’s servants who came with you, go to the place I picked out for you. Do not take to heart their worthless remarks; for you have been valuable in my service. But make an early morning start, as soon as it grows light, and be on your way.”","Wherefore now rise up early in the morning with thy master's servants that are come with thee: and as soon as ye be up early in the morning, and have light, depart.","Now get up early, along with your master's servants who have come with you, and leave in the morning as soon as it is light.\"","Igitur consurge mane, tu et servi domini tui, qui venerunt tecum, et, cum de nocte surrexeritis et coeperit dilucescere, pergite “.","ועתה השכם בבקר ועבדי אדניך אשר באו אתך והשכמתם בבקר ואור לכם ולכו׃"],["9","29","11","그리하여 다윗과 부하들은 아침 일찍 일어나 필리스티아인들의 땅으로 돌아가고, 필리스티아인들은 이즈르엘로 올라갔다.","그래서 다윗은 부하들을 데리고 아침 일찍 길을 떠나 불레셋 땅으로 돌아가고 불레셋 군은 이즈르엘로 진군해 갔다.","이에 다윗이 자기 사람들과 더불어 아침에 일찍이 일어나서 떠나 블레셋 사람들의 땅으로 돌아가고 블레셋 사람들은 이스르엘로 올라가니라","이에 다윗이 자기 사람들로 더불어 일찌기 아침에 일어나서 떠나 블레셋 사람의 땅으로 돌아가고 블레셋 사람은 이스르엘로 올라가니라","이리하여 다음날 아침 동틀 무렵에 다윗은 부하들과 함께 그곳을 출발하여 블레셋 족속의 땅으로 돌아왔다. 이때에 블레셋 족속들은 이스르엘 평원으로 진군해 올라갔다.","So David and his warriors left early in the morning to return to the land of the Philistines, and the Philistines went on up to Jezreel.","So David and his men rose up early to depart in the morning, to return into the land of the Philistines. And the Philistines went up to Jezreel.","So David and his men got up early in the morning to go back to the land of the Philistines, and the Philistines went up to Jezreel.","Surrexit itaque de nocte David ipse et viri eius, ut proficiscerentur mane et reverterentur ad terram Philisthim. Philisthim autem ascenderunt in Iezrahel.","וישכם דוד הוא ואנשיו ללכת בבקר לשוב אל ארץ פלשתים ופלשתים עלו יזרעאל׃"],["9","30","1","다윗은 부하들을 거느리고 사흘 만에 치클락에 이르렀는데, 그때는 아말렉족이 네겝과 치클락을 습격한 뒤였다. 아말렉족은 치클락을 쳐 불을 지르고는,","다윗은 부하를 이끌고 사흘 만에 시글락에 이르렀는데 그 때는 이미 네겝과 시글락이 아말렉 군에게 약탈당한 뒤였다. 그들은 시글락을 쳐 불을 지르고는","다윗과 그의 사람들이 사흘 만에 시글락에 이른 때에 아말렉 사람들이 이미 네겝과 시글락을 침노하였는데 그들이 시글락을 쳐서 불사르고","다윗과 그의 사람들이 제 삼일에 시글락에 이를 때에 아말렉 사람들이 이미 남방과 시글락을 침로하였는데 그들이 시글락을 쳐서 불사르고","다윗이 부하들을 거느리고 아벡에서 시글락까지의 100킬로미터를 사흘 동안 걸어서 돌아와보니, 시글락의 온 성읍은 잿더미로 변해 있었다. 아말렉 족속이 유다의 남부 지역으로 쳐들어와 약탈하다가 시글락에도 손을 뻗친 것이다.","Before David and his men reached Ziklag on the third day, the Amalekites had raided the Negeb and Ziklag. They stormed Ziklag, and set it on fire.","And it came to pass, when David and his men were come to Ziklag on the third day, that the Amalekites had invaded the south, and Ziklag, and smitten Ziklag, and burned it with fire;","David and his men reached Ziklag on the third day. Now the Amalekites had raided the Negev and Ziklag. They had attacked Ziklag and burned it,","Cumque venissent David et viri eius in Siceleg die tertia, Amalecitae impetum fecerant contra Nageb et contra Siceleg et percusserant Siceleg et succenderant eam igni;","ויהי בבא דוד ואנשיו צקלג ביום השלישי ועמלקי פשטו אל נגב ואל צקלג ויכו את צקלג וישרפו אתה באש׃"],["9","30","2","거기에 있던 여자들을 비롯하여 어린이와 늙은이 할 것 없이 모두 사로잡아, 하나도 죽이지 않고 제 길로 끌고 갔다.","여자를 비롯하여 거기에 있던 사람은 하나도 죽이지 않고 높은 사람 낮은 사람 할 것 없이 모두 사로잡아 갔다.","거기에 있는 젊거나 늙은 여인들은 한 사람도 죽이지 아니하고 다 사로잡아 끌고 자기 길을 갔더라","거기 있는 대소 여인들을 하나도 죽이지 아니하고 다 사로잡아 끌고 자기 길을 갔더라","그들이 비록 시글락에서 사람을 죽이지는 않았지만, 여자와 어린아이까지 남김없이 포로로 사로잡아 끌고 갔다.","They took captive the women and all who were in the city, young and old, killing no one, and they herded them off when they left.","And had taken the women captives, that were therein: they slew not any, either great or small, but carried them away, and went on their way.","and had taken captive the women and all who were in it, both young and old. They killed none of them, but carried them off as they went on their way.","et captivas duxerant mulieres et omnes in ea a minimo usque ad magnum et non interfecerant quemquam, sed secum duxerant et pergebant in itinere suo.","וישבו את הנשים אשר בה מקטן ועד גדול לא המיתו איש וינהגו וילכו לדרכם׃"],["9","30","3","다윗과 부하들이 성읍에 이르러 보니, 성읍은 불타 버리고 그들의 아내와 아들딸들은 이미 사로잡혀 가고 없었다.","다윗의 일행이 성에 이르러서 보니 성은 불타고 있었고 아내와 아들딸들은 이미 사로잡혀 간 뒤였다.","다윗과 그의 사람들이 성읍에 이르러 본즉 성읍이 불탔고 자기들의 아내와 자녀들이 사로잡혔는지라","다윗과 그의 사람들이 성에 이르러 본즉 성이 불탔고 자기들의 아내와 자녀들이 사로잡혔는지라","다윗과 그의 부하들이 돌아와서 그런 광경을 보고 너무 놀란 나머지 소리 지르며 울었는데, 지쳐서 기진맥진할 때까지 울고 또 울었다.","David and his men arrived at the city to find it burned to the ground and their wives, sons, and daughters taken captive.","So David and his men came to the city, and, behold, it was burned with fire; and their wives, and their sons, and their daughters, were taken captives.","When David and his men came to Ziklag, they found it destroyed by fire and their wives and sons and daughters taken captive.","Cum ergo venisset David et viri eius ad civitatem et invenissent eam succensam igni et uxores suas et filios suos et filias ductas esse captivas,","ויבא דוד ואנשיו אל העיר והנה שרופה באש ונשיהם ובניהם ובנתיהם נשבו׃"],["9","30","4","다윗과 그의 수하 군사들은 더 이상 울 기운조차 없을 때까지 목 놓아 울었다.","다윗과 함께 있던 무리는 소리쳐 울부짖다가 지쳐서 더 이상 울 기운조차 없게 되었다.","다윗과 그와 함께 한 백성이 울 기력이 없도록 소리를 높여 울었더라","다윗과 그와 함께한 백성이 울 기력이 없도록 소리를 높여 울었더라","(3절에 포함되어 있음)","Then David and those who were with him wept aloud until they could weep no more.","Then David and the people that were with him lifted up their voice and wept, until they had no more power to weep.","So David and his men wept aloud until they had no strength left to weep.","levaverunt David et populus, qui erat cum eo, voces suas et planxerunt, donec deficerent in eis lacrimae.","וישא דוד והעם אשר אתו את קולם ויבכו עד אשר אין בהם כח לבכות׃"],["9","30","5","다윗의 두 아내 이즈르엘 여자 아히노암과, 카르멜 사람 나발의 아내였던 아비가일도 사로잡혀 갔다.","다윗의 두 아내 이즈르엘 여자 아히노암과 가르멜 사람 나발의 아내였던 아비가일도 사로잡혀 갔다.","(다윗의 두 아내 이스르엘 여인 아히노암과 갈멜 사람 나발의 아내였던 아비가일도 사로잡혔더라)","(다윗의 두 아내 이스르엘 여인 아히노암과 갈멜 사람 나발의 아내 되었던 아비가일도 사로잡혔더라)","다윗의 두 아내, 곧 이스르엘 여인 아히노암과 갈멜 사람 나발의 미망인 아비가일도 포로로 잡혀갔다.","David’s two wives, Ahinoam of Jezreel and Abigail, the widow of Nabal from Carmel, had also been carried off.","And David's two wives were taken captives, Ahinoam the Jezreelitess, and Abigail the wife of Nabal the Carmelite.","David's two wives had been captured--Ahinoam of Jezreel and Abigail, the widow of Nabal of Carmel.","Siquidem et duae uxores David captivae ductae fuerant, Achinoam Iezrahelites et Abigail uxor Nabal de Carmel.","ושתי נשי דוד נשבו אחינעם היזרעלית ואביגיל אשת נבל הכרמלי׃"],["9","30","6","다윗은 큰 곤경에 빠졌다. 모든 군사가 저마다 아들딸을 잃고 마음이 쓰라려, 다윗에게 돌을 던져 죽이자고 수군거렸기 때문이다. 그러나 다윗은 주 자기의 하느님 덕분에 힘을 얻었다.","온 무리는 아들딸을 잃고 격분해서 다윗을 돌로 쳐죽이자고 수군거렸다. 그리하여 다윗은 곤경에 빠지게 되었으나 자기의 하느님 야훼를 믿고 힘을 얻었다.","백성들이 자녀들 때문에 마음이 슬퍼서 다윗을 돌로 치자 하니 다윗이 크게 다급하였으나 그의 하나님 여호와를 힘입고 용기를 얻었더라","백성이 각기 자녀들을 위하여 마음이 슬퍼서 다윗을 돌로 치자 하니 다윗이 크게 군급하였으나 그 하나님 여호와를 힘입고 용기를 얻었더라","그런데 이러한 사태는 미묘하게도 다윗에게 아주 불리하게 발전되었다. 왜냐하면 처자식을 잃고 흥분한 군중들이 다윗을 돌로 쳐죽이자고 덤벼들었기 때문이다. 그러나 이런 와중에서도 다윗은 자기의 하나님 여호와를 더욱 의지하였다.","Now David found himself in great danger, for the soldiers spoke of stoning him, so bitter were they over the fate of their sons and daughters. David took courage in the LORD his God","And David was greatly distressed; for the people spake of stoning him, because the soul of all the people was grieved, every man for his sons and for his daughters: but David encouraged himself in the LORD his God.","David was greatly distressed because the men were talking of stoning him; each one was bitter in spirit because of his sons and daughters. But David found strength in the LORD his God.","Et angustiatus est David valde; volebat enim eum populus lapidare, quia amara erat anima uniuscuiusque viri super filiis suis et filiabus. Confortatus est autem David in Domino Deo suo","ותצר לדוד מאד כי אמרו העם לסקלו כי מרה נפש כל העם איש על בנו ועל בנתיו ויתחזק דוד ביהוה אלהיו׃"],["9","30","7","다윗은 아히멜렉의 아들 에브야타르 사제에게, “에폿을 나에게 가져오시오.” 하였다. 에브야타르가 에폿을 다윗에게 가져오자,","다윗은 아히멜렉의 아들 에비아달 사제에게 부탁하여 에봇을 모셔 오게 하였다. 에비아달이 에봇을 다윗에게 모셔 오자","다윗이 아히멜렉의 아들 제사장 아비아달에게 이르되 원하건대 에봇을 내게로 가져오라 아비아달이 에봇을 다윗에게로 가져가매","다윗이 아히멜렉의 아들 제사장 아비아달에게 이르되 청컨대 에봇을 내게로 가져오라 아비아달이 에봇을 다윗에게로 가져오매","하나님께로부터 백 배 용기를 얻은 다윗이 제사장 아비아달에게 하나님의 뜻을 묻는 에봇을 가져오도록 명령하였다. 아비아달이 제비가 든 에봇을 가져오자","and said to Abiathar, the priest, son of Ahimelech, “Bring me the ephod!” When Abiathar brought him the ephod,","And David said to Abiathar the priest, Ahimelech's son, I pray thee, bring me hither the ephod. And Abiathar brought thither the ephod to David.","Then David said to Abiathar the priest, the son of Ahimelech, \"Bring me the ephod.\" Abiathar brought it to him,","et ait ad Abiathar sacerdotem filium Achimelech:  “Applica ad me ephod “. Et applicuit Abiathar ephod ad David.","ויאמר דוד אל אביתר הכהן בן אחימלך הגישה נא לי האפד ויגש אביתר את האפד אל דוד׃"],["9","30","8","다윗이 주님께 여쭈어 보았다. “이 강도떼를 쫓아가면 따라잡을 수 있겠습니까?” 주님께서 그에게 응답하셨다. “쫓아가거라. 반드시 따라잡을 뿐만 아니라 모든 것을 되찾을 수 있다.”","다윗이 야훼께 여쭈었다. \"이 강도떼를 쫓아가면 따라잡을 수 있겠습니까?\" 야훼께서 \"쫓아가거라. 따라잡을 뿐만 아니라 모든 것을 도로 찾을 수 있다.\" 하고 대답하시자","다윗이 여호와께 묻자와 이르되 내가 이 군대를 추격하면 따라잡겠나이까 하니 여호와께서 그에게 대답하시되 그를 쫓아가라 네가 반드시 따라잡고 도로 찾으리라","다윗이 여호와께 묻자와 가로되 내가 이 군대를 쫓아 가면 미치겠나이까 여호와께서 대답하시되 쫓아가라 네가 반드시 미치고 정녕 도로 찾으리라","다윗이 여호와께 여쭈었다. \"제가 앞서 떠난 저 약탈자들을 추격해야 되겠습니까? 제가 그들을 쫓아가면 따라잡을 수 있겠습니까?\" 그가 이런 응답을 받았다. \"네가 그들을 쫓으면 틀림없이 따라잡을 수 있거니와 잡혀간 사람들도 구할 수 있다.\"","David inquired of the LORD, “Shall I pursue these raiders? Can I overtake them?” The LORD answered him: Go in pursuit, for you will certainly overtake them and bring about a rescue.","And David enquired at the LORD, saying, Shall I pursue after this troop? shall I overtake them? And he answered him, Pursue: for thou shalt surely overtake them, and without fail recover all.","and David inquired of the LORD, \"Shall I pursue this raiding party? Will I overtake them?\" \"Pursue them,\" he answered. \"You will certainly overtake them and succeed in the rescue.\"","Et consuluit David Dominum dicens:  “Persequar latrunculos hos et comprehendam eos an non? “. Dixitque ei:  “Persequere; absque dubio enim comprehendes eos et excuties praedam “.","וישאל דוד ביהוה לאמר ארדף אחרי הגדוד הזה האשגנו ויאמר לו רדף כי השג תשיג והצל תציל׃"],["9","30","9","다윗은 자기가 데리고 있는 부하 육백 명을 이끌고 나섰다. 브소르 개울에 다다랐을 때 뒤에 처지는 이들은 거기에 남겨 두었다.","다윗은 부하 육백 명을 이끌고 나섰다. 브솔 개울에 다다랐을 때 뒤에 처지는 사람들이 생겼다.","이에 다윗과 또 그와 함께 한 육백 명이 가서 브솔 시내에 이르러 뒤떨어진 자를 거기 머물게 했으되","이에 다윗과 그와 함께한 육백명이 가서 브솔 시내에 이르러는 뒤떨어진 자를 거기 머물렀으되","다윗은 즉시 부하 600명을 거느리고 출동하였다. 군대가 브솔 시내쯤에 이르렀을 때 그중 200명은 이미 지쳐서 더 이상 험악한 브솔 골짜기를 건널 수 없게 되었다. 그래서 200명은 그곳에 남아 있고, 400명만이 다윗을 따라 그 시내를 건너 계속 추격하였다.","So David went off with his six hundred as far as the Wadi Besor, where those who were to remain behind halted.","So David went, he and the six hundred men that were with him, and came to the brook Besor, where those that were left behind stayed.","David and the six hundred men with him came to the Besor Ravine, where some stayed behind,","Abiit ergo David ipse et sescenti viri, qui erant cum eo, et venerunt usque ad torrentem Besor, et lassi quidam substiterunt.","וילך דוד הוא ושש מאות איש אשר אתו ויבאו עד נחל הבשור והנותרים עמדו׃"],["9","30","10","지쳐서 브소르 개울을 건너지 못하는 부하 이백 명은 그곳에 남겨 두고, 다윗은 부하 사백 명만 데리고 계속 쫓아갔다.","다윗은 지쳐서 브솔 개울을 건너지 못하는 이백 명은 거기에 남겨두고 사백 명만을 데리고 계속 쫓아갔다.","곧 피곤하여 브솔 시내를 건너지 못하는 이백 명을 머물게 했고 다윗은 사백 명을 거느리고 쫓아가니라","곧 피곤하여 브솔 시내를 건너지 못하는 이백인을 머물렀고 다윗은 사백인을 거느리고 쫓아가니라","(9절에 포함되어 있음)","David continued the pursuit with four hundred, but two hundred were too exhausted to cross the Wadi Besor and remained behind.","But David pursued, he and four hundred men: for two hundred abode behind, which were so faint that they could not go over the brook Besor.","for two hundred men were too exhausted to cross the ravine. But David and four hundred men continued the pursuit.","Persecutus est autem David ipse et quadringenti viri; et reliqui substiterunt: ducenti, qui lassi transire non poterant torrentem Besor.","וירדף דוד הוא וארבע מאות איש ויעמדו מאתים איש אשר פגרו מעבר את נחל הבשור׃"],["9","30","11","그러다가 벌판에서 어떤 이집트 사람을 만나게 되었는데, 부하들이 그를 다윗에게 데려왔다. 그들은 그에게 빵을 주어 먹게 하고 물도 마시게 하였다.","그러다가 벌판에서 이집트 사람 하나를 만나게 되었는데 부하들이 그를 다윗에게 데리고 와 빵을 주어 먹게 하고 물을 주어 마시게 하였다.","무리가 들에서 애굽 사람 하나를 만나 그를 다윗에게로 데려다가 떡을 주어 먹게 하며 물을 마시게 하고","무리가 들에서 애굽 사람 하나를 만나 다윗에게로 데려다가 떡을 주어 먹게 하며 물을 마시우고","그들은 도중에서 어떤 젊은이가 쓰러져 있는 것을 발견하였는데, 어찌나 많이 굶었는지 거의 다 죽어 가고 있었다. 군인들은 그를 업고 다윗에게로 와서 떡과 물을 주고,","An Egyptian was found in the open country and brought to David. They gave him food to eat and water to drink;","And they found an Egyptian in the field, and brought him to David, and gave him bread, and he did eat; and they made him drink water;","They found an Egyptian in a field and brought him to David. They gave him water to drink and food to eat--","Et invenerunt virum Aegyptium in agro et adduxerunt eum ad David; dederuntque ei panem, et comedit, et dederunt ei aquam bibere,","וימצאו איש מצרי בשדה ויקחו אתו אל דוד ויתנו לו לחם ויאכל וישקהו מים׃"],["9","30","12","또 말린 무화과 과자 한 조각과 건포도 두 뭉치도 주었다. 이것을 먹고 그는 정신을 차렸다. 그는 사흘 밤낮을 빵도 먹지 못하고 물도 마시지 못했던 것이다.","또 말린 무화과 한 뭉치와 건포도 두 덩이를 주었다. 그는 이것을 먹고 정신을 차렸다. 그는 사흘 밤낮을 음식이라고는 입에 대어보지도 못했던 것이다.","그에게 무화과 뭉치에서 뗀 덩이 하나와 건포도 두 송이를 주었으니 그가 밤낮 사흘 동안 떡도 먹지 못하였고 물도 마시지 못하였음이니라 그가 먹고 정신을 차리매","무화과 뭉치에서 뗀 덩이 하나와 건포도 두 송이를 주었으니 그가 낮 사흘, 밤 사흘을 떡도 먹지 못하였고 물도 마시지 못하였음이라 그가 먹고 정신을 차리매","또 맛있는 무화과 떡과 건포도 두사람 분을 내주었다. 그가 그것을 다 먹고 마시자 조금씩 기력을 되찾았다.","they also offered a cake of pressed figs and two cakes of pressed raisins. When he had eaten, he revived, for he had not taken food nor drunk water for three days and three nights.","And they gave him a piece of a cake of figs, and two clusters of raisins: and when he had eaten, his spirit came again to him: for he had eaten no bread, nor drunk any water, three days and three nights.","part of a cake of pressed figs and two cakes of raisins. He ate and was revived, for he had not eaten any food or drunk any water for three days and three nights.","sed et dederunt ei fragmen massae caricarum et duas ligaturas uvae passae. Quae cum comedisset, reversus est spiritus eius; non enim comederat panem neque biberat aquam tribus diebus et tribus noctibus.","ויתנו לו פלח דבלה ושני צמקים ויאכל ותשב רוחו אליו כי לא אכל לחם ולא שתה מים שלשה ימים ושלשה לילות׃"],["9","30","13","다윗이 그에게 “너는 누구네 집 사람이며 어디에서 왔느냐?” 하고 묻자, 그가 이렇게 대답하였다. “저는 이집트 아이로서 어떤 아말렉 사람의 종이었습니다. 그런데 병이 들자 사흘 전에 주인이 저를 버렸습니다.","다윗이 그에게 물었다. \"너는 누구네 집 사람이며 어디에서 왔느냐?\" 그가 대답하였다. \"저는 이집트 아이로서 어떤 아말렉 사람 집에서 종살이를 해왔습니다. 그런데 사흘 전에 병이 들자 주인이 저를 버리고 갔습니다.","다윗이 그에게 이르되 너는 누구에게 속하였으며 어디에서 왔느냐 하니 그가 이르되 나는 애굽 소년이요 아말렉 사람의 종이더니 사흘 전에 병이 들매 주인이 나를 버렸나이다","다윗이 그에게 이르되 너는 뉘게 속하였으며 어디로서냐 가로되 나는 애굽 소년이요 아말렉 사람의 종이더니 사흘 전에 병이 들매 주인이 나를 버렸나이다","그러자 다윗이 그에게 물었다. \"네 주인이 누구냐? 너는 어디서 살다가 이렇게 혼자 들녘에서 죽어 가게 되었느냐?\" 그가 대답하였다. \"저는 본래 애굽 사람인데, 아말렉 사람의 노예로 살았습니다. 이번에 주인을 따라 나섰다가 제가 병이 들어 더 이상 걷지 못하자, 주인이 저를 사흘 전에 이 들녘에 버리고 갔습니다.","Then David asked him, “To whom do you belong? Where did you come from?” “I am an Egyptian, the slave of an Amalekite,” he replied. “My master abandoned me three days ago because I fell sick.","And David said unto him, To whom belongest thou? and whence art thou? And he said, I am a young man of Egypt, servant to an Amalekite; and my master left me, because three days agone I fell sick.","David asked him, \"To whom do you belong, and where do you come from?\" He said, \"I am an Egyptian, the slave of an Amalekite. My master abandoned me when I became ill three days ago.","Dixit itaque ei David:  “Cuius es tu vel unde? “. Qui ait ei:  “Puer Aegyptius ego sum servus viri Amalecitae; dereliquit autem me dominus meus, quia aegrotare coepi nudiustertius.","ויאמר לו דוד למי אתה ואי מזה אתה ויאמר נער מצרי אנכי עבד לאיש עמלקי ויעזבני אדני כי חליתי היום שלשה׃"],["9","30","14","우리는 크렛족의 네겝과 유다 지방과 칼렙의 네겝을 습격하고, 치클락을 불태웠습니다.”","우리는 그렛 지방 남부와 유다 변경과 갈렙 지방 남부를 치고 시글락에 불을 놓았습니다.\"","우리가 그렛 사람의 남방과 유다에 속한 지방과 갈렙 남방을 침노하고 시글락을 불살랐나이다","우리가 그렛 사람의 남방과 유다에 속한 지방과 갈멜 남방을 침로하고 시글락을 불살랐나이다","우리는 남쪽에서 블레셋 족속의 땅을 약탈하고, 유다의 갈멜 족속이 사는 지역을 털었으며, 시글락에도 불을 놓았습니다.\"","We raided the Negeb of the Cherethites, the territory of Judah, and the Negeb of Caleb; and we set Ziklag on fire.”","We made an invasion upon the south of the Cherethites, and upon the coast which belongeth to Judah, and upon the south of Caleb; and we burned Ziklag with fire.","We raided the Negev of the Kerethites and the territory belonging to Judah and the Negev of Caleb. And we burned Ziklag.\"","Siquidem nos erupimus contra Nageb Cherethi et contra Nageb Iudae et Nageb Chaleb et Siceleg succendimus igni “.","אנחנו פשטנו נגב הכרתי ועל אשר ליהודה ועל נגב כלב ואת צקלג שרפנו באש׃"],["9","30","15","다윗이 그에게 “네가 나를 강도떼에게 데려다 줄 수 있겠느냐?” 하고 묻자, 그가 대답하였다. “저를 죽이지 않으시고 제 주인의 손에 넘기지도 않으시겠다고, 하느님의 이름으로 저에게 맹세해 주십시오. 그러면 제가 나리를 그 강도떼에게 모셔다 드리겠습니다.”","다윗이 그에게 물었다. \"내가 그 강도떼들 있는 곳으로 갈 터인데, 길잡이로 나설 생각이 없느냐?\" 그가 대답하였다. \"저를 죽이지 않으시고, 제 상전의 손에 넘기시지도 않으실 것을 하느님을 두고 맹세해 주십시오. 그러면 제가 그 강도떼들이 있는 곳으로 모시고 가겠습니다.\"","다윗이 그에게 이르되 네가 나를 그 군대로 인도하겠느냐 하니 그가 이르되 당신이 나를 죽이지도 아니하고 내 주인의 수중에 넘기지도 아니하겠다고 하나님의 이름으로 내게 맹세하소서 그리하면 내가 당신을 그 군대로 인도하리이다 하니라","다윗이 그에게 이르되 네가 나를 그 군대에게로 인도하겠느냐 그가 가로되 당신이 나를 죽이지도 아니하고 내 주인의 수중에 붙이지도 아니하겠다고 하나님으로 맹세하소서 그리하면 내가 당신을 이 군대에게로 인도하리이다","다윗이 또 물었다. \"네가 나의 길잡이가 되어 그 약탈자들이 있는 곳을 가르쳐 주겠느냐?\" 그가 대답하였다. \"저를 죽이지도 않고, 제 주인에게 넘겨 주지도 않겠다고 하나님의 이름을 걸고 맹세해 주시면 그 약탈자들이 있는 곳으로 모시고 가겠습니다.\"","David then asked him, “Will you lead me down to these raiders?” He answered, “Swear to me by God that you will not kill me or hand me over to my master, and I will lead you down to the raiders.”","And David said to him, Canst thou bring me down to this company? And he said, Swear unto me by God, that thou wilt neither kill me, nor deliver me into the hands of my master, and I will bring thee down to this company.","David asked him, \"Can you lead me down to this raiding party?\" He answered, \"Swear to me before God that you will not kill me or hand me over to my master, and I will take you down to them.\"","Dixitque ei David:  “Potes me ducere ad istum cuneum? “. Qui ait:  “Iura mihi per Deum quod non occidas me et non tradas me in manu domini mei, et ducam te ad cuneum istum “. Et iuravit ei David.","ויאמר אליו דוד התורדני אל הגדוד הזה ויאמר השבעה לי באלהים אם תמיתני ואם תסגרני ביד אדני ואורדך אל הגדוד הזה׃"],["9","30","16","이렇게 하여 그가 다윗과 함께 내려가 보니, 과연 그들이 온 땅에 흩어져 있었다. 그들은 필리스티아인들의 땅과 유다 땅에서 빼앗아 온 많은 전리품을 가지고 온통 먹고 마시며 흥청거리고 있었다.","그는 이렇게 다짐을 받고 길을 안내하였다. 그를 따라 내려가다가 보니 과연 아말렉 군이 그 일대에 깔려 있었다. 불레셋 지방과 유다 지방을 털어온 것들을 먹고 마시며 흥청거리고 있었던 것이다.","그가 다윗을 인도하여 내려가니 그들이 온 땅에 편만하여 블레셋 사람들의 땅과 유다 땅에서 크게 약탈하였음으로 말미암아 먹고 마시며 춤추는지라","그가 인도하여 내려가니 그들이 온 땅에 편만하여 블레셋 사람의 땅과 유다 땅에서 크게 탈취하였음을 인하여 먹고 마시며 춤추는지라","이리하여 다윗이 그의 안내를 받아 내려가보니, 아말렉 족속은 넓은 들에 흩어져서 약탈해 온 물건들을 벌여 놓고 정신없이 먹고 마시며 즐거워하고 있었다.","So he led them down, and there were the Amalekites lounging all over the ground, eating, drinking, and celebrating because of all the rich plunder they had taken from the land of the Philistines and from the land of Judah.","And when he had brought him down, behold, they were spread abroad upon all the earth, eating and drinking, and dancing, because of all the great spoil that they had taken out of the land of the Philistines, and out of the land of Judah.","He led David down, and there they were, scattered over the countryside, eating, drinking and reveling because of the great amount of plunder they had taken from the land of the Philistines and from Judah.","Qui cum duxisset eum, ecce illi discumbebant super faciem universae terrae comedentes et bibentes et festum celebrantes pro cuncta praeda et spoliis, quae ceperant de terra Philisthim et de terra Iudae.","וירדהו והנה נטשים על פני כל הארץ אכלים ושתים וחגגים בכל השלל הגדול אשר לקחו מארץ פלשתים ומארץ יהודה׃"],["9","30","17","다윗은 새벽부터 이튿날 저녁까지 그들을 쳐부수었는데, 그들 가운데 낙타를 타고 도망친 젊은이 사백 명을 빼고는 아무도 목숨을 구하지 못하였다.","다윗은 새벽부터 이튿날 해 질 무렵까지 그들을 쳐부수었는데 겨우 사백 명 정도가 낙타를 타고 도망쳤을 뿐이었다.","다윗이 새벽부터 이튿날 저물 때까지 그들을 치매 낙타를 타고 도망한 소년 사백 명 외에는 피한 사람이 없었더라","다윗이 새벽부터 이튿날 저물때까지 그들을 치매 약대 타고 도망한 소년 사백명 외에는 피한 사람이 없었더라","다윗은 그들을 다음날 새벽 동틀 때에 기습하여 이튿날 해질 때까지 모두 쳐죽였는데, 오직 낙타를 타고 도주한 젊은이 400명만을 죽이지 못하였다.","From dawn to sundown the next day David attacked them, allowing no one to escape except four hundred young men, who mounted their camels and fled.","And David smote them from the twilight even unto the evening of the next day: and there escaped not a man of them, save four hundred young men, which rode upon camels, and fled.","David fought them from dusk until the evening of the next day, and none of them got away, except four hundred young men who rode off on camels and fled.","Et percussit eos David die altera a diluculo usque ad vesperam, et non evasit ex eis quisquam, nisi quadringenti viri adulescentes, qui ascenderant camelos et fugerant.","ויכם דוד מהנשף ועד הערב למחרתם ולא נמלט מהם איש כי אם ארבע מאות איש נער אשר רכבו על הגמלים וינסו׃"],["9","30","18","그리하여 다윗은 아말렉족이 빼앗아 간 것을 모두 되찾고 두 아내도 되찾았다.","이리하여 다윗은 아말렉 군이 털어갔던 것을 모두 되찾고 두 아내도 살려내었다.","다윗이 아말렉 사람들이 빼앗아 갔던 모든 것을 도로 찾고 그의 두 아내를 구원하였고","다윗이 아말렉 사람의 취하였던 모든 것을 도로 찾고 그 두 아내를 구원하였고","다윗은 이렇게 아말렉 족속에게 약탈당하였던 물건과 짐승과 사람을 모두 되찾았고, 그의 두 아내도 되찾았다.","David recovered everything the Amalekites had taken, and he rescued his two wives.","And David recovered all that the Amalekites had carried away: and David rescued his two wives.","David recovered everything the Amalekites had taken, including his two wives.","Eruit ergo David omnia, quae ceperant Amalecitae, et duas uxores suas eruit.","ויצל דוד את כל אשר לקחו עמלק ואת שתי נשיו הציל דוד׃"],["9","30","19","어린이와 늙은이, 아들딸들과 전리품, 그리고 그들에게 빼앗겼던 모든 물건들 가운데 잃은 것이 하나도 없었다. 다윗은 모든 것을 도로 찾아왔다.","모든 사람들이 그들에게 약탈당했던 것을 되찾았다. 다윗은 높은 사람, 낮은 사람, 아들딸은 물론 그들에게 빼앗겼던 물건까지도 하나도 잃지 않고 모두 되찾았다.","그들이 약탈하였던 것 곧 무리의 자녀들이나 빼앗겼던 것은 크고 작은 것을 막론하고 아무것도 잃은 것이 없이 모두 다윗이 도로 찾아왔고","그들의 탈취하였던것 곧 무리의 자녀들이나 빼앗겼던 것의 대소를 물론하고 아무 것도 잃은 것이 없이 다윗이 도로 찾아왔고","다윗의 부하들도 잃어버린 것 하나없이 모두 되찾았다. 여자와 어린아이들도 모두 건강하게 되돌아오고, 약탈당하였던 물건도 모두 되찾았다.","Nothing was missing, small or great, plunder or sons or daughters, of all that the Amalekites had taken. David brought back everything.","And there was nothing lacking to them, neither small nor great, neither sons nor daughters, neither spoil, nor any thing that they had taken to them: David recovered all.","Nothing was missing: young or old, boy or girl, plunder or anything else they had taken. David brought everything back.","Nec defuit quidquam a parvo usque ad magnum tam de filiis quam de filiabus et de spoliis, et, quaecumque rapuerant, omnia reduxit David.","ולא נעדר להם מן הקטן ועד הגדול ועד בנים ובנות ומשלל ועד כל אשר לקחו להם הכל השיב דוד׃"],["9","30","20","양 떼와 소 떼도 모두 빼앗았다. 사람들은 앞에 서서 이 가축 떼를 몰고 오면서, “이것은 다윗의 전리품이다!” 하고 외쳤다.","그들은 양떼와 소떼를 빼앗아 앞세우고는 \"다윗의 전리품이다.\" 하면서 돌아왔다.","다윗이 또 양 떼와 소 떼를 다 되찾았더니 무리가 그 가축들을 앞에 몰고 가며 이르되 이는 다윗의 전리품이라 하였더라","또 양떼와 소떼를 다 탈취하였더니 무리가 그 가축 앞에 몰고 가며 가로되 이는 다윗의 탈취한 것이라 하였더라","다윗의 부하들은 아말렉 군대의 양 떼와 소 떼까지도 빼앗아 몰고 오면서 \"이것이 다윗의 전리품이다.\" 하고 외쳤다.","Moreover, David took all the sheep and oxen, and as they drove these before him, they shouted, “This is David’s plunder!”","And David took all the flocks and the herds, which they drave before those other cattle, and said, This is David's spoil.","He took all the flocks and herds, and his men drove them ahead of the other livestock, saying, \"This is David's plunder.\"","Cepit ergo David universos greges et armenta, et minaverunt ante faciem eius possessionem hanc dixeruntque:  “Haec est praeda David “.","ויקח דוד את כל הצאן והבקר נהגו לפני המקנה ההוא ויאמרו זה שלל דוד׃"],["9","30","21","다윗이, 너무 지쳐서 자기를 따르지 못하여 브소르 개울에 머무르게 했던 이백 명의 부하들에게 돌아오자, 그들이 나와서 다윗을 맞이하고 다윗과 함께 오는 사람들도 맞이하였다. 다윗도 그들에게 다가가 문안하였다.","지쳐서 자기를 따르지 못하고 뒤에 처져 있던 이백 명이 있는 브솔 개울로 다윗이 돌아오자 그들이 나와서 다윗과 다윗의 군대를 맞았다. 그리고 다윗에게 다가와 인사하였다.","다윗이 전에 피곤하여 능히 자기를 따르지 못하므로 브솔 시내에 머물게 한 이백 명에게 오매 그들이 다윗과 그와 함께 한 백성을 영접하러 나오는지라 다윗이 그 백성에게 이르러 문안하매","다윗이 이왕에 피곤하여 능히 자기를 따르지 못하므로 브솔 시내에 머물게 한 이백인에게 오매 그들이 다윗과 그와 함께한 백성을 영접하러 나온지라 다윗이 그 백성에게 이르러 문안하매","그들이 이렇게 개가를 부르며 브솔 시내 가까이에 이르자, 전에 지쳐서 그곳에 처져 있던 사람들 200명이 나와서 즐거이 맞아주었다. 다윗은 그러한 그들 모두에게 친절하게 대해 주었다.","When David came to the two hundred men who had been too exhausted to follow him, whom he had left behind at the Wadi Besor, they came out to meet David and the men with him. As David approached, he greeted them.","And David came to the two hundred men, which were so faint that they could not follow David, whom they had made also to abide at the brook Besor: and they went forth to meet David, and to meet the people that were with him: and when David came near to the people, he saluted them.","Then David came to the two hundred men who had been too exhausted to follow him and who were left behind at the Besor Ravine. They came out to meet David and the people with him. As David and his men approached, he greeted them.","Venit autem David ad ducentos viros, qui lassi substiterant nec sequi potuerant David, et residere eos iusserat in torrente Besor. Qui egressi sunt obviam David et populo, qui erat cum eo. Accedens autem David ad populum salutavit eos pacifice.","ויבא דוד אל מאתים האנשים אשר פגרו מלכת אחרי דוד וישיבם בנחל הבשור ויצאו לקראת דוד ולקראת העם אשר אתו ויגש דוד את העם וישאל להם לשלום׃"],["9","30","22","그런데 다윗과 함께 갔던 이들 가운데 악하고 고약한 자들이 모두 이렇게 말하였다. “이들은 우리와 함께 가지 않았으니, 우리가 되찾은 전리품은 하나도 줄 필요가 없습니다. 저마다 제 아내와 자식들만 데리고 가게 합시다.”","그런데 다윗과 같이 갔다 오던 자들 가운데 심술궂은 자들이 불평을 터뜨렸다. \"이 친구들은 우리와 함께 가지 않았으니 우리가 되찾은 전리품은 하나도 줄 필요가 없습니다. 그들에게는 처자들만 주어서 데리고 가게 합시다.\"","다윗과 함께 갔던 자들 가운데 악한 자와 불량배들이 다 이르되 그들이 우리와 함께 가지 아니하였은즉 우리가 도로 찾은 물건은 무엇이든지 그들에게 주지 말고 각자의 처자만 데리고 떠나가게 하라 하는지라","다윗과 함께 갔던 자 중에 악한 자와 비류들이 다 가로되 그들이 우리와 함께 가지 아니하였은즉 우리가 도로 찾은 물건은 무엇이든지 그들에게 주지 말고 각 사람의 처자만 주어서 데리고 떠나가게 하라 하는지라","그런데 다윗과 함께 출전하였던 사람들 가운데는 더러 야비하고 악의적인 건달패들도 있어서 다윗에게 이같이 주장하고 나섰다. \"그 사람들은 우리와 함께 나가서 싸우지 않았으니 전리품을 나누어 주지 맙시다. 우리가 그들에게 처자식만 되찾아 준 것도 과분하지 않습니까? 그러니 식구들을 데려가는 것만으로도 크게 기뻐하면서 돌아가게 합시다!\"","But all the greedy and worthless among those who had accompanied David said, “Since they did not accompany us, we will not give them anything from the plunder, except for each man’s wife and children.”","Then answered all the wicked men and men of Belial, of those that went with David, and said, Because they went not with us, we will not give them ought of the spoil that we have recovered, save to every man his wife and his children, that they may lead them away, and depart.","But all the evil men and troublemakers among David's followers said, \"Because they did not go out with us, we will not share with them the plunder we recovered. However, each man may take his wife and children and go.\"","Respondensque omnis vir pessimus et iniquus de viris, qui ierant cum David, dixit:  “Quia non venerunt nobiscum, non dabimus eis quidquam de praeda, quam eruimus; sed sufficiat unicuique uxor sua et filii; quos cum acceperint, recedant “.","ויען כל איש רע ובליעל מהאנשים אשר הלכו עם דוד ויאמרו יען אשר לא הלכו עמי לא נתן להם מהשלל אשר הצלנו כי אם איש את אשתו ואת בניו וינהגו וילכו׃"],["9","30","23","그러나 다윗이 말렸다. “형제들, 주님께서 우리에게 넘겨주신 것을 가지고 그렇게 해서는 안 되오. 그분께서 우리를 지켜 주시고 우리를 치러 온 강도떼를 우리 손에 넘겨주셨는데,","그러나 다윗은 \"동지들, 야훼께서 우리를 지켜주시지 않았소? 우리에게 쳐들어왔던 그 강도떼를 우리 손에 부쳐주시지 않았소? 그러니 야훼께서 우리에게 주신 것을 가지고 어떻게 그럴 수 있겠소?\" 하면서 잘라 말하였다.","다윗이 이르되 나의 형제들아 여호와께서 우리를 보호하시고 우리를 치러 온 그 군대를 우리 손에 넘기셨은즉 그가 우리에게 주신 것을 너희가 이같이 못하리라","다윗이 가로되 나의 형제들아 여호와께서 우리를 보호하시고 우리를 치러 온 그 군대를 우리 손에 붙이셨은즉 그가 우리에게 주신 것을 너희가 이같이 못하리라","그러나 다윗의 생각은 그들과 전혀 달랐다. \"나의 형제들이여, 그렇게 해서는 안 됩니다. 여호와께서 우리에게 어떻게 해주셨는가를 생각해 보십시오. 여호와께서는 우리를 보호해 주셨을뿐만 아니라, 우리를 약탈한 강도 떼들을 오히려 우리의 손에 넘겨주시어 그들을 약탈하게 하셨습니다.","But David said: “You must not do this, my brothers, after what the LORD has given us. The LORD has protected us and delivered into our hands the raiders that came against us.","Then said David, Ye shall not do so, my brethren, with that which the LORD hath given us, who hath preserved us, and delivered the company that came against us into our hand.","David replied, \"No, my brothers, you must not do that with what the LORD has given us. He has protected us and handed over to us the forces that came against us.","Dixit autem David:  “Non sic facietis, fratres mei, de his, quae tradidit Dominus nobis, et custodivit nos et dedit latrunculos, qui eruperant adversum nos, in manu nostra;","ויאמר דוד לא תעשו כן אחי את אשר נתן יהוה לנו וישמר אתנו ויתן את הגדוד הבא עלינו בידנו׃"],["9","30","24","이 일을 두고 누가 그대들의 말을 들을 것 같소? 싸우러 나갔던 사람의 몫이나 뒤에 남아 물건을 지킨 사람의 몫이나 다 똑같아야 하오. 똑같이 나눠 가져야 하오.”","\"결코 그럴 수 없소. 싸우러 나갔던 사람의 몫이나 뒤에 남아 물건을 지킨 사람의 몫이나 다 한가지로 똑같이 분배해야 하오.\"","이 일에 누가 너희에게 듣겠느냐 전장에 내려갔던 자의 분깃이나 소유물 곁에 머물렀던 자의 분깃이 동일할지니 같이 분배할 것이니라 하고","이 일에 누가 너희를 듣겠느냐 전장에 내려갔던 자의 분깃이나 소유물 곁에 머물렀던 자의 분깃이 일반일찌니 같이 분배할것이니라 하고","그러므로 여러분의 주장에 좋다고 따를 사람은 아무도 없을 것입니다. 오히려 옛 어른들의 말씀대로 \"나가서 싸우는 사람도 있고, 뒤에서 남아 지키는 사람도 있는 법이어서, 전리품은 누구에게나 공평히 분배되어야 한다\"고 누구나 말할 것입니다.\"","Who could agree with this proposal of yours? Rather, the share of the one who goes down to battle shall be the same as that of the one who remains with the baggage—they share alike.”","For who will hearken unto you in this matter? but as his part is that goeth down to the battle, so shall his part be that tarrieth by the stuff: they shall part alike.","Who will listen to what you say? The share of the man who stayed with the supplies is to be the same as that of him who went down to the battle. All will share alike.\"","nec audiet vos quisquam super sermone hoc; aaequa enim pars erit descendentis ad proelium et remanentis ad sarcinas, et similiter divident “.","ומי ישמע לכם לדבר הזה כי כחלק הירד במלחמה וכחלק הישב על הכלים יחדו יחלקו׃"],["9","30","25","그날 이후 다윗은 이것을 이스라엘의 규정과 법규로 세웠는데, 이것이 오늘날까지 이어 오고 있다.","다윗이 그 날 한 판결은 이스라엘의 관습법이 되어 지금까지 통용되고 있다.","그 날부터 다윗이 이것으로 이스라엘의 율례와 규례를 삼았더니 오늘까지 이르니라","그 날부터 다윗이 이것으로 이스라엘의 율례와 규례를 삼았더니 오늘까지 이르니라","그리하여 그때부터 이런 규정이 이스라엘에서 법칙으로 통용되었다. 다윗이 처음으로 적용하였던 이 법칙은 오늘날까지 그대로 통용되고 있다.","And from that day forward he made this a law and a custom in Israel, as it still is today.","And it was so from that day forward, that he made it a statute and an ordinance for Israel unto this day.","David made this a statute and ordinance for Israel from that day to this.","Et factum est hoc ex die illa et deinceps constitutum ut praeceptum et quasi lex in Israel usque ad diem hanc.","ויהי מהיום ההוא ומעלה וישמה לחק ולמשפט לישראל עד היום הזה׃"],["9","30","26","다윗은 치클락에 돌아온 다음, 자기 친구인 유다 원로들에게 전리품의 일부를 보내면서 이렇게 전하였다. “여기 주님의 원수들에게서 빼앗은 전리품 일부를 어르신들께 선물로 드립니다.”","다윗은 시글락에 돌아와 친분이 있는 유다 장로들에게 전리품을 보내면서 말을 전하였다. \"야훼의 원수들에게서 털어온 것을 선물로 드립니다. 받아주십시오.\"","다윗이 시글락에 이르러 전리품을 그의 친구 유다 장로들에게 보내어 이르되 보라 여호와의 원수에게서 탈취한 것을 너희에게 선사하노라 하고","다윗이 시글락에 이르러 탈취물을 그 친구 유다 장로들에게 보내어 가로되 보라 여호와의 원수에게서 탈취한 것을 너희에게 선사하노라 하고","시글락으로 돌아온 다윗은 전리품 중에서 가장 좋은 것을 골라 유다 지파의 장로들에게 선물로 보내면서 이렇게 인사말을 전하였다. \"다윗은 조국의 어른들께 문안드리면서 여호와의 원수들에게서 빼앗은 전리품을 여러 어른들께 선물로 드립니다.\"","When David came to Ziklag, he sent part of the plunder to his friends, the elders of Judah, saying, “This is a gift to you from the plunder of the enemies of the LORD,” namely,","And when David came to Ziklag, he sent of the spoil unto the elders of Judah, even to his friends, saying, Behold a present for you of the spoil of the enemies of the LORD;","When David arrived in Ziklag, he sent some of the plunder to the elders of Judah, who were his friends, saying, \"Here is a present for you from the plunder of the LORD'S enemies.\"","Venit ergo David in Siceleg et misit dona de praeda senioribus Iudae proximis suis dicens:  “Accipite benedictionem de praeda hostium Domini “;","ויבא דוד אל צקלג וישלח מהשלל לזקני יהודה לרעהו לאמר הנה לכם ברכה משלל איבי יהוה׃"],["9","30","27","그들은 베텔, 라못 네겝, 야티르,","베델, 네겝 지방의 라못, 야띨,","벧엘에 있는 자와 남방 라못에 있는 자와 얏딜에 있는 자와","벧엘에 있는 자와 남방 라못에 있는 자와 얏딜에 있는 자와","다윗이 선물을 보낸 성읍은 모두 헤브론 남쪽에 위치해 있었는데, ㄱ) 브두엘, 남방의 라못, 얏딜, (ㄱ. 원문에는 \"벧엘\"로 되어 있다. 그러나 벧엘은 유다에 있지 않기 때문에 \"브두엘\"로 판독한다)","to those in Bethel, Ramoth-negeb, Jattir,","To them which were in Bethel, and to them which were in south Ramoth, and to them which were in Jattir,","He sent it to those who were in Bethel, Ramoth Negev and Jattir;","his, qui erant in Bethul et qui in Ramathnageb et qui in Iether","לאשר בבית אל ולאשר ברמות נגב ולאשר ביתר׃"],["9","30","28","아로에르, 시프못, 에스트모아,","아로엘, 시브못, 에스드모아,","아로엘에 있는 자와 십못에 있는 자와 에스드모아에 있는 자와","아로엘에 있는 자와 십못에 있는 자와 에스드모아에 있는 자와","아로엘, 십못, 에스드모아,","Aroer, Siphmoth, Eshtemoa,","And to them which were in Aroer, and to them which were in Siphmoth, and to them which were in Eshtemoa,","to those in Aroer, Siphmoth, Eshtemoa","et qui in Aroer et qui in Sephamoth et qui in Esthemo","ולאשר בערער ולאשר בשפמות ולאשר באשתמע׃"],["9","30","29","라칼, 여라흐므엘족의 성읍들, 카인족의 성읍들,","라갈, 여라므엘의 여러 성, 켄의 여러 성,","라갈에 있는 자와 여라므엘 사람의 성읍들에 있는 자와 겐 사람의 성읍들에 있는 자와","라갈에 있는 자와 여라므엘 사람의 성읍들에 있는 자와 겐 사람의 성읍들에 있는 자와","라갈, 여라므엘 족속과 겐 족속이 사는 성읍들,","Racal, Jerahmeelite cities and Kenite cities,","And to them which were in Rachal, and to them which were in the cities of the Jerahmeelites, and to them which were in the cities of the Kenites,","and Racal; to those in the towns of the Jerahmeelites and the Kenites;","et qui in Carmel et qui in urbibus Ierameeli et qui in urbibus Ceni","ולאשר ברכל ולאשר בערי הירחמאלי ולאשר בערי הקיני׃"],["9","30","30","호르마, 보르 아산, 아탁,","호르마, 보라산, 아닥,","홀마에 있는 자와 고라산에 있는 자와 아닥에 있는 자와","홀마에 있는 자와 고라산에 있는 자와 아닥에 있는 자와 헤브론에 있는 자에게와 다윗과 그의 사람들의 왕래하던 모든 곳에 보내었더라","홀마, 고라산, 아닥과 헤브론, 그리고 다윗이 전에 부하들과 함께 숨어 다니던 곳들이다.","Hormah, Borashan, Athach,","And to them which were in Hormah, and to them which were in Chorashan, and to them which were in Athach,","to those in Hormah, Bor Ashan, Athach","et qui in Horma et qui in Borasan et qui in Athach","ולאשר בחרמה ולאשר בבור עשן ולאשר בעתך׃"],["9","30","31","헤브론, 그리고 다윗이 부하들을 거느리고 드나들던 모든 고장의 원로들이었다.","헤브론에 있는 장로들, 그리고 자기가 부하들을 거느리고 드나들던 모든 지방의 장로들에게 다윗은 선물을 보냈다.","헤브론에 있는 자에게와 다윗과 그의 사람들이 왕래하던 모든 곳에 보내었더라",null,null,"Hebron, and to all the places that David and his men had frequented.","And to them which were in Hebron, and to all the places where David himself and his men were wont to haunt.","and Hebron; and to those in all the other places where David and his men had roamed.","et qui in Hebron et reliquis locis, in quibus commoratus fuerat David ipse et viri eius.","ולאשר בחברון ולכל המקמות אשר התהלך שם דוד הוא ואנשיו׃"],["9","31","1","필리스티아인들이 이스라엘에 싸움을 걸어왔다. 이스라엘 군사들은 필리스티아인들 앞에서 도망치다가, 길보아 산에서 살해되어 쓰러졌다.","불레셋 군이 이스라엘을 공격하였다. 이스라엘 군은 불레셋 군에게 쫓겨 도망치다가 길보아 산에서 마구 쓰러져갔다.","블레셋 사람들이 이스라엘을 치매 이스라엘 사람들이 블레셋 사람들 앞에서 도망하여 길보아 산에서 엎드러져 죽으니라","블레셋 사람이 이스라엘을 치매 이스라엘 사람들이 블레셋 사람 앞에서 도망하여 길보아산에서 엎드러져 죽으니라","그 사이에 블레셋 군대는 이스라엘을 공격하여 길보아산으로 올라갔고, 이스라엘 군인들은 대부분 도망하다가 그 산에서 전사하였다.","Now the Philistines went to war against Israel, and the Israelites fled before them, and fell, slain on Mount Gilboa.","Now the Philistines fought against Israel: and the men of Israel fled from before the Philistines, and fell down slain in mount Gilboa.","Now the Philistines fought against Israel; the Israelites fled before them, and many fell slain on Mount Gilboa.","Philisthim autem pugnabant adversum Israel; et fugerunt viri Israel ante faciem Philisthim et ceciderunt interfecti in monte Gelboe.","ופלשתים נלחמים בישראל וינסו אנשי ישראל מפני פלשתים ויפלו חללים בהר הגלבע׃"],["9","31","2","필리스티아인들은 사울과 그의 아들들에게 바짝 따라붙어, 사울의 아들들인 요나탄과 아비나답과 말키수아를 쳐 죽였다.","불레셋 군은 계속 사울과 그의 아들들을 추격하여 사울의 세 아들 요나단, 아비나답, 말기수아를 쳐죽였다.","블레셋 사람들이 사울과 그의 아들들을 추격하여 사울의 아들 요나단과 아비나답과 말기수아를 죽이니라","블레셋 사람들이 사울과 그 아들들을 쫓아 미쳐서 사울의 아들 요나단과 아비나답과 말기수아를 죽이니라","이제 블레셋 군대는 마지막 여세를 몰아 사울과 그의 세 아들을 추격하였는데, 요나단과 아비나답과 말기수아가 그 자리에서 죽었다.","The Philistines pressed hard after Saul and his sons. When the Philistines had struck down Jonathan, Abinadab, and Malchishua, sons of Saul,","And the Philistines followed hard upon Saul and upon his sons; and the Philistines slew Jonathan, and Abinadab, and Melchishua, Saul's sons.","The Philistines pressed hard after Saul and his sons, and they killed his sons Jonathan, Abinadab and Malki-Shua.","Irrueruntque Philisthim in Saul et filios eius et percusserunt Ionathan et Abinadab et Melchisua filios Saul.","וידבקו פלשתים את שאול ואת בניו ויכו פלשתים את יהונתן ואת אבינדב ואת מלכי שוע בני שאול׃"],["9","31","3","사울 가까이에서 싸움이 격렬해졌다. 그러다가 적의 궁수들이 사울을 발견하였다. 사울은 그 궁수들에게 큰 부상을 입었다.","전세가 이미 다 기울어진 판에 사울마저 적의 화살에 맞아 부상당하고 말았다.","사울이 패전하매 활 쏘는 자가 따라잡으니 사울이 그 활 쏘는 자에게 중상을 입은지라","사울이 패전하매 활 쏘는 자가 따라 미치니 사울이 그 활 쏘는 자를 인하여 1)중상한지라 히, 심히 근심","그리고 사울마저 그를 쫓는 자들의 화살에 맞아 중상을 입었다.","the fury of the battle converged on Saul. Then the archers hit him, and he was severely wounded.","And the battle went sore against Saul, and the archers hit him; and he was sore wounded of the archers.","The fighting grew fierce around Saul, and when the archers overtook him, they wounded him critically.","Totumque pondus proelii versum est in Saul; et consecuti sunt eum viri arcu, et vulneratus est vehementer a sagittariis.","ותכבד המלחמה אל שאול וימצאהו המורים אנשים בקשת ויחל מאד מהמורים׃"],["9","31","4","사울이 자기 무기병에게 명령하였다. “칼을 뽑아 나를 찔러라. 그러지 않으면 할례 받지 않은 저자들이 와서 나를 찌르고 희롱할 것이다.” 그러나 무기병은 너무 두려워서 찌르려 하지 않았다. 그러자 사울은 자기 칼을 세우고 그 위에 엎어졌다.","사울은 자기의 무기 당번에게 일렀다. \"저 오랑캐들에게 붙잡혀 욕을 당할 수는 없다. 차라리 네가 칼을 뽑아 나를 찔러라.\" 그러나 무기 당번은 감히 칼을 뽑지 못하고 망설였다. 그러자 사울은 손수 칼을 뽑아 자결하였다.","그가 무기를 든 자에게 이르되 네 칼을 빼어 그것으로 나를 찌르라 할례 받지 않은 자들이 와서 나를 찌르고 모욕할까 두려워하노라 하나 무기를 든 자가 심히 두려워하여 감히 행하지 아니하는지라 이에 사울이 자기의 칼을 뽑아서 그 위에 엎드러지매","그가 병기 든 자에게 이르되 네 칼을 빼어 나를 찌르라 할례 없는 자들이 와서 나를 찌르고 모욕할까 두려워하노라 하나 병기 든 자가 심히 두려워하여 즐겨 행치 아니하는지라 이에 사울이 자기 칼을 취하고 그 위에 엎드러지매","다급해진 사울은 무기를 들고 다니는 경호원에게 자기를 죽여 달라고 명령하였다. \"네 칼을 뽑아 어서 나를 죽여 다오! 어찌 내가 저 할례받지 못한 자들에게 잡혀 조롱당할 수 있겠느냐?\" 그런데도 그 경호원은 여호와께서 기름 부어 세우신 왕을 감히 칼을 들어 치지 못하였다. 그러자 사울은 경호원의 손에서 칼을 빼앗아 스스로 목숨을 끊었다.","Saul said to his armor-bearer, “Draw your sword and run me through; otherwise these uncircumcised will come and abuse me.” But the armor-bearer, badly frightened, refused, so Saul took his own sword and fell upon it.","Then said Saul unto his armourbearer, Draw thy sword, and thrust me through therewith; lest these uncircumcised come and thrust me through, and abuse me. But his armourbearer would not; for he was sore afraid. Therefore Saul took a sword, and fell upon it.","Saul said to his armor-bearer, \"Draw your sword and run me through, or these uncircumcised fellows will come and run me through and abuse me.\" But his armor-bearer was terrified and would not do it; so Saul took his own sword and fell on it.","Dixitque Saul ad armigerum suum:  “Evagina gladium tuum et percute me, ne forte veniant incircumcisi isti et confodiant me et illudant mihi “. Et noluit armiger eius; erat enim nimio timore perterritus. Arripuit itaque Saul gladium et irruit super eum.","ויאמר שאול לנשא כליו שלף חרבך ודקרני בה פן יבואו הערלים האלה ודקרני והתעללו בי ולא אבה נשא כליו כי ירא מאד ויקח שאול את החרב ויפל עליה׃"],["9","31","5","사울이 죽는 것을 보고, 무기병도 칼 위에 엎어져 그와 함께 죽었다.","사울이 죽는 것을 보고는 무기 당번도 자기 칼을 뽑아 자결하였다.","무기를 든 자가 사울이 죽음을 보고 자기도 자기 칼 위에 엎드러져 그와 함께 죽으니라","병기 든 자가 사울의 죽음을 보고 자기도 자기 칼 위에 엎드러져 그와 함께 죽으니라","사울이 이렇게 자결하자, 경호원도 따라서 똑같이 자결하였다.","When the armor-bearer saw that Saul was dead, he too fell upon his sword and died with him.","And when his armourbearer saw that Saul was dead, he fell likewise upon his sword, and died with him.","When the armor-bearer saw that Saul was dead, he too fell on his sword and died with him.","Quod cum vidisset armiger eius, videlicet quod mortuus esset Saul, irruit etiam ipse super gladium suum et mortuus est cum eo.","וירא נשא כליו כי מת שאול ויפל גם הוא על חרבו וימת עמו׃"],["9","31","6","그리하여 사울과 그의 세 아들과 무기병을 비롯하여 사울의 모든 부하가 그날 다 함께 죽고 말았다.","그리하여 그 날, 사울과 그의 세 아들과 무기 당번과 사울의 부하들이 모두 죽고 말았다.","사울과 그의 세 아들과 무기를 든 자와 그의 모든 사람이 다 그 날에 함께 죽었더라","사울과 그 세 아들과 병기 든 자와 그의 모든 사람이 다 그 날에 함께 죽었더라","이리하여 사울과 그의 세 아들과 경호원과 부하들이 모두 한날에 죽고 말았다.","Thus Saul, his three sons, and his armor-bearer died together on that same day.","So Saul died, and his three sons, and his armourbearer, and all his men, that same day together.","So Saul and his three sons and his armor-bearer and all his men died together that same day.","Mortuus est ergo Saul et tres filii eius et armiger illius et universi viri eius in die illa pariter.","וימת שאול ושלשת בניו ונשא כליו גם כל אנשיו ביום ההוא יחדו׃"],["9","31","7","이스라엘 군사들이 도망치고 사울과 그 아들들이 죽는 것을 보고, 골짜기 건너편과 요르단 건너편에 있던 이스라엘 사람들도 성읍들을 버리고 도망쳤다. 그러자 필리스티아인들이 거기에 와서 살았다.","그 곳 골짜기 건너편과 요르단 강 건너편에 있던 이스라엘 사람들이 이스라엘 군이 도주하고 사울의 부자마저 전사하는 것을 보고 모두 저희의 성읍들을 버리고 도망치자 불레셋 사람들이 거기에 와서 살게 되었다.","골짜기 저쪽에 있는 이스라엘 사람과 요단 건너쪽에 있는 자들이 이스라엘 사람들이 도망한 것과 사울과 그의 아들들이 죽었음을 보고 성읍들을 버리고 도망하매 블레셋 사람들이 이르러 거기에서 사니라","골짜기 저편에 있는 이스라엘 사람과 요단 건너편에 있는 자들이 이스라엘 사람들의 도망한 것과 사울과 그 아들들의 죽었음을 보고 성읍들을 버리고 도망하매 블레셋 사람들이 이르러 거기 거하니라","이스라엘 군대가 도망하면서 전멸당하고 사울과 그의 아들들마저 모두 전사하자, 이스르엘 평원과 요단 강가에 있는 주민들이 이 소식을 듣고는 자기들도 성읍을 버리고 도주하였다. 그래서 블레셋 군인들이 텅 빈 성읍으로 들어와 살았다.","When the Israelites on the slope of the valley and those along the Jordan saw that the men of Israel had fled and that Saul and his sons were dead, they abandoned their cities and fled. Then the Philistines came and lived in those cities.","And when the men of Israel that were on the other side of the valley, and they that were on the other side Jordan, saw that the men of Israel fled, and that Saul and his sons were dead, they forsook the cities, and fled; and the Philistines came and dwelt in them.","When the Israelites along the valley and those across the Jordan saw that the Israelite army had fled and that Saul and his sons had died, they abandoned their towns and fled. And the Philistines came and occupied them.","Videntes autem viri Israel, qui erant trans vallem et trans Iordanem, quod fugissent viri Israelitae et quod mortuus esset Saul et filii eius, reliquerunt civitates suas et fugerunt. Veneruntque Philisthim et habitaverunt ibi.","ויראו אנשי ישראל אשר בעבר העמק ואשר בעבר הירדן כי נסו אנשי ישראל וכי מתו שאול ובניו ויעזבו את הערים וינסו ויבאו פלשתים וישבו בהן׃"],["9","31","8","그 이튿날 필리스티아인들이 와서 살해된 이들의 옷을 벗기다가, 사울과 그의 세 아들이 길보아 산에 쓰러져 있는 것을 발견하였다.","그 이튿날 불레셋 군은 길보아 산에 올라, 죽은 군인들의 옷을 벗기다가 사울과 그의 세 아들이 쓰러져 있는 것을 발견하였다.","그 이튿날 블레셋 사람들이 죽은 자를 벗기러 왔다가 사울과 그의 세 아들이 길보아 산에서 죽은 것을 보고","그 이튿날 블레셋 사람들이 죽은 자를 벗기러 왔다가 사울과 그 세 아들이 길보아 산에서 죽은 것을 보고","그 다음날 전사자들의 옷을 벗기러 온 블레셋 군인들이 길보아산에서 사울왕과 그의 세 아들의 시체를 발견하였다.","On the following day, when the Philistines came to strip the slain, they found Saul and his three sons fallen on Mount Gilboa.","And it came to pass on the morrow, when the Philistines came to strip the slain, that they found Saul and his three sons fallen in mount Gilboa.","The next day, when the Philistines came to strip the dead, they found Saul and his three sons fallen on Mount Gilboa.","Facta autem die altera, venerunt Philisthim, ut spoliarent interfectos, et invenerunt Saul et tres filios eius iacentes in monte Gelboe.","ויהי ממחרת ויבאו פלשתים לפשט את החללים וימצאו את שאול ואת שלשת בניו נפלים בהר הגלבע׃"],["9","31","9","그들은 사울의 머리를 자르고 갑옷을 벗긴 다음, 필리스티아인들의 땅 곳곳으로 사람들을 보내어 저희 우상들의 신전과 백성에게 기쁜 소식을 알렸다.","그들은 사울의 목을 자르고 갑옷을 벗겨 불레셋 땅 방방곡곡에 보내어 저희의 우상과 백성에게 기쁜 소식을 알렸다.","사울의 머리를 베고 그의 갑옷을 벗기고 자기들의 신당과 백성에게 알리기 위하여 그것을 블레셋 사람들의 땅 사방에 보내고","사울의 머리를 베고 그 갑옷을 벗기고 자기들의 신당과 백성에게 전파하기 위하여 그것을 블레셋 사람의 땅 사방에 보내고","그들은 쓰러져 있는 왕의 머리를 자르고, 그의 갑옷과 장비를 수거하였다. 그들은 이 승전의 기쁨을 자기들의 신과 온 백성에게 알리기 위하여 약탈한 물건들을 전령에게 주어 블레셋 전국으로 돌아다니며 보이게 하였다.","They cut off Saul’s head and stripped him of his armor; these they sent throughout the land of the Philistines to bring the good news to the temple of their idols and to the people.","And they cut off his head, and stripped off his armour, and sent into the land of the Philistines round about, to publish it in the house of their idols, and among the people.","They cut off his head and stripped off his armor, and they sent messengers throughout the land of the Philistines to proclaim the news in the temple of their idols and among their people.","Et praeciderunt caput Saul et exspoliaverunt eum armis, quae miserunt in terram Philisthinorum per circuitum, ut annuntiaretur in templis idolorum suorum et populo.","ויכרתו את ראשו ויפשיטו את כליו וישלחו בארץ פלשתים סביב לבשר בית עצביהם ואת העם׃"],["9","31","10","그러고 나서 그들은 그의 갑옷을 아스타롯 신전에 보관하고, 시체는 벳 산 성벽에 매달아 놓았다.","그리고 나서 그가 입었던 갑옷은 아스다롯 신당에 보관하고 시체는 벳산 성벽에 못박아 달아놓았다.","그의 갑옷은 아스다롯의 집에 두고 그의 시체는 벧산 성벽에 못 박으매","그 갑옷은 아스다롯의 집에 두고 그 시체는 벧산 성벽에 못 박으매","그러고 나서 사울의 갑옷을 아스다롯의 신전에 보관하고, 사울과 그 아들들의 시체는 벧산 성벽에 못박아 달아두었다.","They put his armor in the temple of Astarte but impaled his body on the wall of Beth-shan.","And they put his armour in the house of Ashtaroth: and they fastened his body to the wall of Bethshan.","They put his armor in the temple of the Ashtoreths and fastened his body to the wall of Beth Shan.","Et posuerunt arma eius in templo Astharoth, corpus vero eius suspenderunt in muro Bethsan.","וישמו את כליו בית עשתרות ואת גויתו תקעו בחומת בית שן׃"],["9","31","11","야베스 길앗의 주민들은 필리스티아인들이 사울에게 한 일을 전해 들었다.","야베스 길르앗에 살던 사람들은 불레셋 군이 사울을 이렇게 해치웠다는 소식을 듣고","길르앗 야베스 주민들이 블레셋 사람들이 사울에게 행한 일을 듣고","길르앗 야베스 거민들이 블레셋 사람들의 사울에게 행한 일을 듣고","길르앗야베스 주민들은 비참하게 죽어 간 사울의 소식을 듣고, 전에 사울이 암몬 족속의 손에서 구해 준 은혜에 보답하고자","When the inhabitants of Jabesh-gilead heard what the Philistines had done to Saul,","And when the inhabitants of Jabeshgilead heard of that which the Philistines had done to Saul;","When the people of Jabesh Gilead heard of what the Philistines had done to Saul,","Quod cum audissent habitatores Iabes Galaad, quaecumque fecerant Philisthim Saul,","וישמעו אליו ישבי יביש גלעד את אשר עשו פלשתים לשאול׃"],["9","31","12","그러자 그곳의 용사들이 모두 나섰다. 그들은 밤새도록 걸어가서, 사울의 주검과 그 아들들의 주검을 벳 산 성벽에서 내려다가, 야베스로 돌아와 거기에서 불태웠다.","용사들이 모두 길을 떠나 밤을 도와 벳산에 이르러 사울 부자의 시체를 그 곳 성벽에서 내려다가 야베스로 옮겨 화장한 다음,","모든 장사들이 일어나 밤새도록 달려가서 사울의 시체와 그의 아들들의 시체를 벧산 성벽에서 내려 가지고 야베스에 돌아가서 거기서 불사르고","모든 장사가 일어나 밤새도록 가서 사울과 그 아들들의 시체를 벧산 성벽에서 취하여 가지고 야베스에 돌아와서 거기서 불사르고","자진해서 일어섰다. 그들은 야음을 틈타 밤새도록 벧산으로가서 성벽에 매달린 시체들을 내려가지고 야베스로 돌아와서 화장하였다.","all their warriors set out and traveled through the night; they removed the bodies of Saul and his sons from the wall of Beth-shan, and, returning to Jabesh, burned them.","All the valiant men arose, and went all night, and took the body of Saul and the bodies of his sons from the wall of Bethshan, and came to Jabesh, and burnt them there.","all their valiant men journeyed through the night to Beth Shan. They took down the bodies of Saul and his sons from the wall of Beth Shan and went to Jabesh, where they burned them.","surrexerunt omnes viri fortissimi et ambulaverunt tota nocte et tulerunt cadaver Saul et cadavera filiorum eius de muro Bethsan; veneruntque Iabes et combusserunt ea ibi.",null],["9","31","13","그다음 그들은 그 뼈를 추려 야베스에 있는 에셀 나무 밑에 묻고, 이레 동안 단식하였다.","그 뼈를 야베스에 있는 위성류나무 아래 매장하고 칠 일간 단식하였다.","그의 뼈를 가져다가 야베스 에셀 나무 아래에 장사하고 칠 일 동안 금식하였더라","그 뼈를 가져다가 야베스 에셀나무 아래 장사하고 칠일을 금식하였더라","그리고 그 유골만 거두어다가 야베스에 있는 위성류나무 아래에 묻고, 사울의 죽음을 슬퍼하면서 7일 동안 단식하였다.","Then they took their bones and buried them under the tamarisk tree in Jabesh, and fasted for seven days.","And they took their bones, and buried them under a tree at Jabesh, and fasted seven days.","Then they took their bones and buried them under a tamarisk tree at Jabesh, and they fasted seven days.","Et tulerunt ossa eorum et sepelierunt sub myrice in Iabes et ieiunaverunt septem diebus.",null],["10","1","1","사울이 죽은 뒤에, 다윗은 아말렉을 쳐부수고 돌아와 치클락에서 이틀을 묵었다.","사울이 죽은 뒤였다. 다윗이 아말렉 군을 쳐부수고 시글락에 돌아와서 이틀을 묵고,","사울이 죽은 후에 다윗이 아말렉 사람을 쳐죽이고 돌아와 다윗이 시글락에서 이틀을 머물더니","사울의 죽은 후라 다윗이 아말렉 사람을 도륙하고 돌아와서 시글락에서 이틀을 유하더니","사울이 블레셋 족속과 싸우다가 죽은 뒤였다. 다윗은 그동안에 아말렉 족속을 치고 시글락으로 돌아와서 이틀을 지냈다.","After the death of Saul, David returned from his victory over the Amalekites and stayed in Ziklag two days.","Now it came to pass after the death of Saul, when David was returned from the slaughter of the Amalekites, and David had abode two days in Ziklag;","After the death of Saul, David returned from defeating the Amalekites and stayed in Ziklag two days.","Factum est autem, postquam mortuus est Saul, ut David re verteretur a caede Amalec et maneret in Siceleg dies duos.","ויהי אחרי מות שאול ודוד שב מהכות את העמלק וישב דוד בצקלג ימים שנים׃"],["10","1","2","사흘째 되는 날, 어떤 사람이 옷은 찢어지고 머리에는 흙이 묻은 채 사울의 진영에서 찾아왔다. 그가 다윗에게 나아가 땅에 엎드려 절을 하자,","사흘째 되던 날, 사울 진영의 한 사람이, 옷이 찢기고, 머리는 흙투성이가 된 채 찾아왔다. 그가 다윗 앞에 나아가 땅에 엎드려 절을 하자,","사흘째 되는 날에 한 사람이 사울의 진영에서 나왔는데 그의 옷은 찢어졌고 머리에는 흙이 있더라 그가 다윗에게 나아와 땅에 엎드려 절하매","제 삼일에 한 사람이 사울의 진에서 나왔는데 그 옷은 찢어졌고 머리에는 흙이 있더라 저가 다윗에게 나아와 땅에 엎드려 절하매","그런데 사흘째 되던 날 사울의 진지에서 한 사람이 다윗을 찾아왔다. 그는 사울의 죽음을 슬퍼하는 표시로 자신의 옷을 갈기갈기 찢고 머리에는 흙을 끼얹은 채 다윗 앞에 나아와 땅에 엎드려 절하였다.","On the third day a man came from the field of battle, one of Saul’s people, with his garments torn and his head covered with dirt. Going to David, he fell to the ground in homage.","It came even to pass on the third day, that, behold, a man came out of the camp from Saul with his clothes rent, and earth upon his head: and so it was, when he came to David, that he fell to the earth, and did obeisance.","On the third day a man arrived from Saul's camp, with his clothes torn and with dust on his head. When he came to David, he fell to the ground to pay him honor.","In die autem tertia apparuit homo veniens de castris Saul veste conscissa et pulvere aspersus caput; et, ut venit ad David, cecidit super faciem suam et adoravit.","ויהי ביום השלישי והנה איש בא מן המחנה מעם שאול ובגדיו קרעים ואדמה על ראשו ויהי בבאו אל דוד ויפל ארצה וישתחו׃"],["10","1","3","다윗이 “너는 어디에서 왔느냐?” 하고 물었다. 그가 다윗에게 “이스라엘의 진영에서 빠져나왔습니다.” 하고 대답하였다.","다윗이 물었다. \"너는 어디에서 온 사람이냐?\" \"저는 이스라엘 진영에서 가까스로 살아 남아 온 자입니다.\" 하고 그가 대답하자","다윗이 그에게 묻되 너는 어디서 왔느냐 하니 대답하되 이스라엘 진영에서 도망하여 왔나이다 하니라","다윗이 저에게 묻되 너는 어디서 왔느냐 대답하되 이스라엘 진에서 도망하여 왔나이다","다윗이 그에게 \"네가 어디서 오느냐?\" 고 묻자 그가 이렇게 대답하였다. \"저는 이스라엘 진지에서 싸우다가 블레셋 족속의 포위망을 뚫고 간신히 빠져 나왔습니다.\"","David asked him, “Where have you come from?” He replied, “From the Israelite camp: I have escaped.”","And David said unto him, From whence comest thou? And he said unto him, Out of the camp of Israel am I escaped.","\"Where have you come from?\" David asked him. He answered, \"I have escaped from the Israelite camp.\"","Dixitque ad eum David:  “Unde venis? “. Qui ait ad eum:  “De castris Israel fugi “.","ויאמר לו דוד אי מזה תבוא ויאמר אליו ממחנה ישראל נמלטתי׃"],["10","1","4","다윗이 “무슨 일이 있었는지 어서 말해 보아라.” 하자, 그가 대답하였다. “싸움터에서 군사들이 달아났습니다. 또 많은 군사가 쓰러져 죽었는데, 사울 임금님과 요나탄 왕자님도 돌아가셨습니다.”","다윗은 일이 어떻게 되었는지 어서 말하라고 다그쳤다. \"이스라엘 군은 싸움터에서 많은 전사자를 내고 다 도망쳤습니다. 사울과 요나단 부자도 전사했습니다.\" 하고 그가 대답하였다.","다윗이 그에게 이르되 일이 어떻게 되었느냐 너는 내게 말하라 그가 대답하되 군사가 전쟁 중에 도망하기도 하였고 무리 가운데에 엎드러져 죽은 자도 많았고 사울과 그의 아들 요나단도 죽었나이다 하는지라","다윗이 가로되 일이 어떻게 되었느뇨 너는 내게 고하라 저가 대답하되 군사가 전쟁 중에서 도망하기도 하였고 무리 중에 엎드러져 죽은 자도 많았고 사울과 그 아들 요나단도 죽었나이다","다윗이 재차 물었다. \"전세가 어떻게 되었느냐? 어서 자세히 말하여라!\" 그가 전하였다. \"우리 이스라엘 군인들은 모두 패주하였으나 대부분 길보아산에서 전사하였고 사울과 요나단도 죽었습니다.\"","“What happened?” David said. “Tell me.” He answered that the soldiers had fled the battle and many of them had fallen and were dead; and that Saul and his son Jonathan were dead.","And David said unto him, How went the matter? I pray thee, tell me. And he answered, That the people are fled from the battle, and many of the people also are fallen and dead; and Saul and Jonathan his son are dead also.","\"What happened?\" David asked. \"Tell me.\" He said, \"The men fled from the battle. Many of them fell and died. And Saul and his son Jonathan are dead.\"","Et dixit ad eum David:  “Quid enim factum est? Indica mihi “. Qui ait:  “Fugit populus ex proelio, et multi corruentes e populo mortui sunt; sed et Saul et Ionathan filius eius interierunt “.","ויאמר אליו דוד מה היה הדבר הגד נא לי ויאמר אשר נס העם מן המלחמה וגם הרבה נפל מן העם וימתו וגם שאול ויהונתן בנו מתו׃"],["10","1","5","소식을 전해 준 젊은이에게 다윗이, “사울 임금님과 요나탄 왕자님도 돌아가신 줄을 어떻게 알았느냐?” 하고 물었다.","이 말을 듣고, 다윗은 소식을 전해 준 그 젊은이에게 사울과 요나단 부자가 전사한 사실을 어떻게 알았느냐고 물었다.","다윗이 자기에게 알리는 청년에게 묻되 사울과 그의 아들 요나단이 죽은 줄을 네가 어떻게 아느냐","다윗이 자기에게 고하는 소년에게 묻되 사울과 그 아들 요나단의 죽은 줄을 네가 어떻게 아느냐","다윗은 사울의 전사 소식을 전한 그 젊은이에게 다시 물었다. \"사울이 요나단과 함께 죽었다는데, 네가 어디서 그것을 알았느냐?\"","Then David said to the youth who was reporting to him, “How do you know that Saul and his son Jonathan are dead?”","And David said unto the young man that told him, How knowest thou that Saul and Jonathan his son be dead?","Then David said to the young man who brought him the report, \"How do you know that Saul and his son Jonathan are dead?\"","Dixitque David ad adulescentem, qui nuntiabat ei:  “Unde scis quia mortuus est Saul et Ionathan filius eius? “.","ויאמר דוד אל הנער המגיד לו איך ידעת כי מת שאול ויהונתן בנו׃"],["10","1","6","그러자 소식을 전해 준 젊은이가 다윗에게 대답하였다. “제가 우연히 길보아 산에 올라갔다가 사울 임금님께서 창에 몸을 기대고 서 계시는 것을 보았습니다. 그런데 병거와 기병들이 그분을 바짝 뒤쫓고 있었습니다.","젊은이는 이렇게 대답하였다. \"저는 길보아 산에 올라갔다가 사울이 창으로 몸을 버티고 있는 것을 보았는데, 적의 병거와 기병대가 뒤쫓고 있었습니다.","그에게 알리는 청년이 이르되 내가 우연히 길보아 산에 올라가 보니 사울이 자기 창에 기대고 병거와 기병은 그를 급히 따르는데","그에게 고하는 소년이 가로되 내가 우연히 길보아산에 올라보니 사울이 자기 창을 의지하였고 병거와 기병은 저를 촉급히 따르는데","그가 설명하였다. \"제가 우연히 길보아산으로 올라갔다가 사울이 자기의 창자루에 의지하고 간신히 서 있는 것을 보았습니다. 그때에 블레셋 족속의 전차와 마병이 그를 향해 가까이 달려오고 있었습니다.","The youth reporting to him replied: “I happened to find myself on Mount Gilboa and saw Saul leaning on his spear, with chariots and horsemen closing in on him.","And the young man that told him said, As I happened by chance upon mount Gilboa, behold, Saul leaned upon his spear; and, lo, the chariots and horsemen followed hard after him.","\"I happened to be on Mount Gilboa,\" the young man said, \"and there was Saul, leaning on his spear, with the chariots and riders almost upon him.","Et ait adulescens, qui narrabat ei:  “Casu veni in montem Gelboe, et Saul incumbebat super hastam suam. Porro currus et equites appropinquabant ei,","ויאמר הנער המגיד לו נקרא נקריתי בהר הגלבע והנה שאול נשען על חניתו והנה הרכב ובעלי הפרשים הדבקהו׃"],["10","1","7","그분은 뒤돌아보시다가 저를 발견하고 부르셨습니다. 제가 ‘예!’ 하고 대답하니,","사울은 뒤돌아보고 제가 있는 것을 알고는 저를 불렀습니다. 제가 왜 그러시느냐고 대답했더니,","사울이 뒤로 돌아 나를 보고 부르시기로 내가 대답하되 내가 여기 있나이다 한즉","사울이 뒤로 돌이켜 나를 보고 부르시기로 내가 대답하되 내가 여기 있나이다 한즉","사울이 고개를 돌리다가 저를 보고서는 즉시 오라고 불렀습니다. 그래서 제가 다가가서 \"임금님, 제가 여기 있습니다!\" 하고 대답하였습니다.","He turned around and saw me, and called me to him. When I said, ‘Here I am,’","And when he looked behind him, he saw me, and called unto me. And I answered, Here am I.","When he turned around and saw me, he called out to me, and I said, 'What can I do?'","et conversus post tergum suum vidensque me vocavit. Cui cum respondissem: Adsum,","ויפן אחריו ויראני ויקרא אלי ואמר הנני׃"],["10","1","8","임금님께서 저에게 ‘너는 누구냐?’ 하고 물으셨습니다. 제가 ‘아말렉 사람입니다.’ 하자,","저더러 누구냐고 물으셨습니다. 제가 아말렉 사람이라고 대답하자","내게 이르되 너는 누구냐 하시기로 내가 그에게 대답하되 나는 아말렉 사람이니이다 한즉","내게 이르되 너는 누구냐 하시기로 내가 대답하되 나는 아말렉 사람이니이다 한즉","그가 저에게 \"네가 누구냐?\" 하고 묻기에 \"저는 아말렉 사람입니다.\"라고 대답하였습니다.","he asked me, ‘Who are you?’ and I replied, ‘An Amalekite.’","And he said unto me, Who art thou? And I answered him, I am an Amalekite.","\"He asked me, 'Who are you?' \"'An Amalekite,' I answered.","dixit mihi: “Quisnam es tu? “. Et dixi ad eum: Amalecites ego sum.","ויאמר לי מי אתה ויאמר אליו עמלקי אנכי׃"],["10","1","9","임금님께서 저에게 ‘내 곁으로 와서 나를 죽여 다오. 내게 아직도 목숨이 붙어 있으니 괴로워 견딜 수가 없구나.’ 하고 말씀하셨습니다.","저더러 어서 와서 죽여달라고 하셨습니다. 목숨만 붙어 있을 뿐 더 이상 버틸 수가 없다는 것이었습니다.","또 내게 이르시되 내 목숨이 아직 내게 완전히 있으므로 내가 고통 중에 있나니 청하건대 너는 내 곁에 서서 나를 죽이라 하시기로","또 내게 이르되 내 목숨이 아직 내게 완전히 있으므로 내가 고통에 들었나니 너는 내 곁에 서서 나를 죽이라 하시기로","그러자 그가 이렇게 명령하였습니다. \"어서 내게 다가와 단번에 나를 죽여라! 몸은 이미 굳어서 말을 듣지 않으나 정신은 아직도 온전하여 고통만 더할 뿐이구나\"","Then he said to me, ‘Stand over me, please, and put me to death, for I am in great suffering, but still alive.’","He said unto me again, Stand, I pray thee, upon me, and slay me: for anguish is come upon me, because my life is yet whole in me.","\"Then he said to me, 'Stand over me and kill me! I am in the throes of death, but I'm still alive.'","Et locutus est mihi: “Sta super me et interfice me, quoniam tenent me angustiae, et adhuc tota anima mea in me est “.","ויאמר אלי עמד נא עלי ומתתני כי אחזני השבץ כי כל עוד נפשי בי׃"],["10","1","10","제가 보기에도 그분께서는 쓰러지신 뒤에 다시 살아나실 것 같지 않아, 그분 곁으로 가서 그분을 돌아가시게 하였습니다. 그러고 나서 머리에 쓰신 왕관과 팔에 끼신 팔찌를 벗겨 여기 나리께 가져왔습니다.”","제가 보기에도 다시 일어나 사실 것 같지 않아 다가가서 그의 목숨을 끊어드렸습니다. 그리고 머리에 썼던 왕관과 팔에 끼었던 팔찌를 벗겨서 이렇게 가지고 왔습니다.\"","그가 엎드러진 후에는 살 수 없는 줄을 내가 알고 그의 곁에 서서 죽이고 그의 머리에 있는 왕관과 팔에 있는 고리를 벗겨서 내 주께로 가져왔나이다 하니라","저가 엎드러진 후에는 살 수 없는 줄을 내가 알고 그 곁에 서서 죽이고 그 머리에 있는 면류관과 팔에 있는 고리를 벗겨서 내 주께로 가져왔나이다","제가 보기에도 그는 다시 회복될 수 없는 사람이었습니다. 그래서 제가 가까이 가서 단번에 그를 쳐죽였습니다. 그런 다음에 저는 그의 머리에 썼던 금으로 된 왕관과 팔에 끼었던 팔찌를 빼 가지고 직접 내 주께 달려왔습니다. 여기에 있는 것을 받아 주십시오.\" 단순히 시체의 유품을 도둑질한 그는 다윗에게 무슨 큰 상이라도 받을 줄 알았는지 온갖 거짓말을 꾸며 대어 다윗과 사울의 불화관계를 이용하려고 그릇된 기대를 품었다.","So I stood over him and put him to death, for I knew that he could not survive his wound. I removed the crown from his head and the armlet from his arm and brought them here to my lord.”","So I stood upon him, and slew him, because I was sure that he could not live after that he was fallen: and I took the crown that was upon his head, and the bracelet that was on his arm, and have brought them hither unto my lord.","\"So I stood over him and killed him, because I knew that after he had fallen he could not survive. And I took the crown that was on his head and the band on his arm and have brought them here to my lord.\"","Stansque super eum occidi illum; sciebam enim quod vivere non poterat post ruinam. Et tuli diadema, quod erat in capite eius, et armillam de brachio illius et attuli ad te dominum meum huc “.","ואעמד עליו ואמתתהו כי ידעתי כי לא יחיה אחרי נפלו ואקח הנזר אשר על ראשו ואצעדה אשר על זרעו ואביאם אל אדני הנה׃"],["10","1","11","그러자 다윗이 자기 옷을 잡아 찢었다. 그와 함께 있던 사람들도 모두 그렇게 하였다.","이 말을 듣고 다윗은 자기 옷을 잡아 찢었다. 부하들도 자기들의 옷을 잡아 찢었다.","이에 다윗이 자기 옷을 잡아 찢으매 함께 있는 모든 사람도 그리하고","이에 다윗이 자기 옷을 잡아 찢으매 함께 있는 모든 사람도 그리하고","그런데 다윗은 사울의 비보를 듣자 즉시 자기 옷을 갈기갈기 찢고 슬퍼하기 시작하였으며, 그와 함께 있던 부하들도 모두 옷을 찢으며 행동을 같이하였다.","David seized his garments and tore them, and so did all the men who were with him.","Then David took hold on his clothes, and rent them; and likewise all the men that were with him:","Then David and all the men with him took hold of their clothes and tore them.","Apprehendens autem David vestimenta sua scidit omnesque viri, qui erant cum eo;","ויחזק דוד בבגדו ויקרעם וגם כל האנשים אשר אתו׃"],["10","1","12","그들은 사울과 그의 아들 요나탄, 그리고 주님의 백성과 이스라엘 집안이 칼에 맞아 쓰러진 것을 애도하고 울며, 저녁때까지 단식하였다.","그리고 사울과 그의 아들 요나단, 야훼의 백성, 이스라엘 가문이 칼에 맞아 쓰러진 것을 슬퍼하여 해 질 때까지 통곡하며 단식하였다.","사울과 그의 아들 요나단과 여호와의 백성과 이스라엘 족속이 칼에 죽음으로 말미암아 저녁 때까지 슬퍼하여 울며 금식하니라","사울과 그 아들 요나단과 여호와의 백성과 이스라엘 족속이 칼에 죽음을 인하여 저녁때까지 슬퍼하여 울며 금식하니라","이리하여 그들은 사울과 요나단을 비롯하여 길보아 전쟁에서 전사한 이스라엘의 모든 군인들을 위하여 슬퍼하면서 저녁때까지 단식하고 울었다.","They mourned and wept and fasted until evening for Saul and his son Jonathan, and for the people of the LORD and the house of Israel, because they had fallen by the sword.","And they mourned, and wept, and fasted until even, for Saul, and for Jonathan his son, and for the people of the LORD, and for the house of Israel; because they were fallen by the sword.","They mourned and wept and fasted till evening for Saul and his son Jonathan, and for the army of the LORD and the house of Israel, because they had fallen by the sword.","et planxerunt et fleverunt et ieiunaverunt usque ad vesperam super Saul et super Ionathan filium eius et super populum Domini et super domum Israel, quod corruissent gladio.","ויספדו ויבכו ויצמו עד הערב על שאול ועל יהונתן בנו ועל עם יהוה ועל בית ישראל כי נפלו בחרב׃"],["10","1","13","그러고 나서 다윗이 소식을 전해 준 그 젊은이에게 “너는 어디 사람이냐?” 하고 물었다. 그가 “저는 이방인의 자손으로 아말렉 사람입니다.” 하고 대답하자,","그리고 나서 다윗은 소식을 전해 준 젊은이에게 \"너는 어디 사람이냐?\" 하고 물었다. 그가 이스라엘에 몸붙여 사는 아말렉 이세라고 대답하자,","다윗이 그 소식을 전한 청년에게 묻되 너는 어디 사람이냐 대답하되 나는 아말렉 사람 곧 외국인의 아들이니이다 하니","다윗이 그 고한 소년에게 묻되 너는 어디 사람이냐 대답하되 나는 아말렉 사람 곧 외국인의 아들이니이다","그러고 나서 다윗은 사울의 전사 소식을 전한 그 젊은이에게 \"너는 어느 가문의 출신이냐?\"고 물었다. 그가 \"저는 이스라엘 땅에 이주해 와서 사는 아말렉 사람입니다.\" 하고 대답하자","David said to the youth who had reported to him, “Where are you from?” He replied, “I am the son of a resident alien, an Amalekite.”","And David said unto the young man that told him, Whence art thou? And he answered, I am the son of a stranger, an Amalekite.","David said to the young man who brought him the report, \"Where are you from?\" \"I am the son of an alien, an Amalekite,\" he answered.","Dixitque David ad iuvenem, qui nuntiaverat ei:  “Unde es? “. Qui respondit:  “Filius hominis advenae Amalecitae ego sum “.","ויאמר דוד אל הנער המגיד לו אי מזה אתה ויאמר בן איש גר עמלקי אנכי׃"],["10","1","14","다윗이 “네가 어쩌자고 겁도 없이 손을 뻗어 주님의 기름부음받은이를 살해하였느냐?” 하고 말하였다.","다윗은 \"네놈이 어쩌자고 겁도 없이 손을 대어 야훼께서 기름 부어 세우신 이를 살해했단 말이냐?\" 하고 꾸짖고 나서","다윗이 그에게 이르되 네가 어찌하여 손을 들어 여호와의 기름 부음 받은 자 죽이기를 두려워하지 아니하였느냐 하고","다윗이 저에게 이르되 네가 어찌하여 손을 들어 여호와의 기름부음 받은 자 죽이기를 두려워하지 아니하였느냐 하고","다윗은 그를 무섭게 책망하였다 \"네가 어떻게 감히 여호와께서 기름 부어 세우신 왕을 살해할 수 있느냐?\"","David said to him, “How is it that you were not afraid to put forth your hand to desecrate the LORD’s anointed?”","And David said unto him, How wast thou not afraid to stretch forth thine hand to destroy the LORD's anointed?","David asked him, \"Why were you not afraid to lift your hand to destroy the LORD'S anointed?\"","Et ait ad eum David:  “Quare non timuisti mittere manum tuam, ut occideres christum Domini? “.","ויאמר אליו דוד איך לא יראת לשלח ידך לשחת את משיח יהוה׃"],["10","1","15","그리고 다윗은 부하들 가운데 하나를 불러, “가까이 가서 그를 쳐라.” 하고 일렀다. 부하가 그를 치니 그가 죽었다.","부하 한 사람을 불렀다. \"저놈을 쳐죽여라.\" 하고 다윗이 명령하자 부하가 그를 쳐죽였다.","다윗이 청년 중 한 사람을 불러 이르되 가까이 가서 그를 죽이라 하매 그가 치매 곧 죽으니라","소년 중 하나를 불러 이르되 가까이 가서 저를 죽이라 하매 그가 치매 곧 죽으니라","다윗이 그 자리에서 부하 한 사람을 불러 이렇게 명령하였다. \"그를 즉시 쳐죽여라!\" 다윗의 부하가 젊은이를 치자 그가 그 자리에서 죽었다.","David then called one of the attendants and said to him, “Come, strike him down”; so he struck him and he died.","And David called one of the young men, and said, Go near, and fall upon him. And he smote him that he died.","Then David called one of his men and said, \"Go, strike him down!\" So he struck him down, and he died.","Vocansque David unum de pueris ait:  “Accedens irrue in eum “. Qui percussit illum, et mortuus est.","ויקרא דוד לאחד מהנערים ויאמר גש פגע בו ויכהו וימת׃"],["10","1","16","다윗이 그를 두고 이렇게 말하였다. “네 피가 네 머리 위로 돌아가는 것이다. 네 입이 너를 거슬러 ‘제가 주님의 기름부음받은이를 죽였습니다.’ 하고 증언하였기 때문이다.”","다윗은 그를 두고 이렇게 선언하였다. \"너는 네 입으로 야훼께서 기름 부어 세우신 이를 죽였다고 증언했다. 그러니 네가 죽는 것은 네 탓이다.\"","다윗이 그에게 이르기를 네 피가 네 머리로 돌아갈지어다 네 입이 네게 대하여 증언하기를 내가 여호와의 기름 부음 받은 자를 죽였노라 함이니라 하였더라","다윗이 저에게 이르기를 네 피가 네 머리로 돌아갈찌어다 네 입이 네게 대하여 증거하기를 내가 여호와의 기름 부음 받은 자를 죽였노라 함이니라 하였더라","그때에 다윗이 그 젊은이에게 이와같이 선언하였다. \"네 죽음에 대하여 나는 전혀 허물이 없다. 네가 네 입으로 \"여호와께서 기름부어 세우신 왕을 제 손으로 죽였습니다.\"라고 말할 때에 너는 이미 네 자신에게 사형 선고를 선포한 것이기 때문이다.\"","David said to him, “Your blood is on your head, for you testified against yourself when you said, ‘I put the LORD’s anointed to death.’”","And David said unto him, Thy blood be upon thy head; for thy mouth hath testified against thee, saying, I have slain the LORD's anointed.","For David had said to him, \"Your blood be on your own head. Your own mouth testified against you when you said, 'I killed the LORD'S anointed.'\"","Et ait ad eum David:  “Sanguis tuus super caput tuum; os enim tuum locutum est adversum te dicens: “Ego interfeci christum Domini “ “.","ויאמר אליו דוד דמיך על ראשך כי פיך ענה בך לאמר אנכי מתתי את משיח יהוה׃"],["10","1","17","다윗은 사울과 그의 아들 요나탄을 생각하며 이런 애가를 지어 부르고는,","다윗은 사울과 그의 아들 요나단의 죽음을 슬퍼하여 조가를 지어","다윗이 이 슬픈 노래로 사울과 그의 아들 요나단을 조상하고","다윗이 이 슬픈 노래로 사울과 그 아들 요나단을 조상하고","다윗은 사울과 요나단을 위하여 조가를 지어 부르고,","Then David chanted this lament for Saul and his son Jonathan","And David lamented with this lamentation over Saul and over Jonathan his son:","David took up this lament concerning Saul and his son Jonathan,","Planxit autem David planctum huiuscemodi super Saul et super Ionathan filium eius;","ויקנן דוד את הקינה הזאת על שאול ועל יהונתן בנו׃"],["10","1","18","‘활의 노래’라 이름 붙여 유다의 자손들에게 가르치라고 일렀다. 그 애가는 ‘야사르의 책’에 기록되어 있다.","유다 사람들에게 가르치게 하였다. 이 노래는 야살서에 기록되어 있다.","명령하여 그것을 유다 족속에게 가르치라 하였으니 곧 활 노래라 야살의 책에 기록되었으되","명하여 그것을 유다 족속에게 가르치라 하였으니 곧 활 노래라 야살의 책에 기록되었으되","그것을 유다 백성들에게 가르치도록 명령하였다. 그 노래의 제목은 \"활 노래\"인데, 의인들의 시집 속에 이와 같이 기록되어 있다.","(he commanded that it be taught to the Judahites; it is recorded in the Book of Jashar):","(Also he bade them teach the children of Judah the use of the bow: behold, it is written in the book of Jasher.)","and ordered that the men of Judah be taught this lament of the bow (it is written in the Book of Jashar):","et praecepit, ut docerent filios Iudae canticum Arcus, sicut scriptum est in libro Iusti, et ait:","ויאמר ללמד בני יהודה קשת הנה כתובה על ספר הישר׃"],["10","1","19","“이스라엘아, 네 영광이 살해되어 언덕 위에 누워 있구나. 어쩌다 용사들이 쓰러졌는가?","너 이스라엘의 영광이 산 위에서 죽었구나. 아, 용사들은 쓰러졌구나.","이스라엘아 네 영광이 산 위에서 죽임을 당하였도다 오호라 두 용사가 엎드러졌도다","이스라엘아 너의 영광이 산 위에서 죽임을 당하였도다 오호라 두 용사가 엎드러졌도다","\"이스라엘아! 네 영광이요 자랑이던 젊은이들이 네 산위에 죽어 널려 있구나. 어쩌다가 그토록 용감하고 건장하던 네 용사들이 모두 쓰러져 죽었느냐?","Alas! the glory of Israel, slain upon your heights! How can the warriors have fallen!","The beauty of Israel is slain upon thy high places: how are the mighty fallen!","\"Your glory, O Israel, lies slain on your heights. How the mighty have fallen!","Incliti, o Israel, super montes tuos interfecti, quomodo ceciderunt fortes!","הצבי ישראל על במותיך חלל איך נפלו גבורים׃"],["10","1","20","이 소식을 갓에 알리지 말고 아스클론 거리에 전하지 마라. 필리스티아인들의 딸들이 기뻐하고 할례 받지 않은 자들의 딸들이 좋아 날뛸라.","이 소문을 갓에 알리지 말라. 아스클론 거리에 퍼뜨리지 말라. 불레셋 계집들이 좋아하고, 오랑캐 계집들이 좋아 날뛸라.","이 일을 가드에도 알리지 말며 아스글론 거리에도 전파하지 말지어다 블레셋 사람들의 딸들이 즐거워할까, 할례 받지 못한 자의 딸들이 개가를 부를까 염려로다","이 일을 가드에도 고하지 말며 아스글론 거리에도 전파하지 말찌어다 블레셋 사람의 딸들이 즐거워할까, 할례 받지 못한 자의 딸들이 개가를 부를까 염려로다","그러나 이런 소문은 블레셋 족속의 성읍 가드와 아스글론에서는 말하지도 말아라. 이것이 무슨 좋은 소식이라고 그들의 거리에서 떠들지들 말아라. 어찌 저 블레셋 족속의 여인들이 깔깔대며 기뻐하고 저 할례받지 못한 이들의 딸들이 환호성을 올리게 하려느냐?","Do not report it in Gath, as good news in Ashkelon’s streets, Lest Philistine women rejoice, lest the women of the uncircumcised exult!","Tell it not in Gath, publish it not in the streets of Askelon; lest the daughters of the Philistines rejoice, lest the daughters of the uncircumcised triumph.","\"Tell it not in Gath, proclaim it not in the streets of Ashkelon, lest the daughters of the Philistines be glad, lest the daughters of the uncircumcised rejoice.","Nolite annuntiare in Geth neque annuntietis in compitis Ascalonis, ne forte laetentur filiae Philisthim, ne exsultent filiae incircumcisorum.","אל תגידו בגת אל תבשרו בחוצת אשקלון פן תשמחנה בנות פלשתים פן תעלזנה בנות הערלים׃"],["10","1","21","길보아의 산들아 너희 위에, 그 비옥한 밭에 이슬도 비도 내리지 마라. 거기에서 용사들의 방패가 더럽혀지고 사울의 방패가 기름칠도 않은 채 버려졌다.","길보아 산악에는 비도 이슬도 내리지 아니하고, 소나기도 쏟아지지 아니하리라. 거기서 용사들의 방패는 더러워졌고, 사울의 방패는 기름칠도 않은 채 버려졌구나.","길보아 산들아 너희 위에 이슬과 비가 내리지 아니하며 제물 낼 밭도 없을지어다 거기서 두 용사의 방패가 버린 바 됨이니라 곧 사울의 방패가 기름 부음을 받지 아니함 같이 됨이로다","길보아산들아 너희 위에 우로가 내리지 아니하며 제물 낼 밭도 없을찌어다 거기서 두 용사의 방패가 버린바 됨이라 곧 사울의 방패가 기름 부음을 받지 않음 같이 됨이로다","너희 길보아의 산줄기들아, 너희는 이제 저주를 받아라! 너희에게는 영영 이슬도 맺히지 않고 비도 내리지 말아라! 들녘에도 오곡백과가 무르익어 출렁이는 일이 영영 없어져라! 거기서는 용사들의 방패가 녹슬어 가고, 사울의 방패가 잡초에 묻혀 영원히 영원히 더럽혀졌기 때문이다.","O mountains of Gilboa, upon you be neither dew nor rain, nor surging from the deeps! Defiled there the warriors’ shields, the shield of Saul—no longer anointed with oil!","Ye mountains of Gilboa, let there be no dew, neither let there be rain, upon you, nor fields of offerings: for there the shield of the mighty is vilely cast away, the shield of Saul, as though he had not been anointed with oil.","\"O mountains of Gilboa, may you have neither dew nor rain, nor fields that yield offerings of grain. For there the shield of the mighty was defiled, the shield of Saul--no longer rubbed with oil.","Montes Gelboe, nec ros nec pluviae veniant super vos, neque sint agri oblationum! Quia ibi abiectus est clipeus fortium, clipeus Saul, quasi non esset unctus oleo.","הרי בגלבע אל טל ואל מטר עליכם ושדי תרומת כי שם נגעל מגן גבורים מגן שאול בלי משיח בשמן׃"],["10","1","22","요나탄의 활은 살해된 자들의 피와 용사들의 굳기름을 묻히지 않고서는 돌아온 적이 없고 사울의 칼은 허공을 치고 되돌아온 적이 없었네.","요나단이 한번 활을 쏘면 사람들은 피를 쏟으며 쓰러졌고, 그 살에는 적군 용사들의 기름기가 묻고야 말았는데. 사울이 한번 칼을 휘두르면 사람들은 피를 쏟으며 쓰러졌고, 그 칼에는 적군 용사들의 기름기가 묻고야 말았는데.","죽은 자의 피에서, 용사의 기름에서 요나단의 활이 뒤로 물러가지 아니하였으며 사울의 칼이 헛되이 돌아오지 아니하였도다","죽은 자의 피에서, 용사의 기름에서 요나단의 활이 물러가지 아니하였으며 사울의 칼이 헛되이 돌아오지 아니하였도다","요나단은 얼마나 활을 잘 쏘고 사울은 얼마나 칼을 잘썼던가! 요나단의 화살은 언제나 물러서지 않았고 사울의 칼은 언제나 헛되지 않았네. 언제나 원수들을 떼죽음시켰는데!","From the blood of the slain, from the bodies of the warriors, The bow of Jonathan did not turn back, nor the sword of Saul return unstained.","From the blood of the slain, from the fat of the mighty, the bow of Jonathan turned not back, and the sword of Saul returned not empty.","From the blood of the slain, from the flesh of the mighty, the bow of Jonathan did not turn back, the sword of Saul did not return unsatisfied.","A sanguine interfectorum, ab adipe fortium arcus Ionathan numquam rediit retrorsum, et gladius Saul non est reversus inanis.","מדם חללים מחלב גבורים קשת יהונתן לא נשוג אחור וחרב שאול לא תשוב ריקם׃"],["10","1","23","사울과 요나탄은 살아 있을 때에도 서로 사랑하며 다정하더니 죽어서도 떨어지지 않았구나. 그들은 독수리보다 날래고 사자보다 힘이 세었지.","사울과 요나단은 살았을 때 그렇게도 정이 두텁더니, 죽을 때도 갈라지지 않았구나. 독수리보다도 날쌔고, 사자보다도 힘이 세더니.","사울과 요나단이 생전에 사랑스럽고 아름다운 자이러니 죽을 때에도 서로 떠나지 아니하였도다 그들은 독수리보다 빠르고 사자보다 강하였도다","사울과 요나단이 생전에 사랑스럽고 아름다운 자러니 죽을 때에도 서로 떠나지 아니하였도다 저희는 독수리보다 빠르고 사자보다 강하였도다","사울과 요나단은 살아 생전에도 그렇게 서로 사랑하며 아끼더니 죽을 때에도 서로 헤어지지 않았도다! 독수리가 빠르다지만 그들보다 더 빠르랴! 사자가 힘이 세다지만 그들보다 더 세랴!","Saul and Jonathan, beloved and dear, separated neither in life nor death, swifter than eagles, stronger than lions!","Saul and Jonathan were lovely and pleasant in their lives, and in their death they were not divided: they were swifter than eagles, they were stronger than lions.","\"Saul and Jonathan--in life they were loved and gracious, and in death they were not parted. They were swifter than eagles, they were stronger than lions.","Saul et Ionathan amabiles et decori in vita sua, in morte quoque non sunt divisi, aquilis velociores, leonibus fortiores.","שאול ויהונתן הנאהבים והנעימם בחייהם ובמותם לא נפרדו מנשרים קלו מאריות גברו׃"],["10","1","24","이스라엘의 딸들아 사울을 생각하며 울어라. 그는 너희에게 장식 달린 진홍색 옷을 입혀 주고 너희 예복에 금붙이를 달아 주었다.","이스라엘의 딸들아, 주홍색 옷을 입혀주고 그 옷에 금장식을 달아주던 사울을 생각하고 통곡하여라.","이스라엘 딸들아 사울을 슬퍼하여 울지어다 그가 붉은 옷으로 너희에게 화려하게 입혔고 금 노리개를 너희 옷에 채웠도다","이스라엘 딸들아 사울을 슬퍼하여 울찌어다 저가 붉은 옷으로 너희에게 화려하게 입혔고 금 노리개를 너희 옷에 채웠도다","너희 이스라엘의 여인들아, 너희는 모두 사울을 위하여 울어라! 그는 일평생 너희를 위하여 싸우고 너희를 위하여 온갖 보물을 약탈해 왔고 너희에게 자색 옷도 화려하계 입혀 주고 금장식도 풍성하게 선물로 주었었다.","Women of Israel, weep over Saul, who clothed you in scarlet and in finery, covered your clothing with ornaments of gold.","Ye daughters of Israel, weep over Saul, who clothed you in scarlet, with other delights, who put on ornaments of gold upon your apparel.","\"O daughters of Israel, weep for Saul, who clothed you in scarlet and finery, who adorned your garments with ornaments of gold.","Filiae Israel, super Saul flete, qui vestiebat vos coccino in deliciis, qui praebebat ornamenta aurea cultui vestro.","בנות ישראל אל שאול בכינה המלבשכם שני עם עדנים המעלה עדי זהב על לבושכן׃"],["10","1","25","어쩌다 용사들이 싸움터 한복판에서 쓰러졌는가? 요나탄이 네 산 위에서 살해되다니!","아, 용사들이 싸움터에 쓰러졌구나. 요나단이 산 위에서 죽었구나.","오호라 두 용사가 전쟁 중에 엎드러졌도다 요나단이 네 산 위에서 죽임을 당하였도다","오호라 두 용사가 전쟁 중에 엎드러졌도다 요나단이 너의 산 위에서 죽임을 당하였도다","그토록 용맹스럽던 용사들이 어쩌다가 싸움을 중단하고 죽었으며 요나단, 형이 어떻게 산중에 그냥 죽어 있소?","How can the warriors have fallen in the thick of battle! Jonathan—slain upon your heights!","How are the mighty fallen in the midst of the battle! O Jonathan, thou wast slain in thine high places.","\"How the mighty have fallen in battle! Jonathan lies slain on your heights.","Quomodo ceciderunt fortes in proelio! Ionathan in excelsis tuis occisus est.","איך נפלו גברים בתוך המלחמה יהונתן על במותיך חלל׃"],["10","1","26","나의 형 요나탄 형 때문에 내 마음이 아프오. 형은 나에게 그토록 소중하였고 나에 대한 형의 사랑은 여인의 사랑보다 아름다웠소.","나의 형, 요나단, 형 생각에 나는 가슴이 미어지오. 형은 나를 즐겁게 해주더니. 형의 그 남다른 사랑, 어느 여인의 사랑도 따를 수 없었는데.","내 형 요나단이여 내가 그대를 애통함은 그대는 내게 심히 아름다움이라 그대가 나를 사랑함이 기이하여 여인의 사랑보다 더하였도다","내 형 요나단이여 내가 그대를 애통함은 그대는 내게 심히 아름다움이라 그대가 나를 사랑함이 기이하여 여인의 사랑보다 승하였도다","나의 형 요나단, 나의 가장 좋은 친구 요나단! 형 생각에 나는 메어지는 가슴으로 울고 있소. 형의 우정은 나를 무조건 아끼고 사랑한 것이었소. 어느 여인이 사랑하여도 형이 나를 사랑한 것보다 더 사랑하지는 못할 것이오.","I grieve for you, Jonathan my brother! Most dear have you been to me; More wondrous your love to me than the love of women.","I am distressed for thee, my brother Jonathan: very pleasant hast thou been unto me: thy love to me was wonderful, passing the love of women.","I grieve for you, Jonathan my brother; you were very dear to me. Your love for me was wonderful, more wonderful than that of women.","Doleo super te, frater mi Ionathan, suavis nimis mihi; mirabilis amor tuus mihi super amorem mulierum.","צר לי עליך אחי יהונתן נעמת לי מאד נפלאתה אהבתך לי מאהבת נשים׃"],["10","1","27","어쩌다 용사들이 쓰러지고 무기들이 사라졌는가?”","아, 용사들은 쓰러지고, 무기는 사라졌구나.","오호라 두 용사가 엎드러졌으며 싸우는 무기가 망하였도다 하였더라","오호라 두 용사가 엎드러졌으며 싸우는 병기가 망하였도다 하였더라","슬프고 슬프다! 그토록 뛰어난 용사들이 쓰러져 죽고 그 좋은 투사들이 영영 사라져 버렸으니!\"","How can the warriors have fallen, the weapons of war have perished!","How are the mighty fallen, and the weapons of war perished!","\"How the mighty have fallen! The weapons of war have perished!\"","Quomodo ceciderunt fortes, et perierunt arma bellica! “.","איך נפלו גבורים ויאבדו כלי מלחמה׃"],["10","2","1","그 뒤 다윗이 주님께 여쭈어 보았다. “유다의 성읍들 가운데 한 곳으로 올라가도 되겠습니까?” 주님께서 그에게 “올라가거라.” 하고 이르셨다. 다윗이 다시 “어디로 올라가야 합니까?” 하고 여쭈어 보자, 그분께서는 “헤브론으로 가거라.” 하고 말씀하셨다.","이런 일이 있은 뒤, 다윗이 야훼께 여쭈었다. \"유다 지방에 올라가 어느 성읍에 자리를 잡아도 되겠습니까?\" 야훼께서 올라가라고 하시자 다윗이 다시 여쭈었다. \"어디로 올라가면 좋겠습니까?\" \"헤브론으로 올라가거라.\"","그 후에 다윗이 여호와께 여쭈어 아뢰되 내가 유다 한 성읍으로 올라가리이까 여호와께서 이르시되 올라가라 다윗이 아뢰되 어디로 가리이까 이르시되 헤브론으로 갈지니라","그 후에 다윗이 여호와께 물어 가로되 내가 유다 한 성으로 올라가리이까 여호와께서 가라사대 올라가라 다윗이 가로되 어디로 가리이까 가라사대 헤브론으로 갈찌니라","다윗이 여호와께 물었다. \"이제는 제가 유다 지파의 성읍들 중 한 성읍에 들어가 살아도 되겠습니까?\" 여호와께서 \"올라가라!\" 고 대답하시자 다윗은 \"제가 어느 성읍으로 들어가야 되겠습니까?\" 하고 다시 물었다. 여호와께서는 \"헤브론으로 올라가라!\" 고 대답하셨다.","After this, David inquired of the LORD, “Shall I go up into one of the cities of Judah?” The LORD replied to him: Go up. Then David asked, “Where shall I go?” He replied: To Hebron.","And it came to pass after this, that David enquired of the LORD, saying, Shall I go up into any of the cities of Judah? And the LORD said unto him, Go up. And David said, Whither shall I go up? And he said, Unto Hebron.","In the course of time, David inquired of the LORD. \"Shall I go up to one of the towns of Judah?\" he asked. The LORD said, \"Go up.\" David asked, \"Where shall I go?\" \"To Hebron,\" the LORD answered.","Igitur post haec consuluit David Dominum dicens:  “Num ascendam in unam de civitatibus Iudae? “. Et ait Dominus ad eum:  “Ascende “. Dixitque David:  “Quo ascendam? “. Et respondit ei:  “In Hebron “.","ויהי אחרי כן וישאל דוד ביהוה לאמר האעלה באחת ערי יהודה ויאמר יהוה אליו עלה ויאמר דוד אנה אעלה ויאמר חברנה׃"],["10","2","2","그래서 다윗은 두 아내, 곧 이즈르엘 여자 아히노암과 카르멜 사람 나발의 아내였던 아비가일을 데리고 그곳으로 올라갔다.","이 말씀을 듣고 다윗은 이즈르엘 여자 아히노암과 가르멜 사람 나발의 아내였던 아비가일, 두 아내를 데리고 헤브론으로 갔다.","다윗이 그의 두 아내 이스르엘 여인 아히노암과 갈멜 사람 나발의 아내였던 아비가일을 데리고 그리로 올라갈 때에","다윗이 그 두 아내 이스르엘 여인 아히노암과 갈멜 사람 나발의 아내 되었던 아비가일을 데리고 그리로 올라갈 때에","이리하여 다윗은 자기의 두 아내, 즉 이스르엘 여인 아히노암과 나발의 아내였던 갈멜 여인 아비가일을 데리고 헤브론으로 올라갔다.","So David went up there, with his two wives, Ahinoam of Jezreel and Abigail, the wife of Nabal of Carmel.","So David went up thither, and his two wives also, Ahinoam the Jezreelitess, and Abigail Nabal's wife the Carmelite.","So David went up there with his two wives, Ahinoam of Jezreel and Abigail, the widow of Nabal of Carmel.","Ascendit ergo David et duae uxores eius, Achinoam Iezrahelites et Abigail uxor Nabal de Carmel;","ויעל שם דוד וגם שתי נשיו אחינעם היזרעלית ואביגיל אשת נבל הכרמלי׃"],["10","2","3","다윗은 함께 있던 부하들도 저마다 가족을 데리고 올라가게 하였다. 그리하여 그들은 헤브론의 여러 성읍에 자리 잡았다.","다윗은 부하들의 가족까지도 모두 데리고 올라가 헤브론에 있는 여러 성에 흩어져 살게 하였다.","또 자기와 함께 한 추종자들과 그들의 가족들을 다윗이 다 데리고 올라가서 헤브론 각 성읍에 살게 하니라","또 자기와 함께한 종자들과 그들의 권속들을 다 데리고 올라가서 헤브론 각 성에 거하게 하니라","다윗의 부하들도 가족을 모두 거느리고 그와 함께 올라가서 헤브론 주변에 있는 여러 성읍들을 차지하고 살았다.","David also brought up his men with their families, and they dwelt in the towns of Hebron.","And his men that were with him did David bring up, every man with his household: and they dwelt in the cities of Hebron.","David also took the men who were with him, each with his family, and they settled in Hebron and its towns.","sed et viros, qui erant cum eo, duxit David singulos cum domo sua, et manserunt in oppidis Hebron.","ואנשיו אשר עמו העלה דוד איש וביתו וישבו בערי חברון׃"],["10","2","4","그러자 유다 사람들이 와, 거기에서 다윗에게 기름을 붓고 그를 유다 집안의 임금으로 세웠다. 다윗은 사울의 장례를 치른 이들이 야베스 길앗 사람들이라는 소식을 듣고,","이 때, 유다 사람들이 그리로 찾아와 다윗에게 기름을 붓고 그를 유다 왕으로 삼았다.","유다 사람들이 와서 거기서 다윗에게 기름을 부어 유다 족속의 왕으로 삼았더라","유다 사람들이 와서 거기서 다윗에게 기름을 부어 유다 족속의 왕을 삼았더라","그러자 유다 지파의 장로들이 헤브론으로 올라와서 다윗에게 기름을 부어 자기들의 왕으로 세웠다.  유다 왕이 된 다윗은 사울의 시체를 거두어다가 장사 지낸 사람들이 바로 길르앗야베스의 주민들이라는 소식을 듣게 되었다.","Then the men of Judah came there and anointed David king over the house of Judah. A report reached David that the people of Jabesh-gilead had buried Saul.","And the men of Judah came, and there they anointed David king over the house of Judah. And they told David, saying, That the men of Jabeshgilead were they that buried Saul.","Then the men of Judah came to Hebron and there they anointed David king over the house of Judah. When David was told that it was the men of Jabesh Gilead who had buried Saul,","Veneruntque viri Iudae et unxerunt ibi David, ut regnaret super domum Iudae. Et nuntiatum est David quod viri Iabes Galaad sepelissent Saul.","ויבאו אנשי יהודה וימשחו שם את דוד למלך על בית יהודה ויגדו לדוד לאמר אנשי יביש גלעד אשר קברו את שאול׃"],["10","2","5","심부름꾼들을 야베스 길앗 사람들에게 보내어 이런 말을 전하게 하였다. “여러분은 여러분의 주군 사울에게 그토록 충성을 다하여 그의 장례를 치렀으니, 주님께 복을 받으시기를 빕니다.","야베스 길르앗 주민들에게 전갈을 보냈다. \"그대들이 상전 사울의 장례를 치러 충성을 보였으니 야훼께서 복을 내리시기를 바라오.","다윗이 길르앗 야베스 사람들에게 전령들을 보내 그들에게 이르되 너희가 너희 주 사울에게 이처럼 은혜를 베풀어 그를 장사하였으니 여호와께 복을 받을지어다","다윗이 길르앗 야베스 사람들에게 사자들을 보내어 가로되 너희가 너희 주 사울에게 이처럼 은혜를 베풀어 장사하였으니 여호와께 복을 받을찌어다","그래서 그는 그들에게 사신들을 보내어 이렇게 전하였다. \"여러분이 사울왕의 시체를 장사 지내 줌으로써 그분에게 끝까지 충성하였으니, 여호와께서 그 충성을 보시고 여러분에게 보답해 주시기 바랍니다.","So David sent messengers to the people of Jabesh-gilead and said to them: “May you be blessed by the LORD for having done this kindness to your lord Saul in burying him.","And David sent messengers unto the men of Jabeshgilead, and said unto them, Blessed be ye of the LORD, that ye have shewed this kindness unto your lord, even unto Saul, and have buried him.","he sent messengers to the men of Jabesh Gilead to say to them, \"The LORD bless you for showing this kindness to Saul your master by burying him.","Misit ergo David nuntios ad viros Iabes Galaad dixitque ad eos:  “Benedicti vos Domino, qui fecistis misericordiam hanc cum domino vestro Saul et sepelistis eum.","וישלח דוד מלאכים אל אנשי יביש גלעד ויאמר אליהם ברכים אתם ליהוה אשר עשיתם החסד הזה עם אדניכם עם שאול ותקברו אתו׃"],["10","2","6","이제 주님께서 여러분에게 자애와 성실을 보여 주실 것입니다. 또한 여러분이 이런 일을 하였으니 나도 여러분에게 선을 베풀겠습니다.","이제 야훼께서는 그대들에게 틀림없이 은덕을 베푸실 것이오. 그대들이 이런 일을 했으니, 나도 그대들에게 잘해 주겠소.","너희가 이 일을 하였으니 이제 여호와께서 은혜와 진리로 너희에게 베푸시기를 원하고 나도 이 선한 일을 너희에게 갚으리니","너희가 이 일을 하였으니 이제 여호와께서 은혜와 진리로 너희에게 베푸시기를 원하고 나도 이 선한 일을 너희에게 갚으리니","이제는 여호와께서 여러분에게 변함없는 사랑과 진실하심을 베풀어 주시기 바라는 마음으로 나도 여러분에게 그와 같이 좋은 일로 보답해 드리겠습니다.","And now may the LORD show you kindness and fidelity. For my part, I will show generosity to you for having done this.","And now the LORD shew kindness and truth unto you: and I also will requite you this kindness, because ye have done this thing.","May the LORD now show you kindness and faithfulness, and I too will show you the same favor because you have done this.","Et nunc faciat quidem vobis Dominus misericordiam et veritatem; sed et ego reddam vobis similiter bonum, eo quod feceritis istud.","ועתה יעש יהוה עמכם חסד ואמת וגם אנכי אעשה אתכם הטובה הזאת אשר עשיתם הדבר הזה׃"],["10","2","7","여러분의 주군 사울이 세상을 떠났지만, 주먹을 불끈 쥐고 용기를 내십시오. 유다 집안이 나에게 기름을 부어 자기들의 임금으로 삼았습니다.”","그대들의 상전 사울은 세상을 떠났고, 유다 가문은 나에게 기름을 부어 왕으로 삼았소. 그러니 낙심말고 힘들을 내시오.\"","이제 너희는 손을 강하게 하고 담대히 할지어다 너희 주 사울이 죽었고 또 유다 족속이 내게 기름을 부어 그들의 왕으로 삼았음이니라 하니라","이제 너희는 손을 강하게 하고 담대히 할찌어다 너희 주 사울이 죽었고 또 유다 족속이 내게 기름을 부어 저희의 왕을 삼았음이니라","비록 여러분의 왕 사울은 죽었어도 유다 지파가 이미 나를 자기들의 왕으로 세워 놓았으니, 여러분도 실망하지 말고 오히려 강하고 담대한 사람들이 되시기 바랍니다.\"","So take courage and prove yourselves valiant, for though your lord Saul is dead, the house of Judah has anointed me king over them.”","Therefore now let your hands be strengthened, and be ye valiant: for your master Saul is dead, and also the house of Judah have anointed me king over them.","Now then, be strong and brave, for Saul your master is dead, and the house of Judah has anointed me king over them.\"","Nunc autem confortentur manus vestrae, et estote fortes; licet enim mortuus sit dominus vester Saul, tamen me unxit domus Iudae in regem sibi “.","ועתה תחזקנה ידיכם והיו לבני חיל כי מת אדניכם שאול וגם אתי משחו בית יהודה למלך עליהם׃"],["10","2","8","사울 군대의 장수이며 네르의 아들인 아브네르가 사울의 아들 이스 보셋을 데리고 마하나임으로 건너갔다.","한편, 넬의 아들 아브넬은 사울의 사령관이었는데, 그는 사울의 아들 이스보셋을 모시고 마하나임으로 건너가서","사울의 군사령관 넬의 아들 아브넬이 이미 사울의 아들 이스보셋을 데리고 마하나임으로 건너가","사울의 군장 넬의 아들 아브넬이 이미 사울의 아들 이스보셋을 데리고 마하나임으로 건너가서","사울의 왕가가 전쟁으로 패망하자, 그의 군사령관이었던 아브넬이 이스라엘의 실권을 장악하게 되었다. 넬의 아들 아브넬은 이제 사울의 아들 이스보셋을 데리고 요단강 동쪽으로 건너가 얍복 강가의 성읍 마하나임으로 갔다. 요단강 서쪽에 있는 이스라엘 지역은 블레셋 족속의 세력이 뻗쳐 있어 일부러 안전한 곳을 택한 것이다. 이스보셋은 본래 \"여호와의 사람\"이라는 뜻의 ㄱ) 리스위라는 이름을 썼으나 나중에 \"바알 우상의 사람\" 이라는 뜻의 이스바알이나 \"치욕의 사람\"이라는 뜻의 이스보셋으로 불렸다. (ㄱ. 좀더 정확한 발음은 \"이쉬비\"이다)","Abner, son of Ner, captain of Saul’s army, took Ishbaal, son of Saul, and brought him over to Mahanaim,","But Abner the son of Ner, captain of Saul's host, took Ishbosheth the son of Saul, and brought him over to Mahanaim;","Meanwhile, Abner son of Ner, the commander of Saul's army, had taken Ish-Bosheth son of Saul and brought him over to Mahanaim.","Abner autem filius Ner princeps exercitus Saul tulit Isbaal filium Saul et duxit eum in Mahanaim","ואבנר בן נר שר צבא אשר לשאול לקח את איש בשת בן שאול ויעברהו מחנים׃"],["10","2","9","거기에서 그는 이스 보셋을 길앗과 아수르족과 이즈르엘, 에프라임과 벤야민과 온 이스라엘의 임금으로 세웠다.","길르앗, 아술, 이즈르엘, 에브라임, 베냐민 등, 온 이스라엘의 왕으로 삼았다.","길르앗과 아술과 이스르엘과 에브라임과 베냐민과 온 이스라엘의 왕으로 삼았더라","길르앗과 아술과 이스르엘과 에브라임과 베냐민과 온 이스라엘의 왕을 삼았더라","아브넬은 마하나임에서 이스보셋을 허수아비 왕으로 세우고, 길르앗 지역과 아술 지방과 이스르엘 평원과 에브라임 산지와 베냐민 지파를 다스리게 하였다. 그런데 갈릴리 지역의 아술 지방과 이스르엘 평원의 이스르엘 지역은 블레셋의 통치를 받던 행정 구역상의 이름으로서, 여기서는 이스보셋이 블레셋 족속의 영주에 불과하였다.","where he made him king over Gilead, the Asherites, Jezreel, Ephraim, Benjamin, and the rest of Israel.","And made him king over Gilead, and over the Ashurites, and over Jezreel, and over Ephraim, and over Benjamin, and over all Israel.","He made him king over Gilead, Ashuri and Jezreel, and also over Ephraim, Benjamin and all Israel.","regemque constituit super Galaad et super Aser et super Iezrahel et super Ephraim et super Beniamin et super Israel universum.","וימלכהו אל הגלעד ואל האשורי ואל יזרעאל ועל אפרים ועל בנימן ועל ישראל כלה׃"],["10","2","10","사울의 아들 이스 보셋이 이스라엘의 임금이 된 것은 마흔 살 때였다. 그는 두 해 동안 다스렸다. 한편, 유다 집안은 다윗을 따랐다.","사울의 아들 이스보셋은 이스라엘 왕위에 오를 때 사십 세였다. 그는 이 년밖에 왕노릇 하지 못하였다. 한편, 유다 가문은 다윗을 따랐는데,","사울의 아들 이스보셋이 이스라엘 왕이 될 때에 나이가 사십 세이며 두 해 동안 왕위에 있으니라 유다 족속은 다윗을 따르니","사울의 아들 이스보셋이 비로소 이스라엘 왕이 될 때에 나이 사십세며 두해 동안 위에 있으니라 유다 족속은 다윗을 따르니","이스보셋은 40세에 왕이 되어 2년 동안 다스렸다. 사울이 죽은 뒤에는 유다 지파만이 다윗을 왕으로 모셨으며,","Ishbaal, son of Saul, was forty years old when he became king over Israel, and he reigned two years; but the house of Judah followed David.","Ishbosheth Saul's son was forty years old when he began to reign over Israel, and reigned two years. But the house of Judah followed David.","Ish-Bosheth son of Saul was forty years old when he became king over Israel, and he reigned two years. The house of Judah, however, followed David.","Quadraginta annorum erat Isbaal filius Saul, cum regnare coepisset super Israel, et duobus annis regnavit; sola autem domus Iudae sequebatur David.","בן ארבעים שנה איש בשת בן שאול במלכו על ישראל ושתים שנים מלך אך בית יהודה היו אחרי דוד׃"],["10","2","11","다윗이 헤브론에서 유다 집안을 다스린 기간은 일곱 해 여섯 달이었다.","그는 헤브론에서 칠 년 반 동안 유다 가문의 왕노릇을 했다.","다윗이 헤브론에서 유다 족속의 왕이 된 날 수는 칠 년 육 개월이더라","다윗이 헤브론에서 유다 족속의 왕이 된 날 수는 일곱해 여섯달이더라","다윗은 유다 왕으로서 헤브론에서 7년 6개월 동안 다스렸다.","In all, David was king in Hebron over the house of Judah seven years and six months.","And the time that David was king in Hebron over the house of Judah was seven years and six months.","The length of time David was king in Hebron over the house of Judah was seven years and six months.","Et fuit numerus dierum, quos commoratus est David imperans in Hebron super domum Iudae, septem annorum et sex mensium.","ויהי מספר הימים אשר היה דוד מלך בחברון על בית יהודה שבע שנים וששה חדשים׃"],["10","2","12","네르의 아들 아브네르와, 사울의 아들 이스 보셋의 부하들은 마하나임에서 기브온으로 출정하였다.","어느 날, 넬의 아들 아브넬이 사울의 아들 이스보셋의 부하들을 거느리고 마하나임에서 기브온으로 왔다.","넬의 아들 아브넬과 사울의 아들 이스보셋의 신복들은 마하나임에서 나와 기브온에 이르고","넬의 아들 아브넬과 사울의 아들 이스보셋의 신복들은 마하나임에서 나와서 기브온에 이르고","무능한 이스보셋이 이스라엘을 다스린 지 2년이 되었을 때였다. 실권을 쥔 넬의 아들 아브넬이 마하나임에서 전군을 거느리고 요단강 서쪽으로 출전하여 예루살렘 북방 12킬로미터 지점에 위치한 기브온에 진을 쳤다.","Now Abner, son of Ner, and the servants of Ishbaal, Saul’s son, set out from Mahanaim for Gibeon.","And Abner the son of Ner, and the servants of Ishbosheth the son of Saul, went out from Mahanaim to Gibeon.","Abner son of Ner, together with the men of Ish-Bosheth son of Saul, left Mahanaim and went to Gibeon.","Egressusque est Abner filius Ner et pueri Isbaal filii Saul de Mahanaim in Gabaon.","ויצא אבנר בן נר ועבדי איש בשת בן שאול ממחנים גבעונה׃"],["10","2","13","츠루야의 아들 요압도 다윗의 부하들을 거느리고 출정하여 기브온 못 가에서 그들과 마주쳤는데, 한편은 못 이쪽에, 다른 편은 못 저쪽에 자리 잡았다.","스루야의 아들 요압도 다윗의 부하들을 거느리고 기브온 못 가로 나가 서로 맞붙게 되었다. 한 편은 못 이 쪽에, 다른 한 편은 못 저 쪽에 진을 쳤다.","스루야의 아들 요압과 다윗의 신복들도 나와 기브온 못 가에서 그들을 만나 함께 앉으니 이는 못 이쪽이요 그는 못 저쪽이라","스루야의 아들 요압과 다윗의 신복들도 나와서 기브온 못가에서 저희를 만나 앉으니 이는 못 이편이요 저는 못 저편이라","스루야의 아들 요압도 다윗의 부하들을 거느리고 출전하였다. 스루야는 다윗의 누이인데, 그녀의 남편은 이미 죽었기 때문에 요압은 살아 있는 어머니의 이름을 빌려 그의 아들로 호칭되었다. 이리하여 아브넬과 요압은 서로 군대를 거느리고 기브온의 연못가에서 대치하게 되었다. 다윗의 군인들은 연못의 이편에, 이스보셋의 군인들은 연못의 저편에 진을 쳤다.","Joab, son of Zeruiah, and the servants of David also set out and encountered them at the pool of Gibeon. And they sat down, one group on one side of the pool and the other on the opposite side.","And Joab the son of Zeruiah, and the servants of David, went out, and met together by the pool of Gibeon: and they sat down, the one on the one side of the pool, and the other on the other side of the pool.","Joab son of Zeruiah and David's men went out and met them at the pool of Gibeon. One group sat down on one side of the pool and one group on the other side.","Porro Ioab filius Sarviae et pueri David egressi sunt et occurrerunt eis iuxta piscinam Gabaon; et, cum in unum convenissent e regione, constiterunt hi ex una parte piscinae et illi ex altera.","ויואב בן צרויה ועבדי דוד יצאו ויפגשום על ברכת גבעון יחדו וישבו אלה על הברכה מזה ואלה על הברכה מזה׃"],["10","2","14","그때 아브네르가 요압에게 “부하들을 내세워 우리 앞에서 겨루게 하자.” 하니, 요압도 “좋다.” 하였다.","아브넬이 요압에게 말을 건넸다. \"젊은 군인들을 뽑아 이 자리에서 겨루게 하면 어떤가?\" 요압도 그렇게 하자고 응했다.","아브넬이 요압에게 이르되 원하건대 청년들에게 일어나서 우리 앞에서 겨루게 하자 요압이 이르되 일어나게 하자 하매","아브넬이 요압에게 이르되 청컨대 소년들로 일어나서 우리 앞에서 장난하게 하자 요압이 가로되 일어나게 하자 하매","이때에 아브넬이 요압에게 한가지 제안을 하였다. \"우리 모두가 싸울 것이 아니라 젊은 군인을 대표로 뽑아 겨루어 보게 합시다\" 요압도 이에 찬성하였다.","Then Abner said to Joab, “Let the young men rise and perform for us.” Joab replied, “All right.”","And Abner said to Joab, Let the young men now arise, and play before us. And Joab said, Let them arise.","Then Abner said to Joab, \"Let's have some of the young men get up and fight hand to hand in front of us.\" \"All right, let them do it,\" Joab said.","Dixitque Abner ad Ioab:  “Surgant pueri et ludant coram nobis “. Et respondit Ioab:  “Surgant “.","ויאמר אבנר אל יואב יקומו נא הנערים וישחקו לפנינו ויאמר יואב יקמו׃"],["10","2","15","그래서 부하들이 일어나 정한 수대로 나갔는데, 사울의 아들 이스 보셋 쪽에서 벤야민 사람 열둘, 다윗의 부하들 가운데에서 열둘이 나갔다.","이윽고 사울의 아들 이스보셋 편인 베냐민 가문에서 열두 사람, 다윗의 부하 가운데서 열두 사람이 나섰다.","그들이 일어나 그 수대로 나아가니 베냐민과 사울의 아들 이스보셋의 편에 열두 명이요 다윗의 신복 중에 열두 명이라","저희가 일어나 그 수효대로 나아가니 베냐민과 사울의 아들 이스보셋의 편에 열 둘이요 다윗의 신복 중에 열 둘이라","이리하여 이스보셋 편에서는 베냐민 사람 12명이 나서고, 다윗의 부하들 편에서도 12명이 나섰다.","So they rose and were counted off: twelve of the Benjaminites of Ishbaal, son of Saul, and twelve of David’s servants.","Then there arose and went over by number twelve of Benjamin, which pertained to Ishbosheth the son of Saul, and twelve of the servants of David.","So they stood up and were counted off--twelve men for Benjamin and Ish-Bosheth son of Saul, and twelve for David.","Surrexerunt ergo et transierunt numero duodecim de Beniamin ex parte Isbaal filii Saul, et duodecim de pueris David.","ויקמו ויעברו במספר שנים עשר לבנימן ולאיש בשת בן שאול ושנים עשר מעבדי דוד׃"],["10","2","16","그들은 저마다 상대방의 머리를 붙잡고 칼로 옆구리를 찔러 함께 쓰러졌다. 그래서 그곳을 ‘옆구리 벌판’이라고 하였는데, 그곳은 기브온에 있다.","그들은 서로 상대방의 머리를 그러쥐고 칼로 옆구리를 찔러 양편이 모두 쓰러져 죽었다. 그래서 기브온에 있는 그 곳을 \"옆구리 벌판\"이라고 부르게 되었다.","각기 상대방의 머리를 잡고 칼로 상대방의 옆구리를 찌르매 일제히 쓰러진지라 그러므로 그 곳을 헬갓 핫수림이라 일컬었으며 기브온에 있더라","각기 적수의 머리를 잡고 칼로 적수의 옆구리를 찌르매 일제히 쓰러진지라 그러므로 그곳을 1)헬갓핫수림이라 일컬었으며 기브온에 있더라 날카로운 칼의 밭","그런데 젊은 투사들은 서로 상대편의 머리카락을 거머쥐고 똑같이 상대편의 옆구리를 칼로 찔러 모두 함께 죽였다. 그래서 그때부터 기브온 근처에 있는 그곳을 헬갓핫수림이라고 부르게 되었다. 이것은 \"칼날의 들판\"이나 \"옆구리 벌판\"을 뜻하는 이름이다.","Then each one grasped his opponent’s head and thrust his sword into his opponent’s side, and they all fell down together. And so that place was named the Field of the Sides; it is in Gibeon.","And they caught every one his fellow by the head, and thrust his sword in his fellow's side; so they fell down together: wherefore that place was called Helkathhazzurim, which is in Gibeon.","Then each man grabbed his opponent by the head and thrust his dagger into his opponent's side, and they fell down together. So that place in Gibeon was called Helkath Hazzurim.","Apprehensoque unusquisque capite comparis sui, defixit gladium in latus contrarii, et ceciderunt simul; vocatumque est nomen loci illius ager Laterum in Gabaon.","ויחזקו איש בראש רעהו וחרבו בצד רעהו ויפלו יחדו ויקרא למקום ההוא חלקת הצרים אשר בגבעון׃"],["10","2","17","그날 싸움은 매우 치열하였다. 아브네르와 이스라엘 사람들은 다윗의 부하들에게 패배하였다.","그 날 격전이 벌어졌다. 아브넬이 거느린 이스라엘 편은 다윗의 부하들에게 패하고 말았다.","그 날에 싸움이 심히 맹렬하더니 아브넬과 이스라엘 사람들이 다윗의 신복들 앞에서 패하니라","그 날에 싸움이 심히 맹렬하더니 아브넬과 이스라엘 사람들이 다윗의 신복들 앞에서 패하니라","일이 이쯤 되자 두 편 사이에 무서운 전면전이 발발하였고, 결국은 아브넬이 지휘하는 이스라엘 군대가 다윗의 군인들에게 패하여 도주하였다.","The battle that day was very fierce, and Abner and the men of Israel were defeated by David’s servants.","And there was a very sore battle that day; and Abner was beaten, and the men of Israel, before the servants of David.","The battle that day was very fierce, and Abner and the men of Israel were defeated by David's men.","Et ortum est bellum durum valde in die illa, fugatusque est Abner et viri Israel a pueris David.","ותהי המלחמה קשה עד מאד ביום ההוא וינגף אבנר ואנשי ישראל לפני עבדי דוד׃"],["10","2","18","그곳에는 츠루야의 세 아들 요압과 아비사이와 아사엘이 있었는데, 아사엘은 들에 사는 영양처럼 달음박질이 빨랐다.","거기에는 스루야의 세 아들, 요압과 아비새와 아사헬이 있었는데, 아사헬은 달음박질이 들사슴처럼 빨랐다.","그 곳에 스루야의 세 아들 요압과 아비새와 아사헬이 있었는데 아사헬의 발은 들노루 같이 빠르더라","그곳에 스루야의 세 아들 요압과 아비새와 아사헬이 있었는데 아사헬의 발은 들노루 같이 빠르더라","마침 스루야의 세 아들, 즉 요압과 아비새와 아사헬이 모두 그 전투에 가담하고 있었는데, 아사헬은 들사슴처럼 발이 빠른 자였다.","The three sons of Zeruiah were there—Joab, Abishai, and Asahel. Asahel, who was as fleet of foot as a gazelle in the open field,","And there were three sons of Zeruiah there, Joab, and Abishai, and Asahel: and Asahel was as light of foot as a wild roe.","The three sons of Zeruiah were there: Joab, Abishai and Asahel. Now Asahel was as fleet-footed as a wild gazelle.","Erant autem ibi tres filii Sarviae: Ioab et Abisai et Asael. Porro Asael cursor velocissimus fuit quasi unus ex capreis, quae morantur in campis.","ויהיו שם שלשה בני צרויה יואב ואבישי ועשהאל ועשהאל קל ברגליו כאחד הצבים אשר בשדה׃"],["10","2","19","아사엘은 아브네르의 뒤를 쫓아, 오른쪽으로도 왼쪽으로도 몸을 돌리지 않고 아브네르의 뒤만 따라갔다.","그는 한눈 한 번 팔지 않고 아브넬의 뒤를 곧장 쫓았다.","아사헬이 아브넬을 쫓아 달려가되 좌우로 치우치지 않고 아브넬의 뒤를 쫓으니","아사헬이 아브넬을 쫓아 달려가되 좌우로 치우치지 않고 아브넬의 뒤를 쫓으니","바로 그가 패주하는 아브넬을 뒤쫓기 시작하였는데, 오른쪽으로나 왼쪽으로나 치우치지 않고 곧장 아브넬만을 따라붙었다.","set out after Abner, turning neither right nor left in his pursuit.","And Asahel pursued after Abner; and in going he turned not to the right hand nor to the left from following Abner.","He chased Abner, turning neither to the right nor to the left as he pursued him.","Persequebatur autem Asael Abner et non declinavit ad dextram sive ad sinistram omittens persequi Abner.","וירדף עשהאל אחרי אבנר ולא נטה ללכת על הימין ועל השמאול מאחרי אבנר׃"],["10","2","20","아브네르가 뒤돌아보며, “네가 바로 아사엘이냐?” 하고 물으니, 아사엘이 “그렇다.” 하고 대답하였다.","아브넬이 뒤를 돌아보며 \"아사헬, 너였구나.\" 하고 말했다. \"그렇다.\" 아사헬이 말을 받자,","아브넬이 뒤를 돌아보며 이르되 아사헬아 너냐 대답하되 나로라","아브넬이 뒤를 돌아 보며 가로되 아사헬아 너냐 대답하되 내로라","쫓기던 아브넬이 뒤를 돌아보며 \"아사헬아, 네가 그렇게 나를 쫓아왔느냐?\" 하고 물었다. 아사헬이 \"그렇다\" 라고 대답하자","Abner turned around and said, “Is that you, Asahel?” He replied, “Yes.”","Then Abner looked behind him, and said, Art thou Asahel? And he answered, I am.","Abner looked behind him and asked, \"Is that you, Asahel?\" \"It is,\" he answered.","Respexit itaque Abner post tergum suum et ait:  “Tune es Asael? “. Qui respondit:  “Ego sum “.","ויפן אבנר אחריו ויאמר האתה זה עשהאל ויאמר אנכי׃"],["10","2","21","그러자 아브네르가 그에게 말하였다. “오른쪽이나 왼쪽으로 몸을 돌려 젊은이나 하나 잡고 그를 털어 가라.” 그러나 아사엘은 물러서지 않고 그의 뒤를 쫓았다.","아브넬이 \"네 좌우에 있는 젊은 놈이나 하나 잡아서 갑옷이라도 빼앗아라.\" 하고 말했다. 그래도 아사헬이 들은 체도 않고 따라붙자,","아브넬이 그에게 이르되 너는 왼쪽으로나 오른쪽으로나 가서 청년 하나를 붙잡아 그의 군복을 빼앗으라 하되 아사헬이 그렇게 하기를 원하지 아니하고 그의 뒤를 쫓으매","아브넬이 저에게 이르되 너는 좌편으로나 우편으로나 치우쳐서 소년 하나를 잡아 그 군복을 빼앗으라 하되 아사헬이 치우치기를 원치 않고 그 뒤를 쫓으매","아브넬이 그에게 이와 같이 타일렀다. \"나를 쫓지 말고 다른 사람이나 하나 잡아가거라! 내 뒤에 사방으로 흩어진 부하들 중에서 어느 한놈을 붙잡아 그의 무기와 군복이나 빼앗아 가지고 돌아가거라.\" 그런데도 아사헬은 딴 길로 들어서지 않고 계속 아브넬만을 뒤쫓았다.","Abner said to him, “Turn right or left; seize one of the young men and take what you can strip from him.” But Asahel would not stop pursuing him.","And Abner said to him, Turn thee aside to thy right hand or to thy left, and lay thee hold on one of the young men, and take thee his armour. But Asahel would not turn aside from following of him.","Then Abner said to him, \"Turn aside to the right or to the left; take on one of the young men and strip him of his weapons.\" But Asahel would not stop chasing him.","Dixitque ei Abner:  “Vade ad dextram sive ad sinistram et apprehende unum de adulescentibus et tolle tibi spolia eius “. Noluit autem Asael omittere quin urgeret eum.","ויאמר לו אבנר נטה לך על ימינך או על שמאלך ואחז לך אחד מהנערים וקח לך את חלצתו ולא אבה עשהאל לסור מאחריו׃"],["10","2","22","아브네르가 다시 아사엘에게 “내 뒤는 그만 쫓고 물러서라. 내가 너를 쳐 땅바닥에 쓰러지게 할 까닭이 없지 않느냐? 그렇게 되면 네 형 요압 앞에서 내가 어떻게 머리를 들겠느냐?” 하고 말하였다.","아브넬이 타일렀다. \"내 뒤는 그만 쫓고 물러가라! 너를 쳐서 쓰러뜨리고 싶지는 않다. 그렇게 되면 네 형 요압을 볼 낯이 없지 않겠느냐?\"","아브넬이 다시 아사헬에게 이르되 너는 나 쫓기를 그치라 내가 너를 쳐서 땅에 엎드러지게 할 까닭이 무엇이냐 그렇게 하면 내가 어떻게 네 형 요압을 대면하겠느냐 하되","아브넬이 다시 아사헬에게 이르되 너는 나 쫓기를 그치라 내가 너를 쳐서 땅에 엎드러지게 할 까닭이 무엇이냐 그렇게 하면 내가 어떻게 네 형 요압을 대면하겠느냐 하되","그래서 아브넬이 그에게 다시 한 번 경고하였다. \"이제는 더이상 나를 뒤쫓아오지 말아라. 네가 무엇 때문에 내 창에 찔려 죽으려고 하느냐? 만일 내가 너를 죽이면, 내가 어떻게 네 형 요압 앞에서 얼굴을 들 수가 있겠느냐?\"","Once more Abner said to Asahel: “Stop pursuing me! Why must I strike you to the ground? How could I show my face to your brother Joab?”","And Abner said again to Asahel, Turn thee aside from following me: wherefore should I smite thee to the ground? how then should I hold up my face to Joab thy brother?","Again Abner warned Asahel, \"Stop chasing me! Why should I strike you down? How could I look your brother Joab in the face?\"","Rursumque locutus est Abner ad Asael:  “Recede, noli me sequi, ne compellar confodere te in terram et levare non potero faciem meam ad Ioab fratrem tuum “.","ויסף עוד אבנר לאמר אל עשהאל סור לך מאחרי למה אככה ארצה ואיך אשא פני אל יואב אחיך׃"],["10","2","23","그래도 아사엘은 물러서기를 마다하였다. 그래서 아브네르는 창끝으로 그의 배를 찔렀다. 창이 등을 뚫고 나오자 그는 그 자리에서 쓰러져 죽었다. 아사엘이 쓰러져 죽은 자리에 다다른 사람들은 모두 그곳에 멈추어 섰다.","그래도 아사헬이 물러서려고 하지 않자 아브넬은 창 끝으로 아사헬의 배를 찔렀다. 창이 아사헬의 등을 뚫고 나가 그는 그 자리에 쓰러져 죽고 말았다. 다른 사람들도 아사헬이 쓰러져 죽은 곳까지 와서는 더 나아가지 못하고 그 자리에 멈추어 섰다. 그러나","그가 물러가기를 거절하매 아브넬이 창 뒤 끝으로 그의 배를 찌르니 창이 그의 등을 꿰뚫고 나간지라 곧 그 곳에 엎드러져 죽으매 아사헬이 엎드러져 죽은 곳에 이르는 자마다 머물러 섰더라","저가 치우치기를 싫어하매 아브넬이 창 뒤끝으로 그 배를 찌르니 창이 그 등을 꿰뚫고 나간지라 곧 그곳에 엎드러져 죽으매 아사헬의 엎드러져 죽은 곳에 이르는 자마다 머물러 섰더라","그런데도 아사헬이 방향을 다른 곳으로 바꾸지 않자 아브넬은 창끝으로 그의 배를 찔렀다. 그러자 빠른 속도로 달려오던 아사헬은 창에 찔려 그 자리에서 즉사하였다. 그래서 그곳을 지나는 사람마다 아사헬이 쓰러져 죽은 곳에 이르러서는 잠시 멈추어 서게 되었다.","Still he refused to stop. So Abner struck him in the abdomen with the heel of his spear, and the weapon protruded from his back. He fell there and died on the spot. All who came to the place where Asahel had fallen and died, halted.","Howbeit he refused to turn aside: wherefore Abner with the hinder end of the spear smote him under the fifth rib, that the spear came out behind him; and he fell down there, and died in the same place: and it came to pass, that as many as came to the place where Asahel fell down and died stood still.","But Asahel refused to give up the pursuit; so Abner thrust the butt of his spear into Asahel's stomach, and the spear came out through his back. He fell there and died on the spot. And every man stopped when he came to the place where Asahel had fallen and died.","Qui audire contempsit et noluit declinare. Percussit ergo eum Abner, aversa hasta in inguine, et exiit hasta retrorsum, et mortuus est ibi. Omnesque qui transibant per locum, in quo ceciderat Asael et mortuus erat, subsistebant.","וימאן לסור ויכהו אבנר באחרי החנית אל החמש ותצא החנית מאחריו ויפל שם וימת תחתו ויהי כל הבא אל המקום אשר נפל שם עשהאל וימת ויעמדו׃"],["10","2","24","그러나 요압과 아비사이는 계속 아브네르의 뒤를 쫓아, 해가 질 무렵 기브온 광야로 가는 길가의 기아 맞은쪽에 있는 암마 언덕에 이르렀다.","요압과 아비새만은 아브넬을 계속 쫓았다. 그들이 기브온 사막으로 가는 길가에 있는 기아 맞은편 암마 언덕에 다다랐을 때 날이 저물었다.","요압과 아비새가 아브넬의 뒤를 쫓아 기브온 거친 땅의 길 가 기아 맞은쪽 암마 산에 이를 때에 해가 졌고","요압과 아비새가 아브넬의 뒤를 쫓아 기브온 거친 땅의 길 가 기아 맞은편 암마산에 이를 때에 해가 졌고","아사헬이 그렇게 죽자, 이를 분하게 여긴 그의 형들이 계속 아브넬을 뒤쫓았다. 요압과 아비새가 해질 때까지 추격하여서 암마 언덕에 이르렀는데, 그 건너편에는 기아 샘이 있고, 거기서부터는 기브온 초원이 시작되는 황막한 지역이었다.","But Joab and Abishai continued the pursuit of Abner. The sun had gone down when they came to the hill of Ammah which lies east of the valley toward the wilderness near Geba.","Joab also and Abishai pursued after Abner: and the sun went down when they were come to the hill of Ammah, that lieth before Giah by the way of the wilderness of Gibeon.","But Joab and Abishai pursued Abner, and as the sun was setting, they came to the hill of Ammah, near Giah on the way to the wasteland of Gibeon.","Persequentibus autem Ioab et Abisai fugientem Abner, sol occubuit; et venerunt usque ad collem Amma, qui est ex adverso Gaiah in via deserti in Gabaon.","וירדפו יואב ואבישי אחרי אבנר והשמש באה והמה באו עד גבעת אמה אשר על פני גיח דרך מדבר גבעון׃"],["10","2","25","그때 벤야민의 자손들은 아브네르의 뒤로 모여들어 한 무리가 되자, 어떤 언덕 꼭대기에 버티고 섰다.","한편, 아브넬을 따라온 베냐민 사람들은 언덕 위에서 그를 둘러싸고 한데 뭉쳐서 버티었다.","베냐민 족속은 함께 모여 아브넬을 따라 한 무리를 이루고 작은 산 꼭대기에 섰더라","베냐민 족속은 함께 모여 아브넬을 따라 한 떼를 이루고 작은 산꼭대기에 섰더라","이때에 베냐민 지파의 군인들은 아브넬 주위에 집결하여 암마 언덕의 꼭대기에 진을 치고 있었다.","Here the Benjaminites rallied around Abner, forming a single group, and made a stand on a hilltop.","And the children of Benjamin gathered themselves together after Abner, and became one troop, and stood on the top of an hill.","Then the men of Benjamin rallied behind Abner. They formed themselves into a group and took their stand on top of a hill.","Congregatique sunt filii Beniamin ad Abner et conglobati in unum cuneum steterunt in summitate tumuli unius.","ויתקבצו בני בנימן אחרי אבנר ויהיו לאגדה אחת ויעמדו על ראש גבעה אחת׃"],["10","2","26","아브네르가 요압을 불러서 말하였다. “우리가 언제까지 이렇게 칼부림을 해야 하겠느냐? 이러다가 결국 비참한 일이 일어나게 될 줄을 모른단 말이냐? 그대는 군사들에게 제 형제의 뒤를 그만 쫓고 돌아서라는 명령을 끝내 내리지 않을 셈인가?”","아브넬이 요압 쪽에 대고 소리쳤다. \"언제까지 피를 보아야 하겠느냐? 이러다가는 마침내 끔찍한 일이 일어날 줄을 모르느냐? 너는 군사들에게 동족을 그만 추격하고 돌아가라는 명령을 끝내 내리지 않을 셈이냐?\"","아브넬이 요압에게 외쳐 이르되 칼이 영원히 사람을 상하겠느냐 마침내 참혹한 일이 생길 줄을 알지 못하느냐 네가 언제 무리에게 그의 형제 쫓기를 그치라 명령하겠느냐","아브넬이 요압에게 외쳐 가로되 칼이 영영히 사람을 상하겠느냐 마침내 참혹한 일이 생길 줄을 알지 못하느냐 네가 언제나 무리에게 그 형제 쫓기를 그치라 명하겠느냐","거기서 아브넬이 요압에게 소리를 지르며 말하였다. \"무엇 때문에 우리가 끝없는 칼부림을 해야 되겠느냐? 그 결과가 어떻게 될는지 너는 짐작도 못하느냐? 너는 어서 네 부하들에게 더 이상 동족을 추격하지 말라고 명령하여라.\"","Then Abner called to Joab and said: “Must the sword devour forever? Do you not know that afterward there will be bitterness? How long before you tell the people to stop pursuing their brothers?”","Then Abner called to Joab, and said, Shall the sword devour for ever? knowest thou not that it will be bitterness in the latter end? how long shall it be then, ere thou bid the people return from following their brethren?","Abner called out to Joab, \"Must the sword devour forever? Don't you realize that this will end in bitterness? How long before you order your men to stop pursuing their brothers?\"","Et exclamavit Abner ad Ioab et ait:  “Num usque ad internecionem tuus mucro desaeviet? An ignoras quod periculosa sit desperatio? Usquequo non dicis populo, ut omittat persequi fratres suos? “.","ויקרא אבנר אל יואב ויאמר הלנצח תאכל חרב הלוא ידעתה כי מרה תהיה באחרונה ועד מתי לא תאמר לעם לשוב מאחרי אחיהם׃"],["10","2","27","요압이 대답하였다. “살아 계신 하느님을 두고 맹세하는데, 그대가 그 말을 하지 않았으면, 내일 아침이 되어서야 군사들이 저마다 제 형제의 뒤를 쫓는 것을 그만두었을 것이다.”","\"네가 그런 말을 하지 않았더라면, 너희가 아무리 동족이라 해도 우리 군사들이 내일 아침까지는 천하 없어도 너를 따라잡았을 것이다.\"","요압이 이르되 하나님이 살아 계심을 두고 맹세하노니 네가 말하지 아니하였더면 무리가 아침에 각각 다 돌아갔을 것이요 그의 형제를 쫓지 아니하였으리라 하고","요압이 가로되 하나님이 사시거니와 네가 흔단의 말을 내지 아니하였더면 무리가 아침에 다 돌아갔을 것이요 그 형제를 쫓지 아니하였으리라 하고","요압도 이제는 아우에 대한 보복을 뒷날로 미루고 이렇게 대답하였다. \"하나님께서 분명히 살아 계심을 걸고 맹세하지만 네가 그 말을 하지 않았더라면 내 부하들이 내일 아침까지는 충분히 너를 따라 잡았을 것이다.\"","Joab replied, “As God lives, if you had not spoken, it would be morning before the people would be stopped from pursuing their brothers.”","And Joab said, As God liveth, unless thou hadst spoken, surely then in the morning the people had gone up every one from following his brother.","Joab answered, \"As surely as God lives, if you had not spoken, the men would have continued the pursuit of their brothers until morning.\"","Et ait Ioab:  “Vivit Deus, nisi locutus fuisses, usque mane non recessisset populus persequens unusquisque fratrem suum “.","ויאמר יואב חי האלהים כי לולא דברת כי אז מהבקר נעלה העם איש מאחרי אחיו׃"],["10","2","28","요압이 나팔을 부니, 모든 군사가 멈춰 서서 더 이상 이스라엘인들의 뒤를 쫓지도 않고 싸우지도 않았다.","이렇게 말하고 나서 요압은 나팔을 불어 추격을 멈추고, 더 이상 이스라엘 군을 쫓아가며 치지 않았다.","요압이 나팔을 불매 온 무리가 머물러 서고 다시는 이스라엘을 쫓아가지 아니하고 다시는 싸우지도 아니하니라","나팔을 불매 온 무리가 머물러 서고 다시는 이스라엘을 쫓아가지 아니하고 다시는 싸우지도 아니하니라","그러고 나서 요압이 그 자리에서 나팔을 불자, 다윗의 군인들은 더 이상 이스라엘 군인들을 추격하지도 않고 그들과 싸우지도 않았다.","Joab then sounded the horn, and all the people came to a halt, pursuing Israel no farther and fighting no more.","So Joab blew a trumpet, and all the people stood still, and pursued after Israel no more, neither fought they any more.","So Joab blew the trumpet, and all the men came to a halt; they no longer pursued Israel, nor did they fight anymore.","Insonuit ergo Ioab bucina, et stetit omnis exercitus; nec persecuti sunt ultra Israel neque certaverunt amplius.","ויתקע יואב בשופר ויעמדו כל העם ולא ירדפו עוד אחרי ישראל ולא יספו עוד להלחם׃"],["10","2","29","그날 아브네르와 그의 부하들은 밤새도록 걸어 아라바를 지나 요르단을 건너고, 오전 내내 걸어 마하나임에 이르렀다.","아브넬은 부하들을 이끌고 밤을 새우며 아라바를 지나 요르단 강을 건너고 아침 나절에도 내내 걸어서 가까스로 마하나임에 다다랐다.","아브넬과 그의 부하들이 밤새도록 걸어서 아라바를 지나 요단을 건너 비드론 온 땅을 지나 마하나임에 이르니라","아브넬과 그 종자들이 밤새도록 행하여 아라바를 지나 요단을 건너 비드론 온 땅을 지나 마하나임에 이르니라","그래서 아브넬은 부하들을 거느리고 그날 밤새도록 걸어서 요단강을 지나, 그 다음날에야 얍복강 줄기를 따라 마하나임으로 돌아갔다.","Abner and his men marched all night long through the Arabah, crossed the Jordan, marched all through the morning, and came to Mahanaim.","And Abner and his men walked all that night through the plain, and passed over Jordan, and went through all Bithron, and they came to Mahanaim.","All that night Abner and his men marched through the Arabah. They crossed the Jordan, continued through the whole Bithron and came to Mahanaim.","Abner autem et viri eius abierunt per Arabam tota nocte illa et transierunt Iordanem et, lustrato toto saltu Bethron, venerunt Mahanaim.","ואבנר ואנשיו הלכו בערבה כל הלילה ההוא ויעברו את הירדן וילכו כל הבתרון ויבאו מחנים׃"],["10","2","30","요압도 아브네르의 뒤를 더 이상 쫓지 않고 돌아섰다. 그가 군사들을 모두 모아 보니 다윗의 부하들 가운데 열아홉 명과 아사엘이 비었다.","요압이 아브넬 추격을 그만두고 돌아와서 군사들을 모아보니 아사헬과 다윗의 신하 열아홉이 없어졌다.","요압이 아브넬 쫓기를 그치고 돌아와 무리를 다 모으니 다윗의 신복 중에 열아홉 명과 아사헬이 없어졌으나","요압이 아브넬 쫓기를 그치고 돌아와서 무리를 다 모으니 다윗의 신복 중에 십 구인과 아사헬이 궐이 났으나","요압도 아브넬을 추격하던 길에서 돌아와 군인들을 점검해 보니 다윗의 부하 19명과 아사헬이 없었다.","Joab, coming from the pursuit of Abner, assembled all the men. Nineteen other servants of David were missing, besides Asahel.","And Joab returned from following Abner: and when he had gathered all the people together, there lacked of David's servants nineteen men and Asahel.","Then Joab returned from pursuing Abner and assembled all his men. Besides Asahel, nineteen of David's men were found missing.","Porro Ioab reversus, omisso Abner, congregavit omnem populum; et defuerunt de pueris David decem et novem viri, excepto Asaele;","ויואב שב מאחרי אבנר ויקבץ את כל העם ויפקדו מעבדי דוד תשעה עשר איש ועשהאל׃"],["10","2","31","그러나 다윗의 부하들은 벤야민 사람과 아브네르의 부하를 삼백육십 명이나 쳐 죽였다.","다윗의 부하들 손에 죽은 아브넬 수하 베냐민 군은 삼백육십 명이나 되었다.","다윗의 신복들이 베냐민과 아브넬에게 속한 자들을 쳐서 삼백육십 명을 죽였더라","다윗의 신복들이 베냐민과 아브넬에게 속한 자들을 쳐서 삼백 륙십명을 죽였더라","그런데 그들이 쳐죽인 사람은 아브넬의 부하 중에서 베냐민 사람만 360명이었다.","But David’s servants had struck down and killed three hundred and sixty men of Benjamin, followers of Abner.","But the servants of David had smitten of Benjamin, and of Abner's men, so that three hundred and threescore men died.","But David's men had killed three hundred and sixty Benjamites who were with Abner.","servi autem David percusserunt de Beniamin et ex viris, qui erant cum Abner, trecentos sexaginta, qui et mortui sunt.","ועבדי דוד הכו מבנימן ובאנשי אבנר שלש מאות וששים איש מתו׃"],["10","2","32","그들은 아사엘을 메어다가 베들레헴에 있는 그의 아버지 무덤에 묻었다. 그런 다음 요압과 그의 부하들은 밤새도록 걸어서 동틀 무렵에 헤브론에 이르렀다.","군사들은 아사헬을 베들레헴에 있는 조상의 무덤에 안장하였다. 요압은 부하들을 거느리고 밤새 걸어서 동 틀 무렵에 헤브론에 다다랐다.","무리가 아사헬을 들어올려 베들레헴에 있는 그의 조상 묘에 장사하고 요압과 그의 부하들이 밤새도록 걸어서 헤브론에 이른 때에 날이 밝았더라","무리가 아사헬을 베들레헴에 있는 그 아비 묘에 장사하고 요압과 그 종자들이 밤새도록 행하여 헤브론에 이를 때에 날이 밝았더라","그들은 아사헬의 시체를 메어다가 베들레헴에 있는 그의 조상들 묘에 장사하였다. 요압은 부하들과 밤새도록 행군하여 이튿날 동틀 무렵에 헤브론으로 돌아왔다.","They took up Asahel and buried him in his father’s tomb in Bethlehem. Joab and his men made an all-night march, and dawn found them in Hebron.","And they took up Asahel, and buried him in the sepulchre of his father, which was in Bethlehem. And Joab and his men went all night, and they came to Hebron at break of day.","They took Asahel and buried him in his father's tomb at Bethlehem. Then Joab and his men marched all night and arrived at Hebron by daybreak.","Tuleruntque Asael et sepelierunt eum in sepulcro patris sui in Bethlehem. Et ambulaverunt tota nocte Ioab et viri, qui erant cum eo, et in ipso crepusculo pervenerunt in Hebron.","וישאו את עשהאל ויקברהו בקבר אביו אשר בית לחם וילכו כל הלילה יואב ואנשיו ויאר להם בחברון׃"],["10","3","1","사울 집안과 다윗 집안 사이의 싸움은 오래 계속되었다. 다윗은 갈수록 강해졌고 사울 집안은 갈수록 약해졌다.","사울 왕실과 다윗 왕실 사이의 싸움은 오래 계속되었다. 다윗은 갈수록 강해졌고 사울 왕실은 갈수록 약해졌다.","사울의 집과 다윗의 집 사이에 전쟁이 오래매 다윗은 점점 강하여 가고 사울의 집은 점점 약하여 가니라","사울의 집과 다윗의 집 사이에 전쟁이 오래매 다윗은 점점 강하여가고 사울의 집은 점점 약하여가니라","그런데 사울의 추종자들과 다윗의 추종자들 사이에 오랜 전쟁이 계속되었다. 그럴수록 다윗은 점점 더 우세해지고, 사울 집안은 점점 더 권세와 위엄을 잃어 갔다.","There followed a long war between the house of Saul and the house of David, in which David grew ever stronger, but the house of Saul ever weaker.","Now there was long war between the house of Saul and the house of David: but David waxed stronger and stronger, and the house of Saul waxed weaker and weaker.","The war between the house of Saul and the house of David lasted a long time. David grew stronger and stronger, while the house of Saul grew weaker and weaker.","Facta est ergo longa concertatio inter domum Saul et inter do mum David: David semper invalescens, domus autem Saul decrescens cotidie.","ותהי המלחמה ארכה בין בית שאול ובין בית דוד ודוד הלך וחזק ובית שאול הלכים ודלים׃"],["10","3","2","다윗이 헤브론에서 아들들을 낳았다. 맏아들은 이즈르엘 여자 아히노암에게서 난 암논이다.","1)다윗이 헤브론에서 낳은 아들은 다음과 같다. 이즈르엘 여자 아히노암에게서 맏아들 암논을 낳았고,3:2-5에 대해서는 1역대 3:1-4 참조.","다윗이 헤브론에서 아들들을 낳았으되 맏아들은 암논이라 이스르엘 여인 아히노암의 소생이요","다윗이 헤브론에서 아들들을 낳았으되 맏아들은 암논이라 이스르엘 여인 아히노암의 소생이요","다윗이 헤브론에서 낳은 아들들은 차례대로 다음과 같았다. 맏아들 암논은 이스르엘 여인 아비노암이 낳았고,","Sons were born to David in Hebron: his firstborn, Amnon, of Ahinoam from Jezreel;","And unto David were sons born in Hebron: and his firstborn was Amnon, of Ahinoam the Jezreelitess;","Sons were born to David in Hebron: His firstborn was Amnon the son of Ahinoam of Jezreel;","Nati quoque sunt filii David in Hebron. Fuitque primogenitus eius Amnon de Achinoam Iezrahelitide,","וילדו לדוד בנים בחברון ויהי בכורו אמנון לאחינעם היזרעאלת׃"],["10","3","3","둘째는 카르멜 사람 나발의 아내였던 아비가일에게서 난 킬압이고, 셋째는 그수르 임금 탈마이의 딸 마아카의 아들 압살롬이다.","가르멜 사람 나발의 아내였던 아비가일에게서 둘째 아들 길랍을 낳았고, 그술 왕 탈매의 딸 마아가에게서 셋째 아들 압살롬을 낳았고,","둘째는 길르압이라 갈멜 사람 나발의 아내였던 아비가일의 소생이요 셋째는 압살롬이라 그술 왕 달매의 딸 마아가의 아들이요","둘째는 길르압이라 갈멜 사람 나발의 아내 되었던 아비가일의 소생이요 세째는 압살롬이라 그술 왕 달매의 딸 마아가의 아들이요","둘째 아들 길르압은 나발의 아내였던 갈멜 여인 아비가일이 낳았고, 셋째 아들 압살롬은 길르앗 북쪽에 있던 아람 족속의 작은 나라 그술의 왕 달매의 딸 마아가가 낳았고,","the second, Chileab, of Abigail the wife of Nabal of Carmel; the third, Absalom, son of Maacah, who was the daughter of Talmai, king of Geshur;","And his second, Chileab, of Abigail the wife of Nabal the Carmelite; and the third, Absalom the son of Maacah the daughter of Talmai king of Geshur;","his second, Kileab the son of Abigail the widow of Nabal of Carmel; the third, Absalom the son of Maacah daughter of Talmai king of Geshur;","et post eum Cheleab de Abigail uxore Nabal de Carmel, porro tertius Absalom filius Maacha filiae Tholmai regis Gesur,","ומשנהו כלאב לאביגל אשת נבל הכרמלי והשלשי אבשלום בן מעכה בת תלמי מלך גשור׃"],["10","3","4","넷째는 하낏의 아들 아도니야이고, 다섯째는 아비탈의 아들 스파트야이다.","하낏에게서 넷째 아들 아도니야를 낳았고, 아비탈에게서 다섯째 아들 스바티야를 낳았고,","넷째는 아도니야라 학깃의 아들이요 다섯째는 스바댜라 아비달의 아들이요","네째는 아도니야라 학깃의 아들이요 다섯째는 스바댜라 아비달의 아들이요","넷째 아들 아도니야는 학깃이 낳았고, 다섯째 아들 스바댜는 아비달이 낳았고,","the fourth, Adonijah, son of Haggith; the fifth, Shephatiah, son of Abital;","And the fourth, Adonijah the son of Haggith; and the fifth, Shephatiah the son of Abital;","the fourth, Adonijah the son of Haggith; the fifth, Shephatiah the son of Abital;","quartus autem Adonias filius Haggith et quintus Saphatia filius Abital,","והרביעי אדניה בן חגית והחמישי שפטיה בן אביטל׃"],["10","3","5","여섯째는 다윗의 부인 에글라에게서 난 이트르암이다. 이들이 헤브론에서 다윗이 낳은 아들들이다.","2)애처 에글라에게서 여섯째 아들 이드르암을 낳았다. 이상은 다윗이 헤브론에서 낳은 아들들이다.히브리어 본문: \"다윗의 아내.\"","여섯째는 이드르암이라 다윗의 아내 에글라의 소생이니 이들은 다윗이 헤브론에서 낳은 자들이더라","여섯째는 이드르암이라 다윗의 아내 에글라의 소생이니 이는 다윗이 헤브론에서 낳은 자들이더라","여섯째 아들 이드르암은 다윗이 가장 사랑하던 아내 에글라가 낳았다. 다윗은 이렇게 여섯 아내에게서 아들을 하나씩 낳은 뒤 헤브론에서 자녀들을 더 낳았다.","and the sixth, Ithream, by David’s wife Eglah. These were born to David in Hebron.","And the sixth, Ithream, by Eglah David's wife. These were born to David in Hebron.","and the sixth, Ithream the son of David's wife Eglah. These were born to David in Hebron.","sextus quoque Iethraam de Egla uxore David. Hi nati sunt David in Hebron.","והששי יתרעם לעגלה אשת דוד אלה ילדו לדוד בחברון׃"],["10","3","6","사울 집안과 다윗 집안 사이에 싸움이 계속되는 동안, 아브네르는 사울 집안에서 점점 강해졌다.","사울 왕실과 다윗 왕실 사이에 싸움이 계속되는 동안, 아브넬은 사울 왕실에서 차츰 세력을 굳혀갔다.","사울의 집과 다윗의 집 사이에 전쟁이 있는 동안에 아브넬이 사울의 집에서 점점 권세를 잡으니라","사울의 집과 다윗의 집 사이에 전쟁이 있는 동안에 아브넬이 사울의 집에서 점점 권세를 잡으니라","사울의 추종자들과 다윗의 추종자들 사이에 전쟁이 계속된 동안에 사울 왕기에서 실권을 행사한 사람은 아브넬이었다.","During the war between the house of Saul and the house of David, Abner was gaining power in the house of Saul.","And it came to pass, while there was war between the house of Saul and the house of David, that Abner made himself strong for the house of Saul.","During the war between the house of Saul and the house of David, Abner had been strengthening his own position in the house of Saul.","Cum ergo esset proelium inter domum Saul et domum David, Abner filius Ner regebat domum Saul.","ויהי בהיות המלחמה בין בית שאול ובין בית דוד ואבנר היה מתחזק בבית שאול׃"],["10","3","7","사울에게는 아야의 딸 리츠파라는 후궁이 있었다. 어느 날 이스 보셋이 아브네르에게 “장군은 어찌하여 내 아버지의 후궁을 범하였소?” 하고 말하였다.","사울에게 아야의 딸 리스바라는 후궁이 있었는데, 아브넬이 그를 범하였다. 이스보셋이 왜 자기 아버지의 후궁을 범했느냐고 꾸짖자","사울에게 첩이 있었으니 이름은 리스바요 아야의 딸이더라 이스보셋이 아브넬에게 이르되 네가 어찌하여 내 아버지의 첩과 통간하였느냐 하니","사울에게 첩이 있었으니 이름은 리스바요 아야의 딸이더라 이스보셋이 아브넬에게 이르되 네가 어찌하여 내 아버지의 첩을 통간하였느냐","그런데 군사령관 아브넬이 사울의 첩이었던 아야의 딸 리스바와 정을 통하는 데에까지 이르자 이스보셋은 이것이 바로 왕권을 노리는 아브넬의 야욕이라고 판단하였다. 이스보셋이 이러한 일을 아브넬에게 따지자","Now Saul had had a concubine, Rizpah, the daughter of Aiah. And Ishbaal, son of Saul, said to Abner, “Why have you slept with my father’s concubine?”","And Saul had a concubine, whose name was Rizpah, the daughter of Aiah: and Ishbosheth said to Abner, Wherefore hast thou gone in unto my father's concubine?","Now Saul had had a concubine named Rizpah daughter of Aiah. And Ish-Bosheth said to Abner, \"Why did you sleep with my father's concubine?\"","Fuerat autem Sauli concubina nomine Respha filia Aia. Dixitque Isbaal ad Abner:","ולשאול פלגש ושמה רצפה בת איה ויאמר אל אבנר מדוע באתה אל פילגש אבי׃"],["10","3","8","이스 보셋의 말에 아브네르가 몹시 화를 내며 대꾸하였다. “내가 유다의 개 대가리란 말이오? 오늘날까지 나는 당신의 아버지 사울의 집안과 그분의 형제들과 친구들에게 충성을 다하였고, 당신을 다윗의 손에 넘어가지 않게 하였소. 그런데도 당신은 오늘 한낱 여자에 관한 잘못을 들어 나를 꾸짖으시오?","아브넬은 몹시 화를 냈다. \"나를 개대가리로 아시오? 이 날까지 나는 당신의 선친 사울의 왕실과 그 동기간과 동지들에게 충성을 바쳐 당신을 다윗의 손에 넘기지 않고 있는데, 당신은 오늘 하찮은 여자 일로 나를 책잡으시오?","아브넬이 이스보셋의 말을 매우 분하게 여겨 이르되 내가 유다의 개 머리냐 내가 오늘 당신의 아버지 사울의 집과 그의 형제와 그의 친구에게 은혜를 베풀어 당신을 다윗의 손에 내주지 아니하였거늘 당신이 오늘 이 여인에게 관한 허물을 내게 돌리는도다","아브넬이 이스보셋의 말을 매우 분히 여겨 가로되 내가 유다의 개 대강이뇨 내가 오늘날 당신의 아버지 사울의 집과 그 형제와 그 친구에게 은혜를 베풀어서 당신을 다윗의 손에 내어주지 아니하였거늘 당신이 오늘날 이 여인에게 관한 허물을 내게 돌리는도다","아브넬이 즉석에서 노발대발하면서 이렇게 소리를 질렀다. \"나를 유다 나라에서 기어 들어온 한 마리 개로 여기시오? 나는 오늘날까지 당신의 아버지 사울의 집안을 위하여 충성을 바쳐 왔고 그의 온 집안과 그의 친구들을 위해서 나의 모든 것을 다 바쳐 살아왔소. 또한 이제까지 당신을 보호하여 당신이 다윗의 손에 잡히지 않도록 하였는데, 이제 와서 당신이 하찮은 여자 문제로 나를 꾸짖겠다는 말이오?","Enraged at the words of Ishbaal, Abner said, “Am I a dog’s head from Judah? As of today, I have been loyal to the house of Saul your father, to his brothers and his friends, and I have kept you out of David’s clutches; and today you charge me with a crime involving a woman!","Then was Abner very wroth for the words of Ishbosheth, and said, Am I a dog's head, which against Judah do shew kindness this day unto the house of Saul thy father, to his brethren, and to his friends, and have not delivered thee into the hand of David, that thou chargest me to day with a fault concerning this woman?","Abner was very angry because of what Ish-Bosheth said and he answered, \"Am I a dog's head--on Judah's side? This very day I am loyal to the house of your father Saul and to his family and friends. I haven't handed you over to David. Yet now you accuse me of an offense involving this woman!","Quare ingressus es ad concubinam patris mei?. Qui iratus nimis propter verba Isbaal ait:  “Numquid caput canis ego sum de Iuda? Hodie facio misericordiam super domum Saul patris tui et super fratres et proximos eius et non tradidi te in manu David. Et tu requisisti in me quod argueres pro muliere hodie.","ויחר לאבנר מאד על דברי איש בשת ויאמר הראש כלב אנכי אשר ליהודה היום אעשה חסד עם בית שאול אביך אל אחיו ואל מרעהו ולא המציתך ביד דוד ותפקד עלי עון האשה היום׃"],["10","3","9","주님께서 다윗에게 약속하신 일이 있는데 내가 그것을 하겠소. 그러지 않으면 하느님께서 이 아브네르에게 벌을 내리시고 또 내리실 것이오.","나는 야훼께서 다윗에게 다짐해 주신 일이나 이루어야겠소. 만일 그렇게 하지 못한다면 이 아브넬은 어떤 천벌이라도 달게 받을 것이오.","여호와께서 다윗에게 맹세하신 대로 내가 이루게 하지 아니하면 하나님이 아브넬에게 벌 위에 벌을 내리심이 마땅하니라","여호와께서 다윗에게 맹세하신대로 내가 이루게 아니하면 하나님이 아브넬에게 벌 위에 벌을 내리심이 마땅하니라","나는 이제 여호와께서 이미 다윗에게 맹세하면서 약속해 주신 일이나 실현되도록 노력해야겠소. 만일 내가 그렇게 하지 않는다면, 하나님께 무슨 벌을 받아도 좋소!","May God do thus to Abner, and more, if I do not carry out for David what the LORD swore to him—","So do God to Abner, and more also, except, as the LORD hath sworn to David, even so I do to him;","May God deal with Abner, be it ever so severely, if I do not do for David what the LORD promised him on oath","Haec faciat Deus Abner et haec addat ei, nisi, quomodo iuravit Dominus David, sic faciam cum eo,","כה יעשה אלהים לאבנר וכה יסיף לו כי כאשר נשבע יהוה לדוד כי כן אעשה לו׃"],["10","3","10","그 일은 이 나라를 사울 집안에서 거두어, 다윗의 왕좌를 단에서 브에르 세바에 이르기까지 이스라엘과 유다 위에 세우는 것이오.”","이 나라 사울 왕실을 다윗에게 넘겨주는 도리밖에 없소. 단에서 브엘세바에까지 이르는 유다와 이스라엘을 다스리도록 다윗을 왕으로 받드는 도리밖에 없소.\"","그 맹세는 곧 이 나라를 사울의 집에서 다윗에게 옮겨서 그의 왕위를 단에서 브엘세바까지 이스라엘과 유다에 세우리라 하신 것이니라 하매","그 맹세는 곧 이 나라를 사울의 집에서 다윗에게 옮겨서 그 위를 단에서 브엘세바까지 이스라엘과 유다에 세우리라 하신 것이니라 하매","여호와께서 이미 \"사울의 집안에서 왕권을 빼앗아 다윗을 이스라엘과 유다의 왕으로 삼아 북단의 단에서부터 남단의 브엘세바에 이르는 온 나라를 다스리도록 하겠다!\" 라고 약속하신 줄이나 똑똑히 아시오!\"","that is, take away the kingdom from the house of Saul and establish the throne of David over Israel as well as Judah, from Dan to Beer-sheba.”","To translate the kingdom from the house of Saul, and to set up the throne of David over Israel and over Judah, from Dan even to Beersheba.","and transfer the kingdom from the house of Saul and establish David's throne over Israel and Judah from Dan to Beersheba.\"","ut transferatur regnum de domo Saul, et confirmetur thronus David super Israel et super Iudam a Dan usque Bersabee “.","להעביר הממלכה מבית שאול ולהקים את כסא דוד על ישראל ועל יהודה מדן ועד באר שבע׃"],["10","3","11","이스 보셋은 아브네르를 두려워하여 그에게 다시는 한마디도 대꾸하지 못하였다.","이스보셋은 겁이 나서 아브넬에게 아무 말도 못하였다.","이스보셋이 아브넬을 두려워하여 감히 한 마디도 대답하지 못하니라","이스보셋이 아브넬을 두려워하여 감히 한 말도 대답지 못하니라","이스보셋은 이 말을 듣고 한마디도 대꾸하지 못하였다. 그는 펄펄 뛰는 아브넬 앞에서 두려움에 사로잡혀 있었다.","Ishbaal was no longer able to say a word to Abner, he feared him so.","And he could not answer Abner a word again, because he feared him.","Ish-Bosheth did not dare to say another word to Abner, because he was afraid of him.","Et non potuit respondere ei quidquam, quia metuebat illum.","ולא יכל עוד להשיב את אבנר דבר מיראתו אתו׃"],["10","3","12","아브네르는 다윗에게 자기 대신 사자를 보내어 이렇게 전하였다. “이 땅이 누구 것입니까? 저와 계약을 맺어 주십시오. 제가 임금님의 편이 되어 온 이스라엘을 임금님께 돌아가게 하겠습니다.”","아브넬이 다윗에게 사람을 보내어 제안했다. \"이 나라가 내 것이 아니고 누구의 것입니까? 그러니, 나와 계약을 맺읍시다. 나는 당신을 도와 온 이스라엘이 당신에게 돌아가게 하겠습니다.\"","아브넬이 자기를 대신하여 전령들을 다윗에게 보내어 이르되 이 땅이 누구의 것이니이까 또 이르되 당신은 나와 더불어 언약을 맺사이다 내 손이 당신을 도와 온 이스라엘이 당신에게 돌아가게 하리이다 하니","아브넬이 자기를 대신하여 사자들을 다윗에게 보내어 가로되 이 땅이 뉘 것이니이까 또 가로되 당신은 나로 더불어 언약하사이다 내 손이 당신을 도와 온 이스라엘로 당신에게 돌아가게 하리이다","아브넬은 헤브론에 있는 다윗에게 심복들을 보내어 이렇게 전하였다. \"여기 이스라엘에서 지금 실권을 쥔 사람이 누구인지는 이미 임금님께서도 잘 아실 것입니다. 그러므로 이제 저를 용납해 주신다면, 제가 임금님께로 넘어가서 온 이스라엘이 임금님의 통치를 받도록 힘쓰겠습니다.\"","Then Abner sent messengers to David in Telam, where he was at the moment, to say, “Make a covenant with me, and you have me on your side, to bring all Israel over to you.”","And Abner sent messengers to David on his behalf, saying, Whose is the land? saying also, Make thy league with me, and, behold, my hand shall be with thee, to bring about all Israel unto thee.","Then Abner sent messengers on his behalf to say to David, \"Whose land is it? Make an agreement with me, and I will help you bring all Israel over to you.\"","Misit ergo Abner nuntios ad David pro se dicentes:  “Cuius est terra? “, et ut loquerentur:  “Fac mecum amicitias, et erit manus mea tecum, et reducam ad te universum Israel “.","וישלח אבנר מלאכים אל דוד תחתו לאמר למי ארץ לאמר כרתה בריתך אתי והנה ידי עמך להסב אליך את כל ישראל׃"],["10","3","13","다윗은 이렇게 응답하였다. “좋소. 그대와 계약을 맺겠소. 그 대신 내가 그대에게 한 가지만 요구하겠소. 그대가 나를 보러 올 때 사울의 딸 미칼을 데려오시오. 그러지 않으면 그대는 나를 보지 못할 것이오.”","\"좋소. 그 말대로 밀약을 맺읍시다.\" 하며 다윗은 조건을 내놓았다. \"그 대신 조건이 하나 있소. 나를 만나러 오는 길에 사울 왕의 딸 미갈을 데려오시오. 미갈을 데려오지 않고서는 나를 볼 생각을 마시오.\"","다윗이 이르되 좋다 내가 너와 언약을 맺거니와 내가 네게 한 가지 일을 요구하노니 나를 보러올 때에 우선 사울의 딸 미갈을 데리고 오라 그리하지 아니하면 내 얼굴을 보지 못하리라 하고","다윗이 가로되 좋다 내가 너와 언약하려니와 내가 네게 한가지 일을 요구하노니 나를 보러 올 때에 위선 사울의 딸 미갈을 데리고 오라 그렇지 않으면 내 얼굴을 보지 못하리라 하고","그러자 다윗이 이렇게 대답하였다. \"나는 그대의 제안에 찬성하오. 그러나 한가지 조건이 있소. 그대가 올 때에 사울의 딸 미갈을 데리고 오시오.\"","He replied, “Good, I will make a covenant with you. But one thing I require of you. You must not appear before me unless you bring back Michal, Saul’s daughter, when you come to present yourself to me.”","And he said, Well; I will make a league with thee: but one thing I require of thee, that is, Thou shalt not see my face, except thou first bring Michal Saul's daughter, when thou comest to see my face.","\"Good,\" said David. \"I will make an agreement with you. But I demand one thing of you: Do not come into my presence unless you bring Michal daughter of Saul when you come to see me.\"","Qui ait:  “Optime, ego faciam tecum amicitias, sed unam rem peto a te dicens: Non videbis faciem meam, nisi prius adduxeris Michol filiam Saul; et sic venies et videbis me “.","ויאמר טוב אני אכרת אתך ברית אך דבר אחד אנכי שאל מאתך לאמר לא תראה את פני כי אם לפני הביאך את מיכל בת שאול בבאך לראות את פני׃"],["10","3","14","한편 다윗은 사울의 아들 이스 보셋에게 사자를 보내어 이렇게 전하였다. “나의 아내 미칼을 돌려주시오. 나는 필리스티아인들의 포피 백 개를 바치고 그 여자를 아내로 얻었소.”","한편 다윗은 사울의 아들 이스보셋에게 사절을 보내어 \"내 아내 미갈을 돌려주시오. 미갈은 내가 불레셋 사람의 남근 백 개를 바치고 얻은 사람이오.\" 하고 청하였다.","다윗이 사울의 아들 이스보셋에게 전령들을 보내 이르되 내 처 미갈을 내게로 돌리라 그는 내가 전에 블레셋 사람의 포피 백 개로 나와 정혼한 자니라 하니","사울의 아들 이스보셋에게 사자들을 보내어 이르되 내 처 미갈을 내게로 돌리라 저는 내가 전에 블레셋 사람의 양피 일백으로 정혼한 자니라","이와 동시에 다윗은 사울의 아들 이스보셋에게 심부름꾼들을 보내어 이렇게 전하였다. \"내 아내 미갈을 나에게 내주시오. 미갈은 내가 블레셋 족속의 포경 100개를 신부값으로 바치고 얻은 아내요\"","At the same time David sent messengers to Ishbaal, son of Saul, to say, “Give me my wife Michal, whom I betrothed by paying a hundred Philistine foreskins.”","And David sent messengers to Ishbosheth Saul's son, saying, Deliver me my wife Michal, which I espoused to me for an hundred foreskins of the Philistines.","Then David sent messengers to Ish-Bosheth son of Saul, demanding, \"Give me my wife Michal, whom I betrothed to myself for the price of a hundred Philistine foreskins.\"","Misit autem David nuntios ad Isbaal filium Saul dicens: “Redde uxorem meam Michol, quam despondi mihi centum praeputiis Philisthim “.","וישלח דוד מלאכים אל איש בשת בן שאול לאמר תנה את אשתי את מיכל אשר ארשתי לי במאה ערלות פלשתים׃"],["10","3","15","이스 보셋이 사람을 보내어 미칼을 그의 남편, 라이스의 아들 팔티엘에게서 데려왔다.","이스보셋이 사람을 보내어 라이스의 아들 발티엘에게서 미갈을 빼앗아 오는데,","이스보셋이 사람을 보내 그의 남편 라이스의 아들 발디엘에게서 그를 빼앗아 오매","이스보셋이 보내어 그 남편 라이스의 아들 발디엘에게서 취하매","이스보셋은 사람을 보내어 라이스의 아들 발디엘에게서 미갈을 빼앗아 오도록 하였다.","Ishbaal sent for her and took her away from her husband Paltiel, son of Laish,","And Ishbosheth sent, and took her from her husband, even from Phaltiel the son of Laish.","So Ish-Bosheth gave orders and had her taken away from her husband Paltiel son of Laish.","Misit ergo Isbaal et tulit eam a viro suo Phaltiel filio Lais.","וישלח איש בשת ויקחה מעם איש מעם פלטיאל בן לוש׃"],["10","3","16","남편도 그 여자와 함께 떠나, 바후림까지 울면서 그 뒤를 따라왔다. 아브네르가 그에게 “그만 돌아가시오.” 하니, 그가 돌아섰다.","그의 남편은 바후림까지 울면서 따라오다가 아브넬이 돌아가라고 하자 하는 수 없이 돌아갔다.","그의 남편이 그와 함께 오되 울며 바후림까지 따라왔더니 아브넬이 그에게 돌아가라 하매 돌아가니라","그 남편이 저와 함께 오되 울며 바후림까지 따라 왔더니 아브넬이 저에게 돌아가라 하매 돌아가니라","그러나 그녀의 남편 발디엘은 차마 아내와 헤어지지 못하여 계속 울면서 바후림 시냇가까지 따라오다가 아브넬이 \"그만 돌아가거라!\" 하고 명령하자 홀로 돌아갔다.","who followed her weeping as far as Bahurim. But Abner said to him, “Go back!” So he turned back.","And her husband went with her along weeping behind her to Bahurim. Then said Abner unto him, Go, return. And he returned.","Her husband, however, went with her, weeping behind her all the way to Bahurim. Then Abner said to him, \"Go back home!\" So he went back.","Sequebaturque eam vir suus plorans usque Bahurim; et dixit ad eum Abner:  “Vade, revertere “. Qui reversus est.","וילך אתה אישה הלוך ובכה אחריה עד בחרים ויאמר אליו אבנר לך שוב וישב׃"],["10","3","17","아브네르는 이미 이스라엘 원로들과 이렇게 약속한 바가 있었다. “여러분은 오래전부터 다윗을 여러분 위에 임금으로 모시려 하고 있습니다.","아브넬이 이스라엘의 장로들에게 말하였다. \"당신들이 전부터 여러 차례 다윗을 왕으로 모시자고 하였으니","아브넬이 이스라엘 장로들에게 말하여 이르되 너희가 여러 번 다윗을 너희의 임금으로 세우기를 구하였으니","아브넬이 이스라엘 장로들에게 말하여 가로되 너희가 여러번 다윗으로 너희 임금 삼기를 구하였으니","아브넬은 이제 이스라엘의 장로들과 상의하면서 이렇게 말하였다. \"여러분은 이미 오래전부터 다윗왕을 여러분의 왕으로도 모시려고 하였습니다.","Abner then had a word with the elders of Israel: “For some time you have been wanting David as your king.","And Abner had communication with the elders of Israel, saying, Ye sought for David in times past to be king over you:","Abner conferred with the elders of Israel and said, \"For some time you have wanted to make David your king.","Sermonem quoque intulit Abner ad seniores Israel dicens:  “Tam heri quam nudiustertius quaerebatis David, ut regnaret super vos;","ודבר אבנר היה עם זקני ישראל לאמר גם תמול גם שלשם הייתם מבקשים את דוד למלך עליכם׃"],["10","3","18","이제 그렇게 하십시오. 주님께서는 다윗에게 이렇게 말씀하셨습니다. ‘나는 나의 종 다윗의 손으로 내 백성 이스라엘을 필리스티아인들의 손에서, 그리고 모든 원수의 손에서 구원하겠다.’”","이제 그대로들 하십시오. 야훼께서 '내 종 다윗의 손으로 내 백성 이스라엘을 불레셋뿐만 아니라 모든 원수의 손아귀에서 건져내리라.' 하시지 않았습니까?\"","이제 그대로 하라 여호와께서 이미 다윗에 대하여 말씀하시기를 내가 내 종 다윗의 손으로 내 백성 이스라엘을 구원하여 블레셋 사람의 손과 모든 대적의 손에서 벗어나게 하리라 하셨음이니라 하고","이제 그대로 하라 여호와께서 이미 다윗에 대하여 말씀하시기를 내가 내 종 다윗의 손으로 내 백성 이스라엘을 구원하여 블레셋 사람의 손과 모든 대적의 손에서 벗어나게 하리라 하셨음이니라 하고","지금이 바로 그 소원을 이룰 때입니다. 여호와께서 이미 다윗에 대하여 \"내가 내 종 다윗을 들어 써서 내 백성 이스라엘을 블레셋 족속을 비롯한 모든 원수들의 손에서 해방시켜 놓겠다\"고 약속하신 말씀을 기억해야 합니다.\"","Now take action, for the LORD has said of David: By David my servant I will save my people Israel from the power of the Philistines and from the power of all their enemies.”","Now then do it: for the LORD hath spoken of David, saying, By the hand of my servant David I will save my people Israel out of the hand of the Philistines, and out of the hand of all their enemies.","Now do it! For the LORD promised David, 'By my servant David I will rescue my people Israel from the hand of the Philistines and from the hand of all their enemies.'\"","nunc ergo facite, quoniam Dominus locutus est ad David dicens: “In manu servi mei David salvabo populum meum Israel de manu Philisthim et omnium inimicorum eius “ “.","ועתה עשו כי יהוה אמר אל דוד לאמר ביד דוד עבדי הושיע את עמי ישראל מיד פלשתים ומיד כל איביהם׃"],["10","3","19","아브네르는 또 벤야민 사람들과도 이야기한 다음, 이스라엘과 온 벤야민 집안이 다 좋게 여긴 것을 다윗에게 알리러 헤브론으로 갔다.","아브넬은 베냐민 지파에게도 같은 말을 전한 다음, 이스라엘과 베냐민 가문이 다 좋게 여긴다는 것을 다윗에게 알리려고 헤브론으로 떠났다.","아브넬이 또 베냐민 사람의 귀에 말하고 아브넬이 이스라엘과 베냐민의 온 집이 선하게 여기는 모든 것을 다윗의 귀에 말하려고 헤브론으로 가니라","아브넬이 또 베냐민 사람의 귀에 말하고 이스라엘과 베냐민의 온 집이 선히 여기는 모든 것을 다윗의 귀에 고하려고 헤브론으로 가니라","아브넬은 베냐민 지파의 대표자들과 그렇게 상의한 다음, 헤브론으로 다윗을 찾아가서 베냐민 지파와 온 이스라엘이 소원하는 것을 그대로 전하였다. 아브넬은 사울이 베냐민 지파 출신이었기 때문에 특별히 그들의 의견을 존중하여 따로 동의를 구한 것이다.","Abner also spoke with Benjamin, and then went to speak with David in Hebron concerning all that would be agreeable to Israel and to the whole house of Benjamin.","And Abner also spake in the ears of Benjamin: and Abner went also to speak in the ears of David in Hebron all that seemed good to Israel, and that seemed good to the whole house of Benjamin.","Abner also spoke to the Benjamites in person. Then he went to Hebron to tell David everything that Israel and the whole house of Benjamin wanted to do.","Locutus est autem Abner etiam ad Beniamin; et abiit, ut loqueretur ad David in Hebron omnia, quae placuerant Israel et universo Beniamin.","וידבר גם אבנר באזני בנימין וילך גם אבנר לדבר באזני דוד בחברון את כל אשר טוב בעיני ישראל ובעיני כל בית בנימן׃"],["10","3","20","아브네르가 부하 스무 명과 함께 헤브론으로 다윗을 찾아가자, 다윗은 아브네르와 그 부하들에게 잔치를 베풀어 주었다.","아브넬이 부하 이십 명을 거느리고 헤브론으로 다윗을 찾아가자, 다윗은 아브넬 일행을 맞아 잔치를 베풀었다.","아브넬이 부하 이십 명과 더불어 헤브론에 이르러 다윗에게 나아가니 다윗이 아브넬과 그와 함께 한 사람을 위하여 잔치를 배설하였더라","아브넬이 종자 이십인으로 더불어 헤브론에 이르러 다윗에게 나아가니 다윗이 아브넬과 그 함께한 사람을 위하여 잔치를 배설하였더라","아브넬이 부하 20명을 데리고 헤브론으로 다윗을 찾아가자 다윗은 그들을 맞아 잔치를 베풀어 주었다.","When Abner, accompanied by twenty men, came to David in Hebron, David prepared a feast for Abner and for the men who were with him.","So Abner came to David to Hebron, and twenty men with him. And David made Abner and the men that were with him a feast.","When Abner, who had twenty men with him, came to David at Hebron, David prepared a feast for him and his men.","Venitque ad David in Hebron cum viginti viris, et fecit David Abner et viris eius, qui venerant cum eo, convivium.","ויבא אבנר אל דוד חברון ואתו עשרים אנשים ויעש דוד לאבנר ולאנשים אשר אתו משתה׃"],["10","3","21","아브네르가 다윗에게 말하였다. “제가 일어나 가서 저의 주군이신 임금님께 온 이스라엘을 모아들여 그들이 임금님과 계약을 맺게 하겠으니, 임금님께서는 뜻하시는 대로 다스리십시오.” 다윗이 아브네르를 보내자 그가 무사히 떠나갔다.","그 자리에서 아브넬은 다윗에게 이렇게 제의했다. \"제가 돌아가서 온 이스라엘을 불러모아 임금님과 조약을 맺도록 하겠습니다. 임금님께서는 이 온 지역을 뜻대로 다스리십시오.\" 다윗은 아브넬을 고이 보냈다.","아브넬이 다윗에게 말하되 내가 일어나 가서 온 이스라엘 무리를 내 주 왕의 앞에 모아 더불어 언약을 맺게 하고 마음에 원하시는 대로 모든 것을 다스리시게 하리이다 하니 이에 다윗이 아브넬을 보내매 그가 평안히 가니라","아브넬이 다윗에게 고하되 내가 일어나 가서 온 이스라엘 무리를 내 주 왕의 앞에 모아 더불어 언약하게 하고 마음의 원하시는대로 모든 것을 다스리시게 하리이다 이에 다윗이 아브넬을 보내매 저가 평안히 가니라","잔치가 끝나자 아브넬은 다윗에게 이와같이 약속하였다. \"저는 이제 가서 이스라엘의 모든 지파를 내 주 임금님께로 데리고 와서 그들이 내 주를 임금님으로 섬기겠다는 계약을 맺도록 하겠습니다. 그러면 내 주께서 온 이스라엘의 왕이 되어 모든 소원을 다 이루게 되실 것입니다.\" 다윗은 아브넬을 무사히 돌려보냈다.","Then Abner said to David, “I will now go to assemble all Israel for my lord the king, that they may make a covenant with you; you will then be king over all whom you wish to rule.” So David let Abner go on his way in peace.","And Abner said unto David, I will arise and go, and will gather all Israel unto my lord the king, that they may make a league with thee, and that thou mayest reign over all that thine heart desireth. And David sent Abner away; and he went in peace.","Then Abner said to David, \"Let me go at once and assemble all Israel for my lord the king, so that they may make a compact with you, and that you may rule over all that your heart desires.\" So David sent Abner away, and he went in peace.","Et dixit Abner ad David:  “Surgam, ut congregem ad te dominum meum regem omnem Israel, et ineant tecum foedus, et imperes omnibus, sicut desiderat anima tua “. Cum ergo deduxisset David Abner, et ille isset in pace,","ויאמר אבנר אל דוד אקומה ואלכה ואקבצה אל אדני המלך את כל ישראל ויכרתו אתך ברית ומלכת בכל אשר תאוה נפשך וישלח דוד את אבנר וילך בשלום׃"],["10","3","22","마침, 다윗의 부하들과 요압이 약탈하러 갔다가 많은 노획물을 가지고 돌아왔다. 그때 아브네르는 헤브론에 다윗과 함께 있지 않았다. 다윗이 그를 보내어 그가 무사히 떠나갔기 때문이다.","마침, 다윗의 부하들을 거느리고 전장에 나갔던 요압이 많은 전리품을 거두어가지고 돌아왔다. 그 때 아브넬은 다윗과 함께 헤브론에 있지 않았다. 다윗이 이미 아브넬을 고이 보낸 뒤였던 것이다.","다윗의 신복들과 요압이 적군을 치고 크게 노략한 물건을 가지고 돌아오니 아브넬은 이미 보냄을 받아 평안히 갔고 다윗과 함께 헤브론에 있지 아니한 때라","다윗의 신복들과 요압이 적군을 치고 크게 노략한 물건을 가지고 돌아오니 아브넬은 이미 보냄을 받아 평안히 갔고 다윗과 함께 헤브론에 있지 아니한 때라","그때에 마침 다윗의 부하들을 거느리고 약탈을 나갔던 요압이 많은 전리품을 가지고 돌아왔다. 그는 아브넬이 왕을 찾아왔다가 무사히 돌아갔다는 사실을 알고,","Just then David’s servants and Joab were coming in from an expedition, bringing much plunder with them. Abner, having been dismissed by David, was no longer with him in Hebron but had gone on his way in peace.","And, behold, the servants of David and Joab came from pursuing a troop, and brought in a great spoil with them: but Abner was not with David in Hebron; for he had sent him away, and he was gone in peace.","Just then David's men and Joab returned from a raid and brought with them a great deal of plunder. But Abner was no longer with David in Hebron, because David had sent him away, and he had gone in peace.","pueri David et Ioab venerunt ab expeditione cum praeda magna. Abner autem non erat cum David in Hebron, quia iam dimiserat eum, et profectus fuerat in pace,","והנה עבדי דוד ויואב בא מהגדוד ושלל רב עמם הביאו ואבנר איננו עם דוד בחברון כי שלחו וילך בשלום׃"],["10","3","23","요압과 그의 모든 군대가 돌아왔을 때, 사람들이 요압에게 “네르의 아들 아브네르가 임금님께 왔는데, 임금님께서 그를 보내시어 그가 무사히 떠나갔습니다.” 하고 일러 주었다.","군사들을 이끌고 돌아온 요압은, 넬의 아들 아브넬이 왕을 찾아왔었는데 왕이 그를 고이 보냈다는 말을 듣고,","요압 및 요압과 함께 한 모든 군사가 돌아오매 어떤 사람이 요압에게 말하여 이르되 넬의 아들 아브넬이 왕에게 왔더니 왕이 보내매 그가 평안히 갔나이다 하니","요압과 그 함께한 모든 군사가 돌아오매 혹이 요압에게 고하여 가로되 넬의 아들 아브넬이 왕에게 왔더니 왕이 보내매 저가 평안히 갔나이다","(22절에 포함되어 있음)","When Joab and the whole force he had with him arrived, he was informed, “Abner, son of Ner, came to David, and he let him go on his way in peace.”","When Joab and all the host that was with him were come, they told Joab, saying, Abner the son of Ner came to the king, and he hath sent him away, and he is gone in peace.","When Joab and all the soldiers with him arrived, he was told that Abner son of Ner had come to the king and that the king had sent him away and that he had gone in peace.","et Ioab et omnis exercitus, qui erat cum eo, postea venerant. Nuntiatum est itaque Ioab a narrantibus:  “Venit Abner filius Ner ad regem, et dimisit eum, et abiit in pace “.","ויואב וכל הצבא אשר אתו באו ויגדו ליואב לאמר בא אבנר בן נר אל המלך וישלחהו וילך בשלום׃"],["10","3","24","요압이 임금에게 나아가 말하였다. “도대체 임금님께서는 무슨 일을 그렇게 하셨습니까? 아브네르가 임금님께 왔다는데, 어찌하여 그를 보내어 그가 떠나가게 하셨습니까?","왕에게 나아가 항의했다. \"아브넬이 임금님께 왔었는데 그자를 그대로 보내시다니, 어찌 그러실 수가 있습니까?","요압이 왕에게 나아가 이르되 어찌 하심이니이까 아브넬이 왕에게 나아왔거늘 어찌하여 그를 보내 잘 가게 하셨나이까","요압이 왕에게 나아가 가로되 어찌 하심이니이까 아브넬이 왕에게 나아왔거늘 어찌하여 저를 보내어 잘 가게 하셨나이까","즉각 왕을 찾아가서 항의하였다. \"임금님께서 무슨 일을 하셨는지 아십니까? 아브넬이 마침 제발로 임금님께 왔는데, 어째서 그를 그냥 그대로 돌려보내셨습니까?","So Joab went to the king and said: “What have you done? Abner came to you! Why did you let him get away?","Then Joab came to the king, and said, What hast thou done? behold, Abner came unto thee; why is it that thou hast sent him away, and he is quite gone?","So Joab went to the king and said, \"What have you done? Look, Abner came to you. Why did you let him go? Now he is gone!","Et ingressus est Ioab ad regem et ait:  “Quid fecisti? Ecce venit Abner ad te; quare dimisisti eum, et abiit et recessit?","ויבא יואב אל המלך ויאמר מה עשיתה הנה בא אבנר אליך למה זה שלחתו וילך הלוך׃"],["10","3","25","임금님도 아시다시피 네르의 아들 아브네르는 임금님을 속이려고 왔습니다. 임금님께서 들어오고 나가시는 것을 살피고, 또 임금님께서 하시는 모든 일을 살피러 온 것입니다.”","임금님께서는 넬의 아들 아브넬을 잘 아시지 않습니까? 그자는 임금님을 속이고 임금님의 동정을 살피러 왔던 것입니다. 임금님께서 하시는 일을 샅샅이 살피러 왔던 것입니다.\"","왕도 아시려니와 넬의 아들 아브넬이 온 것은 왕을 속임이라 그가 왕이 출입하는 것을 알고 왕이 하시는 모든 것을 알려 함이니이다 하고","왕도 아시려니와 넬의 아들 아브넬의 온 것은 왕을 속임이라 왕의 출입하는 것을 알고 모든 하시는 것을 알려 함이니이다 하고","그가 어떤 사람인지는 임금님께서도 잘 아시지 않습니까? 그는 임금님의 계획이 무엇인가를 알아보기 위하여 찾아온 것입니다.\"","Don’t you know Abner? He came to trick you, to learn your comings and goings, to learn everything you do.”","Thou knowest Abner the son of Ner, that he came to deceive thee, and to know thy going out and thy coming in, and to know all that thou doest.","You know Abner son of Ner; he came to deceive you and observe your movements and find out everything you are doing.\"","Ignoras Abner filium Ner? Certe ad hoc venit, ut deciperet te et sciret exitum tuum et introitum tuum et nosset omnia quae agis “.","ידעת את אבנר בן נר כי לפתתך בא ולדעת את מוצאך ואת מבואך ולדעת את כל אשר אתה עשה׃"],["10","3","26","요압은 다윗에게서 물러 나온 다음, 사람들을 보내어 아브네르의 뒤를 따라가게 하였다. 그들은 아브네르를 시라 우물 가에서 데려왔는데, 다윗은 이 사실을 알지 못하였다.","요압은 다윗 앞을 물러나와 사람들을 보내어 아브넬의 뒤를 쫓게 하였다. 그들은 시라 우물 가에서 아브넬을 사로잡아 데리고 돌아왔다. 그러나 다윗은 그런 사정을 몰랐다.","이에 요압이 다윗에게서 나와 전령들을 보내 아브넬을 쫓아가게 하였더니 시라 우물 가에서 그를 데리고 돌아왔으나 다윗은 알지 못하였더라","이에 다윗에게서 나와서 사자들을 보내어 아브넬을 쫓아가게 하였더니 시라 우물 가에서 저를 데리고 돌아왔으나 다윗은 알지 못하였더라","요압은 왕 앞을 물러 나오자마자, 군인들을 보내어 아브넬을 뒤쫓게 하였다. 요압의 부하들은 헤브론에서 북쪽으로 4킬로미터를 달려 시라 우물가에서 아브넬을 붙잡아 헤브론으로 데려왔다. 그러나 다윗은 이런 사실을 전혀 몰랐다.","Joab then left David and sent messengers after Abner to bring him back from the cistern of Sirah; but David did not know.","And when Joab was come out from David, he sent messengers after Abner, which brought him again from the well of Sirah: but David knew it not.","Joab then left David and sent messengers after Abner, and they brought him back from the well of Sirah. But David did not know it.","Egressus itaque Ioab a David misit nuntios post Abner, et reduxerunt eum a cisterna Sira, ignorante David.","ויצא יואב מעם דוד וישלח מלאכים אחרי אבנר וישבו אתו מבור הסרה ודוד לא ידע׃"],["10","3","27","아브네르가 헤브론으로 돌아오자, 요압은 그와 더불어 조용히 이야기하겠다고 그를 성문 안쪽으로 데려갔다. 그런 다음 요압은 거기에서 그의 배를 찔렀다. 아브네르는 이렇게 요압의 동생 아사엘의 피를 흘린 탓에 죽었다.","아브넬이 헤브론으로 끌려오자 요압은 단둘이서 할 이야기라도 있는 듯이 속여 아브넬을 성문 한 옆으로 데리고 가서 배를 찔러 죽였다. 자기 동생 아사헬의 복수를 한 것이다.","아브넬이 헤브론으로 돌아오매 요압이 더불어 조용히 말하려는 듯이 그를 데리고 성문 안으로 들어가 거기서 배를 찔러 죽이니 이는 자기의 동생 아사헬의 피로 말미암음이더라","아브넬이 헤브론으로 돌아 오매 요압이 더불어 종용히 말하려는 듯이 저를 데리고 성문으로 들어가서 거기서 배를 찔러 죽이니 이는 자기의 동생 아사헬의 피를 인함이더라","아브넬이 이렇게 헤브론으로 붙들려 오자, 요압은 그와 무슨 비밀 이야기라도 하려는 듯이 그를 성문 안으로 데리고 들어가서 배를 찔러 죽였다. 아브넬이 전에 요압의 동생 아사헬을 죽였기 때문에 이렇게 그 원수를 갚았던 것이다.","When Abner returned to Hebron, Joab took him aside within the city gate to speak with him privately. There he stabbed him in the abdomen, and he died for the blood of Asahel, Joab’s brother.","And when Abner was returned to Hebron, Joab took him aside in the gate to speak with him quietly, and smote him there under the fifth rib, that he died, for the blood of Asahel his brother.","Now when Abner returned to Hebron, Joab took him aside into the gateway, as though to speak with him privately. And there, to avenge the blood of his brother Asahel, Joab stabbed him in the stomach, and he died.","Cumque redisset Abner in Hebron, seorsum abduxit eum Ioab ad medium portae, ut loqueretur ei quiete, et percussit illum ibi in inguine, et mortuus est in ultionem sanguinis Asael fratris eius.","וישב אבנר חברון ויטהו יואב אל תוך השער לדבר אתו בשלי ויכהו שם החמש וימת בדם עשה אל אחיו׃"],["10","3","28","나중에 다윗이 그 소식을 듣고 말하였다. “나와 나의 나라는 네르의 아들 아브네르의 피에 대하여 주님 앞에서 영원히 죄가 없다.","다윗은 그 뒤에야 이 일을 알고 말했다. \"넬의 아들 아브넬이 피를 흘리고 죽었으나, 나와 내 나라는 영원히 야훼께 죄받을 일이 없다.","그 후에 다윗이 듣고 이르되 넬의 아들 아브넬의 피에 대하여 나와 내 나라는 여호와 앞에 영원히 무죄하니","그 후에 다윗이 듣고 이르되 넬의 아들 아브넬의 피에 대하여 나와 내 나라는 여호와 앞에 영원히 무죄하니","다윗이 뒤늦게 이러한 사실을 알게 되자 놀라 펄쩍 뛰면서 이렇게 선언하였다. \"나와 나의 후손들은 아브넬의 죽음에 대해 아무 책임도 없다! 여호와께서 나의 증인이시다!","Later David heard of it and said: “Before the LORD, I and my kingdom are forever innocent.","And afterward when David heard it, he said, I and my kingdom are guiltless before the LORD for ever from the blood of Abner the son of Ner:","Later, when David heard about this, he said, \"I and my kingdom are forever innocent before the LORD concerning the blood of Abner son of Ner.","Quod cum audisset David rem iam gestam, ait:  “Mundus ego sum et regnum meum apud Dominum usque in sempiternum a sanguine Abner filii Ner;","וישמע דוד מאחרי כן ויאמר נקי אנכי וממלכתי מעם יהוה עד עולם מדמי אבנר בן נר׃"],["10","3","29","그 죄는 요압의 머리와 그의 아버지 집안 전체에 닥치리니, 요압의 집안에는 고름을 흘리는 자와 악성 피부병 환자, 물레질하는 자와 칼에 맞아 쓰러지는 자와 양식이 없는 자가 끊이지 않을 것이다.”","그 죄는 요압의 머리와 그 가문에 돌아갈 것이다. 그 집안에는 성병환자, 문둥이, 물레질이나 할 자, 칼에 맞아 죽거나 굶어 죽을 자가 끊이지 아니하리라.\"","그 죄가 요압의 머리와 그의 아버지의 온 집으로 돌아갈지어다 또 요압의 집에서 백탁병자나 나병 환자나 지팡이를 의지하는 자나 칼에 죽는 자나 양식이 떨어진 자가 끊어지지 아니할지로다 하니라","그 죄가 요압의 머리와 그 아비의 온 집으로 돌아갈찌어다 또 요압의 집에서 백탁병자나 문둥병자나 지팡이를 의지하는 자나 칼에 죽는 자나 양식이 핍절한 자가 끊어지지 아니할찌로다 하니라","아브넬을 죽인 죄는 요압과 그의 모든 가족에게 돌아갈 것이다. 이제부터 요압의 후손들 가운데는 언제나 성병이나 문둥병으로 고름을 흘리며 사는 자와 불구자가 되어 지팡이를 짚고 다니는 자와 싸움터에 나가 죽거나 굶어 죽는 자들이 끊이지 않을 것이다\"","May the blood of Abner, son of Ner, be on the head of Joab and all his family. May Joab’s family never be without one suffering from a discharge, or one with a skin disease, or a man who holds the distaff, or one falling by the sword, or one in need of food!”","Let it rest on the head of Joab, and on all his father's house; and let there not fail from the house of Joab one that hath an issue, or that is a leper, or that leaneth on a staff, or that falleth on the sword, or that lacketh bread.","May his blood fall upon the head of Joab and upon all his father's house! May Joab's house never be without someone who has a running sore or leprosy or who leans on a crutch or who falls by the sword or who lacks food.\"","et veniat super caput Ioab et super omnem domum patris eius, nec deficiat de domo Ioab fluxum morbidum sustinens, leprosus et tenens fusum et cadens gladio et indigens pane “.","יחלו על ראש יואב ואל כל בית אביו ואל יכרת מבית יואב זב ומצרע ומחזיק בפלך ונפל בחרב וחסר לחם׃"],["10","3","30","요압과 아비사이 형제가 아브네르를 죽인 것은, 아브네르가 기브온 싸움터에서 저희 동생 아사엘을 죽였기 때문이다.","요압과 아비새 형제가 아브넬을 죽인 것은 아브넬이 저희 동생 아사헬을 기브온 전투에서 죽였기 때문이었다.","요압과 그의 동생 아비새가 아브넬을 죽인 것은 그가 기브온 전쟁에서 자기 동생 아사헬을 죽인 까닭이었더라","요압과 그 동생 아비새가 아브넬을 죽인 것은 저가 기브온 전쟁에서 자기 동생 아사헬을 죽인 까닭이었더라","요압과 아비새가 아브넬을 죽인 것은 아브넬이 그들의 동생 아사헬을 기브온 전투에서 죽였기 때문이다.","Joab and Abishai his brother had been lying in wait for Abner because he killed Asahel their brother in battle at Gibeon.","So Joab, and Abishai his brother slew Abner, because he had slain their brother Asahel at Gibeon in the battle.","(Joab and his brother Abishai murdered Abner because he had killed their brother Asahel in the battle at Gibeon.)","Igitur Ioab et Abisai frater eius interfecerunt Abner, eo quod occidisset Asael fratrem eorum in Gabaon in proelio.","ויואב ואבישי אחיו הרגו לאבנר על אשר המית את עשהאל אחיהם בגבעון במלחמה׃"],["10","3","31","다윗이 요압과 그가 거느린 모든 군사에게 일렀다. “너희는 옷을 찢고 자루옷을 두른 채 아브네르의 주검 앞에서 애도하여라.” 그러고 나서 다윗 임금 자신도 상여 뒤를 따라갔다.","다윗은 요압과 그가 거느린 전군에 영을 내렸다. \"옷을 찢고 굵은 베 옷을 허리에 두르고 아브넬의 상여를 앞서가며 곡하라.\" 그리고 다윗 왕도 몸소 상여 뒤를 따랐다.","다윗이 요압과 및 자기와 함께 있는 모든 백성에게 이르되 너희는 옷을 찢고 굵은 베를 띠고 아브넬 앞에서 애도하라 하니라 다윗 왕이 상여를 따라가","다윗이 요압과 및 자기와 함께 있는 모든 백성에게 이르되 너희는 옷을 찢고 굵은 베를 띠고 아브넬 앞에서 애통하라 하니라 다윗왕이 상여를 따라 가서","다윗은 이제 요압을 비롯하여 자기의 모든 신하들에게 이와같이 명령하였다. \"그대들은 모두 옷을 찢고, 허리에 베옷을 걸친 다음 아브넬의 상여 앞에서 슬피 울면서 가시오!\" 그러고 나서 그는 몸소 상여를 뒤따라갔다.","Then David said to Joab and to all the people who were with him, “Tear your garments, put on sackcloth, and mourn over Abner.” King David himself followed the bier.","And David said to Joab, and to all the people that were with him, Rend your clothes, and gird you with sackcloth, and mourn before Abner. And king David himself followed the bier.","Then David said to Joab and all the people with him, \"Tear your clothes and put on sackcloth and walk in mourning in front of Abner.\" King David himself walked behind the bier.","Dixit autem David ad Ioab et ad omnem populum, qui erat cum eo:  “Scindite vestimenta vestra et accingimini saccis et plangite ante exequias Abner “. Porro rex David sequebatur feretrum.","ויאמר דוד אל יואב ואל כל העם אשר אתו קרעו בגדיכם וחגרו שקים וספדו לפני אבנר והמלך דוד הלך אחרי המטה׃"],["10","3","32","아브네르를 헤브론에 장사 지낸 다음, 아브네르의 무덤에서 임금이 소리 높여 우니 모든 군사도 울었다.","아브넬을 헤브론에 장사한 다음, 다윗 왕이 아브넬의 무덤 앞에서 목놓아 울자 군인들도 모두 따라 곡을 했다.","아브넬을 헤브론에 장사하고 아브넬의 무덤에서 왕이 소리를 높여 울고 백성도 다 우니라","아브넬을 헤브론에 장사하고 아브넬의 무덤에서 소리를 높여 울고 백성도 다 우니라","마침내 아브넬을 헤브론에 장사지내고 다윗이 그 무덤 앞에서 목놓아 울자, 온 백성도 그를 따라서 울었다.","When they had buried Abner in Hebron, the king wept aloud at the grave of Abner, and all the people wept.","And they buried Abner in Hebron: and the king lifted up his voice, and wept at the grave of Abner; and all the people wept.","They buried Abner in Hebron, and the king wept aloud at Abner's tomb. All the people wept also.","Cumque sepelissent Abner in Hebron, levavit rex David vocem suam et flevit super tumulum Abner; flevit autem et omnis populus.","ויקברו את אבנר בחברון וישא המלך את קולו ויבך אל קבר אבנר ויבכו כל העם׃"],["10","3","33","임금은 아브네르를 생각하며 이런 애가를 읊었다. “어리석은 자가 죽듯이 아브네르가 그렇게 죽어야 했더란 말이냐?","왕은 아브넬의 죽음을 슬퍼하여 조가를 지었다. 아브넬이 어이없이 개죽음을 당하다니!","왕이 아브넬을 위하여 애가를 지어 이르되 아브넬의 죽음이 어찌하여 미련한 자의 죽음 같은고","왕이 아브넬을 위하여 애가를 지어 가로되 아브넬의 죽음이 어찌하여 미련한 자의 죽음 같은고","이때에 다윗은 아브넬의 죽음을 슬퍼하며 이런 비가를 지어 읊었다. \"그대가 무슨 몹쓸 죄를 저질렀다고 그토록 모진 죽음을 당하게 되는가!","And the king sang this lament over Abner: Should Abner have died like a fool?","And the king lamented over Abner, and said, Died Abner as a fool dieth?","The king sang this lament for Abner: \"Should Abner have died as the lawless die?","Plangensque rex et lugens Abner ait:  “Numquid, ut mori solent insensati, mori debuit Abner?","ויקנן המלך אל אבנר ויאמר הכמות נבל ימות אבנר׃"],["10","3","34","그대의 손이 묶이지도 않았고 그대의 발이 쇠고랑에 차이지도 않았는데 불의한 자들에게 맞아 쓰러지듯 쓰러졌구나.” 그리고 모든 군사가 다시 그를 생각하며 울었다.","손이 묶이지도 않았고, 발에 쇠고랑을 차지도 않았는데, 불한당에게 맞아 쓰러지듯 죽었구나! 온 군인들은 다시 그를 생각하며 곡을 했다.","네 손이 결박되지 아니하였고 네 발이 차꼬에 채이지 아니하였거늘 불의한 자식의 앞에 엎드러짐 같이 네가 엎드러졌도다 하매 온 백성이 다시 그를 슬퍼하여 우니라","네 손이 결박되지 아니하였고 네 발이 착고에 채이지 아니하였거늘 불의한 자식의 앞에 엎드러짐 같이 네가 엎드러졌도다 하매 온 백성이 다시 그를 슬퍼하여 우니라","그대는 전쟁 포로가 되어 두 손과 두 발이 쇠사슬에 매인 사람도 아니건만! 어째서 그대가 불한당들에게 잡혀 죽듯이 그토록 모진 죽음을 당하게 되었소!\" 다윗의 비가를 들으며 백성들은 더 슬프게 울었다.","Your hands were not bound with chains, nor your feet placed in fetters; As one falls before the wicked, you fell. And all the people continued to weep for him.","Thy hands were not bound, nor thy feet put into fetters: as a man falleth before wicked men, so fellest thou. And all the people wept again over him.","Your hands were not bound, your feet were not fettered. You fell as one falls before wicked men.\" And all the people wept over him again.","Manus tuae ligatae non erant, et pedes tui non erant compedibus aggravati; sed, sicut solent cadere coram filiis iniquitatis, corruisti “. Congeminansque omnis populus flevit super eum.","ידך לא אסרות ורגליך לא לנחשתים הגשו כנפול לפני בני עולה נפלת ויספו כל העם לבכות עליו׃"],["10","3","35","때는 낮이었다. 군사들이 모두 와서 다윗에게 음식을 들라고 권하였다. 그러나 다윗은 이렇게 맹세하였다. “내가 만일 해가 떨어지기 전에 빵이나 그 밖의 어떤 것이라도 맛본다면, 하느님께서 나에게 벌을 내리시고 또 내리실 것이다.”","사람들은 다윗 앞에 나아가 요기라도 좀 하시라고 권하였다. 아직 해가 지기 전이었다. 다윗은 \"해 지기 전에 음식을 입에 댄다면 어떤 천벌이라도 달게 받겠다.\" 하고 맹세하였다.","석양에 뭇 백성이 나아와 다윗에게 음식을 권하니 다윗이 맹세하여 이르되 만일 내가 해 지기 전에 떡이나 다른 모든 것을 맛보면 하나님이 내게 벌 위에 벌을 내리심이 마땅하니라 하매","석양에 뭇 백성이 나아와 다윗에게 음식을 권하니 다윗이 맹세하여 가로되 내가 해 지기 전에 떡이나 다른 것을 맛보면 하나님이 내게 벌 위에 벌을 내리심이 마땅하니라 하매","장례식이 끝날 무렵에 백성이 다윗에게 묘지에서 요기라도 할 것을 권하였다. 그러나 아직 해가 지지 않았기 때문에 다윗이 그날 하루는 단식을 하겠다고 맹세하였다. \"오늘 해지기 전에 내가 어떤 음식이든 조금이라도 입에 댄다면 하나님께서 내게 무슨 벌을 내리셔도 좋습니다.\" 당시에는 해가 져서 새날이 와야 하루의 단식 의무가 풀리게 되어 있었다.","Then they went to console David with food while it was still day. But David swore, “May God do thus to me, and more, if before the sun goes down I eat bread or anything else.”","And when all the people came to cause David to eat meat while it was yet day, David sware, saying, So do God to me, and more also, if I taste bread, or ought else, till the sun be down.","Then they all came and urged David to eat something while it was still day; but David took an oath, saying, \"May God deal with me, be it ever so severely, if I taste bread or anything else before the sun sets!\"","Cumque venisset universa multitudo reficere David pane clara adhuc die, iuravit David dicens:  “Haec faciat mihi Deus et haec addat, si ante occasum solis gustavero panem vel aliud quidquam “.","ויבא כל העם להברות את דוד לחם בעוד היום וישבע דוד לאמר כה יעשה לי אלהים וכה יסיף כי אם לפני בוא השמש אטעם לחם או כל מאומה׃"],["10","3","36","군사들이 모두 이를 알게 되었는데, 그것은 그들이 보기에 좋았다. 임금이 하는 일은 무엇이나 모든 군사가 보기에 좋았던 것이다.","이것을 보고 군사들은 모두 흐뭇하게 여겼다. 왕이 하는 일은 모두 좋게 보였던 것이다.","온 백성이 보고 기뻐하며 왕이 무슨 일을 하든지 무리가 다 기뻐하므로","온 백성이 보고 기뻐하며 왕이 무슨 일을 하든지 무리가 다 기뻐하므로","이렇게 단식하면서 슬퍼하는 왕을 보자, 모든 사람이 다윗왕을 좋게 여겼다. 온 백성은 다윗이 하는 일이라면 무슨 일이든지 좋게 여겼던 것처럼, 이번 일도 기쁘게 여겼다.","All the people noted this with approval, just as everything the king did met with their approval.","And all the people took notice of it, and it pleased them: as whatsoever the king did pleased all the people.","All the people took note and were pleased; indeed, everything the king did pleased them.","Omnisque populus audivit; et placuit eis, sicut cuncta, quae fecit rex, bona erant in conspectu totius populi.","וכל העם הכירו וייטב בעיניהם ככל אשר עשה המלך בעיני כל העם טוב׃"],["10","3","37","그리하여 그날 모든 군사와 온 이스라엘은, 네르의 아들 아브네르를 죽인 것이 임금의 뜻이 아니었음을 알게 되었다.","그제야 비로소 모든 군사들과 온 이스라엘은 왕이 사람을 시켜 넬의 아들 아브넬을 죽인 것이 아니라는 사실을 알게 되었다.","이 날에야 온 백성과 온 이스라엘이 넬의 아들 아브넬을 죽인 것이 왕이 한 것이 아닌 줄을 아니라","이 날에야 온 백성과 온 이스라엘이 넬의 아들 아브넬을 죽인 것이 왕의 한바가 아닌줄을 아니라","이리하여 그날 장례식에 왔던 사람들은 모두 아브넬이 죽은 것은 왕과 전혀 상관이 없다는 것을 확실히 알게 되었다.","So on that day all the people and all Israel came to know that it was not the king’s doing that Abner, son of Ner, was put to death.","For all the people and all Israel understood that day that it was not of the king to slay Abner the son of Ner.","So on that day all the people and all Israel knew that the king had no part in the murder of Abner son of Ner.","Et cognovit omne vulgus et universus Israel in die illa quoniam non actum fuisset a rege, ut occideretur Abner filius Ner.","וידעו כל העם וכל ישראל ביום ההוא כי לא היתה מהמלך להמית את אבנר בן נר׃"],["10","3","38","임금이 신하들에게 말하였다. “그대들은 오늘 이스라엘에서 위대한 장수 하나가 쓰러진 것을 모르오?","왕이 신하들에게 일렀다. \"그대들도 알다시피 오늘 이스라엘의 위대한 장군이 죽었소.","왕이 그의 신복에게 이르되 오늘 이스라엘의 지도자요 큰 인물이 죽은 것을 알지 못하느냐","왕이 그 신복에게 이르되 오늘 이스라엘의 방백이요 또는 대인이 죽은 것을 알지 못하느냐","다윗은 자기의 신복들에게 이와같이 말하였다. \"오늘 이스라엘에서 아주 훌륭하고 유능한 사람이 죽었다는 것을 그대들은 알고 있소?","The king then said to his servants: “Do you not know that a prince, a great man, has fallen today in Israel.","And the king said unto his servants, Know ye not that there is a prince and a great man fallen this day in Israel?","Then the king said to his men, \"Do you not realize that a prince and a great man has fallen in Israel this day?","Dixit quoque rex ad servos suos:  “Num ignoratis quoniam princeps et maximus cecidit hodie in Israel?","ויאמר המלך אל עבדיו הלוא תדעו כי שר וגדול נפל היום הזה בישראל׃"],["10","3","39","내가 비록 기름부음 받은 임금이지만 오늘은 이렇게 약하구려. 츠루야의 아들들인 이 사람들이 나에게는 너무 벅차오. 주님께서 악을 저지르는 자에게 그 악에 따라 갚아 주시기를 바랄 뿐이오.”","스루야의 아들들이 너무 억세어서 나에게는 힘에 겹소. 이처럼 무력해서야 내가 어찌 왕노릇을 하겠소? 야훼께서 그런 나쁜 짓을 한 자들에게 그만한 벌을 내리시기를 바랄 뿐이오.\"","내가 기름 부음을 받은 왕이 되었으나 오늘 약하여서 스루야의 아들인 이 사람들을 제어하기가 너무 어려우니 여호와는 악행한 자에게 그 악한 대로 갚으실지로다 하니라","내가 기름 부음을 받은 왕이 되었으나 오늘날 약하여서 스루야의 아들인 이 사람들을 제어하기가 너무 어려우니 여호와는 악행한 자에게 그 악한대로 갚으실찌로다 하니라","내가 비록 하나님께서 기름 부어 세운 왕이지만 이러한 일을 막을만큼 강한 왕은 못 되오. 스루야의 아들들이 나보다 더 강해졌고, 나는 더 이상 그들의 힘을 누를 수가 없기 때문이오! 그러므로 그들이 저지른 악행대로 여호와께서 그들에게 벌을 내려 주시기 바랄 뿐이오\"","Although I am the anointed king, I am weak this day, and these men, the sons of Zeruiah, are too ruthless for me. May the LORD repay the evildoer in accordance with his evil deed.”","And I am this day weak, though anointed king; and these men the sons of Zeruiah be too hard for me: the LORD shall reward the doer of evil according to his wickedness.","And today, though I am the anointed king, I am weak, and these sons of Zeruiah are too strong for me. May the LORD repay the evildoer according to his evil deeds!\"","Ego vero adhuc debilis sum, quamvis sim unctus rex; viri autem isti filii Sarviae duriores sunt quam ego. Retribuat Dominus facienti malum iuxta malitiam suam “.","ואנכי היום רך ומשוח מלך והאנשים האלה בני צרויה קשים ממני ישלם יהוה לעשה הרעה כרעתו׃"],["10","4","1","아브네르가 헤브론에서 죽었다는 소식을 듣자, 사울의 아들 이스 보셋은 두 손에 맥이 빠졌다. 온 이스라엘도 혼란에 빠졌다.","사울의 아들 이스보셋은 아브넬이 헤브론에서 죽었다는 소식을 듣고 맥이 풀렸다. 온 이스라엘도 갈팡질팡하였다.","사울의 아들 이스보셋은 아브넬이 헤브론에서 죽었다 함을 듣고 손의 맥이 풀렸고 온 이스라엘이 놀라니라","사울의 아들 이스보셋이 아브넬의 헤브론에서 죽었다 함을 듣고 손맥이 풀렸고 온 이스라엘이 놀라니라","사울의 아들 이스보셋은 아브넬이 헤브론에서 피살되었다는 소식을 듣고, 넋을 잃은 채 어쩔 줄을 몰라하였다. 이스라엘 백성도 모두 갈팡질팡하였다.","When Ishbaal, son of Saul, heard that Abner was dead in Hebron, he lost his resolve and all Israel was alarmed.","And when Saul's son heard that Abner was dead in Hebron, his hands were feeble, and all the Israelites were troubled.","When Ish-Bosheth son of Saul heard that Abner had died in Hebron, he lost courage, and all Israel became alarmed.","Audivit autem Isbaal filius Saul quod cecidisset Abner in He bron, et dissolutae sunt manus eius, omnisque Israel perturbatus est.","וישמע בן שאול כי מת אבנר בחברון וירפו ידיו וכל ישראל נבהלו׃"],["10","4","2","사울의 아들에게는 약탈대 장수 두 사람이 있었는데, 한 사람의 이름은 바아나이고 다른 사람의 이름은 레캅이었다. 그들은 벤야민의 자손 브에롯 사람 림몬의 아들이었다. 사실 브에롯도 벤야민 지파에 속한 것으로 여겨졌다.","사울의 아들 이스보셋 수하에는 특공대 대장이 둘 있었는데, 하나는 바아나요, 또 하나는 레갑이었다. 둘 다 베냐민 족속이며 브에롯 사람인 림몬의 아들이었다. 브에롯도 베냐민 가문에 속한 것으로 쳐주고 있었다.","사울의 아들 이스보셋에게 군지휘관 두 사람이 있으니 한 사람의 이름은 바아나요 한 사람의 이름은 레갑이라 베냐민 족속 브에롯 사람 림몬의 아들들이더라 브에롯도 베냐민 지파에 속하였으니","사울의 아들 이스보셋에게 군장 두 사람이 있으니 하나의 이름은 바아나요 하나의 이름은 레갑이라 베냐민 족속 브에롯 사람 림몬의 아들들이더라 브에롯도 베냐민 지파에 속하였으니","그때에 이스보셋을 섬기던 장군들 중에는 바아나와 레갑 형제가 특공대 대장으로 있었는데, 그들 아버지의 이름은 림몬이었다. 그들은 베냐민 지파에 딸린 브에롯 마을에서 태어난 사람들로,","Ishbaal, son of Saul, had two company leaders named Baanah and Rechab, sons of Rimmon the Beerothite, of the tribe of Benjamin—Beeroth, too, was ascribed to Benjamin:","And Saul's son had two men that were captains of bands: the name of the one was Baanah, and the name of the other Rechab, the sons of Rimmon a Beerothite, of the children of Benjamin: (for Beeroth also was reckoned to Benjamin.","Now Saul's son had two men who were leaders of raiding bands. One was named Baanah and the other Recab; they were sons of Rimmon the Beerothite from the tribe of Benjamin--Beeroth is considered part of Benjamin,","Duo autem viri duces turmarum erant filio Saul, nomen uni Baana et nomen alteri Rechab filii Remmon Berothitae de filiis Beniamin; siquidem et Beroth reputata est in Beniamin.","ושני אנשים שרי גדודים היו בן שאול שם האחד בענה ושם השני רכב בני רמון הבארתי מבני בנימן כי גם בארות תחשב על בנימן׃"],["10","4","3","브에롯인들은 일찍이 기타임으로 달아나 오늘날까지 거기에 머물러 살게 된 것이다.","브에롯 사람들은 기따임으로 난을 피해 갔다가 오늘날까지 거기에 머물러 살고 있다.","일찍이 브에롯 사람들이 깃다임으로 도망하여 오늘까지 거기에 우거함이더라","일찍 브에롯 사람들이 깃다임으로 도망하여 오늘까지 거기 우거함이더라","아브넬이 죽었다는 소식을 듣자 자기들의 시대가 온 것으로 착각하고 무모한 거사를 하였기 때문에 그들의 집안과 마을에까지 수치가 되었다. 이리하여 브에롯 주민들은 모두 깃다임으로 도망가서 오늘날까지 그곳에 살고 있다.","the Beerothites fled to Gittaim, where they have been resident aliens to this day.","And the Beerothites fled to Gittaim, and were sojourners there until this day.)","because the people of Beeroth fled to Gittaim and have lived there as aliens to this day.","Fugerant enim Berothitae in Getthaim, factique sunt ibi advenae usque in tempus hoc.","ויברחו הבארתים גתימה ויהיו שם גרים עד היום הזה׃"],["10","4","4","사울의 아들 요나탄에게는 다리를 저는 아들이 하나 있었다. 그의 나이가 다섯 살 되던 해, 이즈르엘에서 사울과 요나탄에 관한 소식이 전해지자, 그의 유모가 그를 데리고 황급히 도망치는 바람에, 그가 떨어져서 다리를 절게 되었다. 그의 이름은 므피보셋이다.","사울의 아들 요나단에게는 다리를 저는 아들이 하나 있었다. 그가 다섯 살 때, 이즈르엘에서 사울과 요나단이 죽었다는 소식이 전해지자, 유모가 그를 안고 허둥지둥 도망치다가 떨어뜨리는 바람에 다리를 절게 되었던 것이다. 그의 이름은 므비보셋이었다.","사울의 아들 요나단에게 다리 저는 아들 하나가 있었으니 이름은 므비보셋이라 전에 사울과 요나단이 죽은 소식이 이스르엘에서 올 때에 그의 나이가 다섯 살이었는데 그 유모가 안고 도망할 때 급히 도망하다가 아이가 떨어져 절게 되었더라","사울의 아들 요나단에게 절뚝발이 아들 하나가 있으니 이름은 므비보셋이라 전에 사울과 요나단의 죽은 소식이 이스르엘에서 올 때에 그 나이 다섯살이었는데 그 유모가 안고 도망하더니 급히 도망하므로 아이가 떨어져 절게 되었더라","사울의 집안에는 아직도 살아 남은 사람이 하나 있었는데, 그는 사울의 아들 요나단이 낳은 므비보셋이었다. 그러나 그는 두 다리를 저는 불구자였다. 그의 아버지와 할아버지가 이스르엘의 싸움터에서 함께 죽었을 때 그의 나이는 겨우 5세였다. 그때에 전사 통보를 받은 유모가 그를 업고 도망치다가 떨어뜨려서 두 다리를 다 절게 된 것이다. 바아나와 레갑은 이제 이스보셋만 죽이면 더 이상 사울의 집안에서 정당한 왕위 계승자가 나올 수 없다는 간교한 계산을 하고 거사를 준비하였다.","(Jonathan, son of Saul, had a son with crippled feet. He was five years old when the news about Saul and Jonathan came from Jezreel; his nurse took him and fled, but in their hasty flight, he fell and became lame. His name was Meribbaal.)","And Jonathan, Saul's son, had a son that was lame of his feet. He was five years old when the tidings came of Saul and Jonathan out of Jezreel, and his nurse took him up, and fled: and it came to pass, as she made haste to flee, that he fell, and became lame. And his name was Mephibosheth.","(Jonathan son of Saul had a son who was lame in both feet. He was five years old when the news about Saul and Jonathan came from Jezreel. His nurse picked him up and fled, but as she hurried to leave, he fell and became crippled. His name was Mephibosheth.)","Erat autem Ionathan filio Saul filius debilis pedibus. Quinquennis enim fuit, quando venit nuntius de Saul et Ionathan ex Iezrahel. Tollens itaque eum nutrix sua fugit; cumque festinaret, ut fugeret, cecidit et claudus effectus est habuitque vocabulum Meribbaal.","וליהונתן בן שאול בן נכה רגלים בן חמש שנים היה בבא שמעת שאול ויהונתן מיזרעאל ותשאהו אמנתו ותנס ויהי בחפזה לנוס ויפל ויפסח ושמו מפיבשת׃"],["10","4","5","브에롯 사람 림몬의 아들 레캅과 바아나가 뜨거운 한낮에 길을 떠나 이스 보셋의 궁에 이르렀다. 마침 이스 보셋은 낮잠을 자고 있었다.","브에롯 사람 림몬의 두 아들 레갑과 바아나가 한낮에 이스보셋 왕궁을 찾아갔다. 때마침 이스보셋은 낮잠을 자고 있었다.","브에롯 사람 림몬의 아들 레갑과 바아나가 길을 떠나 볕이 쬘 때 즈음에 이스보셋의 집에 이르니 마침 그가 침상에서 낮잠을 자는지라","브에롯 사람 림몬의 아들 레갑과 바아나가 행하여 볕이 쬘 때 즈음에 이스보셋의 집에 이르니 마침 저가 낮잠을 자는지라","레갑과 바아나가 이스보셋의 왕궁에 이르렀을 때는 마침 가장 뜨거운 한낮으로, 이스보셋은 낮잠을 자고 있었다.","The sons of Rimmon the Beerothite, Rechab and Baanah, came into the house of Ishbaal during the heat of the day, while he was lying on his bed in the afternoon.","And the sons of Rimmon the Beerothite, Rechab and Baanah, went, and came about the heat of the day to the house of Ishbosheth, who lay on a bed at noon.","Now Recab and Baanah, the sons of Rimmon the Beerothite, set out for the house of Ish-Bosheth, and they arrived there in the heat of the day while he was taking his noonday rest.","Venientes igitur filii Remmon Berothitae, Rechab et Baana, ingressi sunt, fervente die, domum Isbaal, qui dormiebat super stratum suum meridie; et ostiaria domus purgans triticum obdormivit.","וילכו בני רמון הבארתי רכב ובענה ויבאו כחם היום אל בית איש בשת והוא שכב את משכב הצהרים׃"],["10","4","6","그들은 밀을 가지러 온 체하며 궁 안으로 들어가, 이스 보셋의 배를 찔렀다. 그리고 레캅과 그의 동생 바아나는 거기에서 빠져나왔다.","레갑 형제는 밀을 가지러 온 것처럼 꾸미고 궁으로 들어가서 이스보셋의 배를 찌르고 달아났다.","레갑과 그의 형제 바아나가 밀을 가지러 온 체하고 집 가운데로 들어가서 그의 배를 찌르고 도망하였더라","레갑과 그 형제 바아나가 밀을 가지러 온체하고 집 가운데로 들어가서 그 배를 찌르고 도망하였더라","ㄱ) 그들은 밀을 가지고 가려는 사람들처럼 꾸미고 집안으로 들어갔다. 그런데 그 집안에는 어레미로 밀을 깨끗이 치던 여인이 고개를 떨군 채 졸고 있었다. 그들은 그녀의 배를 찔러 죽이고 무사히 안으로 들어갈 수가 있었다. (ㄱ. 70인역에 따라 내용을 보충하였다)","The gatekeeper of the house had dozed off while sifting wheat, and was asleep. So Rechab and his brother Baanah slipped past her","And they came thither into the midst of the house, as though they would have fetched wheat; and they smote him under the fifth rib: and Rechab and Baanah his brother escaped.","They went into the inner part of the house as if to get some wheat, and they stabbed him in the stomach. Then Recab and his brother Baanah slipped away.","Ingressi sunt ergo usque interiora domus et percusserunt eum in inguine Rechab et Baana frater eius et fugerunt.","והנה באו עד תוך הבית לקחי חטים ויכהו אל החמש ורכב ובענה אחיו נמלטו׃"],["10","4","7","그들이 궁으로 들어갔을 때 이스 보셋은 침실에서 침상에 누워 자고 있었는데, 그들은 그를 쳐 죽인 다음에 그의 머리를 베어 가지고 나와서 밤새도록 아라바 길을 걸었다.","둘은 궁에 들어가서 이스보셋이 침대에 누워 자는 것을 보고 그를 죽인 다음 목을 베어가지고 밤새 아라바 길을 걸어","그들이 집에 들어가니 이스보셋이 침실에서 침상 위에 누워 있는지라 그를 쳐죽이고 목을 베어 그의 머리를 가지고 밤새도록 아라바 길로 가","저희가 집에 들어가니 이스보셋이 침실에서 상 위에 누웠는지라 저를 쳐 죽이고 목을 베어 그 머리를 가지고 밤새도록 아라바 길로 행하여","그들은 곧장 이스보셋의 침실로 가서 누워 자던 왕을 찔러 죽였다. 그리고 머리를 잘라 가지고, 곧 거기 마하나임에서 출발하여 밤새도록 아라바 길을 걸어서","and entered the house while Ishbaal was lying asleep in his bedroom. They struck and killed him, and cut off his head. Then, taking the head, they traveled on the Arabah road all night long.","For when they came into the house, he lay on his bed in his bedchamber, and they smote him, and slew him, and beheaded him, and took his head, and gat them away through the plain all night.","They had gone into the house while he was lying on the bed in his bedroom. After they stabbed and killed him, they cut off his head. Taking it with them, they traveled all night by way of the Arabah.","Cum autem ingressi fuissent domum, ille dormiebat super lectum suum in conclavi, et percutientes interfecerunt eum; sublatoque capite eius, abierunt per viam Arabae tota nocte.","ויבאו הבית והוא שכב על מטתו בחדר משכבו ויכהו וימתהו ויסירו את ראשו ויקחו את ראשו וילכו דרך הערבה כל הלילה׃"],["10","4","8","그들은 이스 보셋의 머리를 헤브론에 있는 다윗에게 가지고 가서 임금에게 말하였다. “임금님의 목숨을 노리던 원수 사울의 아들 이스 보셋의 머리가 여기 있습니다. 주님께서 오늘 저의 주군이신 임금님을 위하여 사울과 그의 후손에게 원수를 갚아 주셨습니다.”","헤브론으로 갔다. 그들은 다윗 왕에게 이스보셋의 머리를 바치며 아뢰었다. \"임금님의 목숨을 해치려던 원수 사울의 아들 이스보셋의 머리가 여기 있습니다. 야훼께서 오늘 임금님의 원수를 갚으시어 사울 부자에게 벌을 내리셨습니다.\"","헤브론에 이르러 다윗 왕에게 이스보셋의 머리를 드리며 아뢰되 왕의 생명을 해하려 하던 원수 사울의 아들 이스보셋의 머리가 여기 있나이다 여호와께서 오늘 우리 주 되신 왕의 원수를 사울과 그의 자손에게 갚으셨나이다 하니","헤브론에 이르러 다윗왕에게 이스보셋의 머리를 드리며 고하되 왕의 생명을 해하려 하던 원수 사울의 아들 이스보셋의 머리가 여기 있나이다 여호와께서 오늘 우리 주 되신 왕의 원수를 사울과 그 자손에게 갚으셨나이다","헤브론으로 내려갔다. 거기서 그들은 이스보셋의 머리를 다윗에게로 들고 가 의기양양하게 말하였다. \"이스보셋의 머리가 여기에 있습니다. 오늘에야 여호와께서 사울과 그 후손들의 원수를 우리 임금님께 갚아 주셨습니다. 임금님을 죽이려고 벼르던 사울의 아들이 여기 이렇게 죽었습니다.\"","They brought the head of Ishbaal to David in Hebron and said to the king: “This is the head of Ishbaal, son of your enemy Saul, who sought your life. Thus has the LORD this day avenged my lord the king on Saul and his posterity.”","And they brought the head of Ishbosheth unto David to Hebron, and said to the king, Behold the head of Ishbosheth the son of Saul thine enemy, which sought thy life; and the LORD hath avenged my lord the king this day of Saul, and of his seed.","They brought the head of Ish-Bosheth to David at Hebron and said to the king, \"Here is the head of Ish-Bosheth son of Saul, your enemy, who tried to take your life. This day the LORD has avenged my lord the king against Saul and his offspring.\"","Et attulerunt caput Isbaal ad David in Hebron dixeruntque ad regem:  “Ecce caput Isbaal filii Saul inimici tui, qui quaerebat animam tuam; et dedit Dominus domino meo regi ultiones hodie de Saul et de semine eius “.","ויבאו את ראש איש בשת אל דוד חברון ויאמרו אל המלך הנה ראש איש בשת בן שאול איבך אשר בקש את נפשך ויתן יהוה לאדני המלך נקמות היום הזה משאול ומזרעו׃"],["10","4","9","그러나 다윗은 브에롯 사람 림몬의 아들 레캅과 그의 동생 바아나에게 말하였다. “온갖 고난에서 나의 목숨을 건져 주신, 살아 계신 주님을 두고 맹세한다.","그러자 다윗은 브에롯 사람 림몬의 아들 레갑과 바아나 형제에게 말하였다. \"사지에 빠졌을 때마다 내 목숨을 건져주신 야훼 앞에서 맹세한다.","다윗이 브에롯 사람 림몬의 아들 레갑과 그의 형제 바아나에게 대답하여 그들에게 이르되 내 생명을 여러 환난 가운데서 건지신 여호와께서 살아 계심을 두고 맹세하노니","다윗이 브에롯 사람 림몬의 아들 레갑과 그 형제 바아나에게 대답하여 가로되 내 생명을 여러 환난 가운데서 건지신 여호와의 사심을 가리켜 맹세하노니","그러자 다윗은 이스보셋을 죽인 암살자들에게 이와같이 대답하였다. \"온갖 위기에서 나를 살려내 주신 여호와의 살아 계심을 두고 내가 맹세한다. 너희가 나를 아주 잘못 생각하였다.","But David replied to Rechab and his brother Baanah, sons of Rimmon the Beerothite: “As the LORD lives, who rescued me from every distress:","And David answered Rechab and Baanah his brother, the sons of Rimmon the Beerothite, and said unto them, As the LORD liveth, who hath redeemed my soul out of all adversity,","David answered Recab and his brother Baanah, the sons of Rimmon the Beerothite, \"As surely as the LORD lives, who has delivered me out of all trouble,","Respondens autem David Rechab et Baana fratri eius filiis Remmon Berothitae dixit ad eos:  “Vivit Dominus, qui eruit animam meam de omni angustia,","ויען דוד את רכב ואת בענה אחיו בני רמון הבארתי ויאמר להם חי יהוה אשר פדה את נפשי מכל צרה׃"],["10","4","10","전에 어떤 자가 제 딴에는 기쁜 소식을 전하는 줄로 여기며, ‘사울이 죽었습니다.’ 하고 나에게 알렸다. 그러나 나는 그 기쁜 소식의 대가로 그를 잡아 치클락에서 죽였다.","전에도 희소식이나 되는 줄 알고 사울의 죽음을 전해 주던 자가 있었다. 그 때 나는 그 소식을 가져온 대가로 그자를 잡아 시글락에서 처형하였다.","전에 사람이 내게 알리기를 보라 사울이 죽었다 하며 그가 좋은 소식을 전하는 줄로 생각하였어도 내가 그를 잡아 시글락에서 죽여서 그것을 그 소식을 전한 갚음으로 삼았거든","전에 사람이 내게 고하기를 사울이 죽었다 하며 좋은 소식을 전하는 줄로 생각하였어도 내가 저를 잡아 시글락에서 죽여서 그것으로 그 기별의 갚음을 삼았거든","전에 내가 시글락에 있을 때 \"사울이 죽었다.\"는 소식을 전하면서 나에게 좋은 소식을 전하러 온 전령인 듯 생각한 자가 있었다. 그러나 나는 그를 붙잡아 처형해 버렸다. 이것이 그가 전해 준 소식의 대가이다.","the man who reported to me, ‘Saul is dead,’ and thought he was bringing good news, that man I seized and killed in Ziglag: that was the reward I gave him.","When one told me, saying, Behold, Saul is dead, thinking to have brought good tidings, I took hold of him, and slew him in Ziklag, who thought that I would have given him a reward for his tidings:","when a man told me, 'Saul is dead,' and thought he was bringing good news, I seized him and put him to death in Ziklag. That was the reward I gave him for his news!","quoniam eum, qui annuntiaverat mihi et dixerat: “Mortuus est Saul “, qui putabat se prospera nuntiare, tenui et occidi in Siceleg, cui oportebat me dare mercedem pro nuntio;","כי המגיד לי לאמר הנה מת שאול והוא היה כמבשר בעיניו ואחזה בו ואהרגהו בצקלג אשר לתתי לו בשרה׃"],["10","4","11","하물며 악한 자들이 자기 집 침상에서 자는 의로운 사람을 살해하였는데, 내가 어찌 그 피에 대한 책임을 너희 손에 묻지 않으며 이 땅에서 너희를 없애 버리지 않겠느냐?”","그런데 너희 고약한 놈들은 집에서 잠자리에 누워 자고 있는 무고한 사람을 죽였으니 내가 그대로 둘 성싶으냐? 나 이제 너희 둘을 죽여 그의 원한을 풀어주리라. 너희 같은 자들을 이 땅에서 씨도 남기지 않으리라.\"","하물며 악인이 의인을 그의 집 침상 위에서 죽인 것이겠느냐 그런즉 내가 악인의 피흘린 죄를 너희에게 갚아서 너희를 이 땅에서 없이하지 아니하겠느냐 하고","하물며 악인이 의인을 그 집 침상 위에서 죽인 것이겠느냐 그런즉 내가 저의 피흘린 죄를 너희에게 갚아서 너희를 이 땅에서 없이 하지 아니하겠느냐 하고","자기 집 침상에서 평화롭게 잠자는 무고한 사람을 해친 것은 세상 어디서고 용납되지 못할 행동이다. 너희는 어떻게 생각하느냐? 너희가 바로 그렇게 사람을 죽였으니, 내가 어찌 그 책임을 묻지 않을 수 있겠느냐? 너희가 스스로 죽을 짓을 하였으니 이제 너희를 이 땅에서 없애 버리겠다\"","How much more now, when wicked men have slain an innocent man in bed at home, must I require his blood from you and purge you from the land!”","How much more, when wicked men have slain a righteous person in his own house upon his bed? shall I not therefore now require his blood of your hand, and take you away from the earth?","How much more--when wicked men have killed an innocent man in his own house and on his own bed--should I not now demand his blood from your hand and rid the earth of you!\"","quanto magis nunc, cum homines impii interfecerunt virum innoxium in domo sua super lectum suum, non quaeram sanguinem eius de manu vestra et auferam vos de terra? “.","אף כי אנשים רשעים הרגו את איש צדיק בביתו על משכבו ועתה הלוא אבקש את דמו מידכם ובערתי אתכם מן הארץ׃"],["10","4","12","다윗이 부하들에게 명령을 내리자, 부하들은 그들을 죽인 다음 그들의 손과 발을 자르고 헤브론의 못가에 달아 매었다. 그러나 이스 보셋의 머리는 거두어 헤브론에 있는 아브네르의 무덤에 장사 지냈다.","그리고 다윗은 호위병에게 명령하여 둘을 죽이고 그 손과 발을 잘라 헤브론 못 가에 매달게 하였다. 그리고 이스보셋의 머리를 거두어 헤브론에 있는 아브넬의 무덤에 장사지냈다.","청년들에게 명령하매 곧 그들을 죽이고 수족을 베어 헤브론 못 가에 매달고 이스보셋의 머리를 가져다가 헤브론에서 아브넬의 무덤에 매장하였더라","소년들을 명하매 곧 저희를 죽이고 수족을 베어 헤브론 못가에 매어달고 이스보셋의 머리를 가져다가 헤브론에서 아브넬의 무덤에 장사하였더라","다윗은 자기 부하들에게 암살자들을 처형하라고 명령하였다. 다윗의 부하들이 레갑과 바아나를 죽이고 그들의 손과 발을 모두 자른 다음에 그 시체를 헤브론 연못가에 매달았다. 그리고 이스보셋의 머리는 헤브론에 있는 아브넬의 동굴 무덤에 장사해 주었다.","So at David’s command, the young men killed them and cut off their hands and feet, hanging them up near the pool in Hebron. But he took the head of Ishbaal and buried it in Abner’s grave in Hebron.","And David commanded his young men, and they slew them, and cut off their hands and their feet, and hanged them up over the pool in Hebron. But they took the head of Ishbosheth, and buried it in the sepulchre of Abner in Hebron.","So David gave an order to his men, and they killed them. They cut off their hands and feet and hung the bodies by the pool in Hebron. But they took the head of Ish-Bosheth and buried it in Abner's tomb at Hebron.","Praecepit itaque David pueris, et interfecerunt eos; praecidentesque manus et pedes eorum suspenderunt eos super piscinam in Hebron. Caput autem Isbaal tulerunt et sepelierunt in sepulcro Abner in Hebron.","ויצו דוד את הנערים ויהרגום ויקצצו את ידיהם ואת רגליהם ויתלו על הברכה בחברון ואת ראש איש בשת לקחו ויקברו בקבר אבנר בחברון׃"],["10","5","1","이스라엘의 모든 지파가 헤브론에 있는 다윗에게 몰려가서 말하였다. “우리는 임금님의 골육입니다.","1)이스라엘 여러 족속이 모두 헤브론으로 다윗을 찾아와 아뢰었다. \"우리는 임금님과 한 골육입니다.5:1-3, 6-10에 대해서는 1역대 11:1-9 참조.","이스라엘 모든 지파가 헤브론에 이르러 다윗에게 나아와 이르되 보소서 우리는 왕의 한 골육이니이다","이스라엘 모든 지파가 헤브론에 이르러 다윗에게 나아와 말하여 가로되 보소서 우리는 왕의 골육이니이다","이제는 이스라엘의 모든 지파들이 헤브론으로 다윗을 찾아와서 이렇게 아뢰었다. \"저희는 모두 임금님과 한 골육입니다!","All the tribes of Israel came to David in Hebron, and they said: “Look! We are your bone and your flesh.","Then came all the tribes of Israel to David unto Hebron, and spake, saying, Behold, we are thy bone and thy flesh.","All the tribes of Israel came to David at Hebron and said, \"We are your own flesh and blood.","Et venerunt universae tribus Is rael ad David in Hebron dicen tes:  “Ecce nos os tuum et caro tua sumus.","ויבאו כל שבטי ישראל אל דוד חברונה ויאמרו לאמר הננו עצמך ובשרך אנחנו׃"],["10","5","2","전에 사울이 우리의 임금이었을 때에도, 이스라엘을 거느리고 출전하신 이는 임금님이셨습니다. 또한 주님께서는 ‘너는 내 백성 이스라엘의 목자가 되고 이스라엘의 영도자가 될 것이다.’ 하고 임금님께 말씀하셨습니다.”","전에 사울이 우리의 왕이었을 때에도 우리 이스라엘을 거느리고 출전하신 것은 임금님이었습니다. 야훼께서도 임금님께 '너는 내 백성 이스라엘의 목자로서 이스라엘의 영도자가 되라.' 하지 않으셨습니까?\"","전에 곧 사울이 우리의 왕이 되었을 때에도 이스라엘을 거느려 출입하게 하신 분은 왕이시었고 여호와께서도 왕에게 말씀하시기를 네가 내 백성 이스라엘의 목자가 되며 네가 이스라엘의 주권자가 되리라 하셨나이다 하니라","전일 곧 사울이 우리의 왕이 되었을 때에도 이스라엘을 거느려 출입하게 한 자는 왕이시었고 여호와께서도 왕에게 말씀하시기를 네가 내 백성 이스라엘의 목자가 되며 이스라엘의 주권자가 되리라 하셨나이다 하니라","전에 사울왕이 저희를 다스릴 때에도 이스라엘 백성을 거느리고 싸움터에 나가는 왕의 임무는 이미 임금님께서 수행하셨습니다. 그리고 여호와께서도 이미 임금님한테 약속하시기를 \"내가 너를 내 백성 이스라엘을 인도할 사람으로 정해 놓았다.\" 하셨습니다.\"","In days past, when Saul was still our king, you were the one who led Israel out in all its battles and brought it back. And the LORD said to you: You shall shepherd my people Israel; you shall be ruler over Israel.”","Also in time past, when Saul was king over us, thou wast he that leddest out and broughtest in Israel: and the LORD said to thee, Thou shalt feed my people Israel, and thou shalt be a captain over Israel.","In the past, while Saul was king over us, you were the one who led Israel on their military campaigns. And the LORD said to you, 'You will shepherd my people Israel, and you will become their ruler.'\"","Sed et heri et nudiustertius, cum esset Saul rex super nos, tu eras educens et reducens Israel. Dixit autem Dominus ad te: “Tu pasces populum meum Israel et tu eris dux super Israel “ “.","גם אתמול גם שלשום בהיות שאול מלך עלינו אתה הייתה מוציא והמבי את ישראל ויאמר יהוה לך אתה תרעה את עמי את ישראל ואתה תהיה לנגיד על ישראל׃"],["10","5","3","그리하여 이스라엘의 원로들이 모두 헤브론으로 임금을 찾아가자, 다윗 임금은 헤브론에서 주님 앞으로 나아가 그들과 계약을 맺었다. 그리고 그들은 다윗에게 기름을 부어 이스라엘의 임금으로 세웠다.","이리하여 다윗 왕은 헤브론으로 찾아온 이스라엘의 모든 장로들을 맞아 야훼 앞에서 조약을 맺었고, 그들은 다윗에게 기름을 부어 이스라엘 왕으로 삼았다.","이에 이스라엘 모든 장로가 헤브론에 이르러 왕에게 나아오매 다윗 왕이 헤브론에서 여호와 앞에 그들과 언약을 맺으매 그들이 다윗에게 기름을 부어 이스라엘 왕으로 삼으니라","이에 이스라엘 모든 장로가 헤브론에 이르러 왕에게 나아오매 다윗왕이 헤브론에서 여호와 앞에서 저희와 언약을 세우매 저희가 다윗에게 기름을 부어 이스라엘 왕을 삼으니라","이스라엘의 장로들이 다윗과 이 문제를 협상하자, 다윗은 헤브론에서 그들과 통치 계약을 체결하였다. 그들은 여호와 앞에서 한 임금이 두 나라를 도맡아 다스리는 ㄱ) 군합국을 세웠다. 이리하여 그들은 다윗에게 기름부어 온 이스라엘의 왕으로 삼았다. (ㄱ. 통일국가는 아니지만 한 임금을 섬기는 나라를 가리킨다)","Then all the elders of Israel came to the king in Hebron, and at Hebron King David made a covenant with them in the presence of the LORD; and they anointed David king over Israel.","So all the elders of Israel came to the king to Hebron; and king David made a league with them in Hebron before the LORD: and they anointed David king over Israel.","When all the elders of Israel had come to King David at Hebron, the king made a compact with them at Hebron before the LORD, and they anointed David king over Israel.","Venerunt quoque omnes senes Israel ad regem in Hebron, et percussit cum eis rex David foedus in Hebron coram Domino; unxeruntque David in regem super Israel.","ויבאו כל זקני ישראל אל המלך חברונה ויכרת להם המלך דוד ברית בחברון לפני יהוה וימשחו את דוד למלך על ישראל׃"],["10","5","4","다윗은 서른 살에 임금이 되어 마흔 해 동안 다스렸다.","다윗은 나이 삼십에 왕위에 올라 사십 년을 다스렸다.","다윗이 나이가 삼십 세에 왕위에 올라 사십 년 동안 다스렸으되","다윗이 삼십세에 위에 나아가서 사십년을 다스렸으되","다윗은 30세에 왕이 되어 40년 동안 통치하였는데,","David was thirty years old when he became king, and he reigned forty years:","David was thirty years old when he began to reign, and he reigned forty years.","David was thirty years old when he became king, and he reigned forty years.","Triginta annorum erat David, cum regnare coepisset, et quadraginta annis regnavit:","בן שלשים שנה דוד במלכו ארבעים שנה מלך׃"],["10","5","5","그는 헤브론에서 일곱 해 여섯 달 동안 유다를 다스린 다음, 예루살렘에서 서른세 해 동안 온 이스라엘과 유다를 다스렸다.","헤브론에서 칠 년 육 개월 동안 유다를 다스렸고, 예루살렘에서는 삼십삼 년 동안 온 이스라엘과 유다를 다스렸다.","헤브론에서 칠 년 육 개월 동안 유다를 다스렸고 예루살렘에서 삼십삼 년 동안 온 이스라엘과 유다를 다스렸더라","헤브론에서 칠년 육개월 동안 유다를 다스렸고 예루살렘에서 삼십 삼년 동안 온 이스라엘과 유다를 다스렸더라","헤브론에서 7년 6개월 동안 유다 왕으로 다스리고, 예루살렘에서 33년 동안 온 이스라엘과 유다의 왕으로 다스렸다.","in Hebron he was king over Judah seven years and six months, and in Jerusalem he was king thirty-three years over all Israel and Judah.","In Hebron he reigned over Judah seven years and six months: and in Jerusalem he reigned thirty and three years over all Israel and Judah.","In Hebron he reigned over Judah seven years and six months, and in Jerusalem he reigned over all Israel and Judah thirty-three years.","in Hebron regnavit super Iudam septem annis et sex mensibus; in Ierusalem autem regnavit triginta tribus annis super omnem Israel et Iudam.","בחברון מלך על יהודה שבע שנים וששה חדשים ובירושלם מלך שלשים ושלש שנה על כל ישראל ויהודה׃"],["10","5","6","다윗 임금이 부하들을 거느리고 예루살렘으로 가서 그 땅에 사는 여부스족을 치려 하자, 여부스 주민들이 다윗에게 말하였다. “너는 이곳에 들어올 수 없다. 눈먼 이들과 다리저는 이들도 너쯤은 물리칠 수 있다.” 그들은 다윗이 거기에 들어올 수 없으리라고 여겼던 것이다.","다윗 왕이 부하를 거느리고 예루살렘을 치러 가자, 거기 사는 여부스인들이 다윗에게 빈정거렸다. \"너 같은 것이 이리로 쳐들어오다니, 어림도 없다. 소경이나 절름발이도 너쯤은 쫓아낼 수 있다.\" 그들은 다윗이 감히 쳐들어오지는 못하리라고 생각했던 것이다.","왕과 그의 부하들이 예루살렘으로 가서 그 땅 주민 여부스 사람을 치려 하매 그 사람들이 다윗에게 이르되 네가 결코 이리로 들어오지 못하리라 맹인과 다리 저는 자라도 너를 물리치리라 하니 그들 생각에는 다윗이 이리로 들어오지 못하리라 함이나","왕과 그 종자들이 예루살렘으로 가서 그 땅 거민 여부스 사람을 치려 하매 그 사람들이 다윗에게 말하여 가로되 네가 이리로 들어오지 못하리라 소경과 절뚝발이라도 너를 물리치리라 하니 저희 생각에는 다윗이 이리로 들어오지 못하리라 함이나","다윗은 유다나 이스라엘에 속하지 않는 개인 사병들을 거느리고 있었다. 다윗은 자신의 부하들을 거느리고 예루살렘으로 출동하여 그곳의 원주민인 여부스 족속을 쳤다. 그들은 이미 오래전부터 그곳을 차지하고 살면서 그 도성을 예루살렘이라고 불렀다. 그런데 이스라엘의 왕이 된 다윗이 이렇게 출전하자, 여부스 주민들이 단호하게 항의하였다. \"아무리 싸움을 잘하는 다윗이라도 이 요새는 빼앗지 못한다. 너희들쯤이야 소경이나 절뚝발이라도 막아 낼 수 있다.\" 이렇게 그들은 다윗이 그 도성을 빼앗지 못할 것으로 생각하였으나 다윗은 그 요새 시온을 정복하여 결국 자신의 개인 재산인 \"다윗의 도성\"을 만들었다.","Then the king and his men went to Jerusalem against the Jebusites who inhabited the land. They told David, “You shall not enter here: the blind and the lame will drive you away!” which was their way of saying, “David shall not enter here.”","And the king and his men went to Jerusalem unto the Jebusites, the inhabitants of the land: which spake unto David, saying, Except thou take away the blind and the lame, thou shalt not come in hither: thinking, David cannot come in hither.","The king and his men marched to Jerusalem to attack the Jebusites, who lived there. The Jebusites said to David, \"You will not get in here; even the blind and the lame can ward you off.\" They thought, \"David cannot get in here.\"","Et abiit rex et omnes viri, qui erant cum eo, in Ierusalem ad Iebusaeum habitatorem terrae. Qui dixit ad David: “Non ingredieris huc, sed depellent te caeci et claudi “, significantes:  “Non ingredietur David huc “.","וילך המלך ואנשיו ירושלם אל היבסי יושב הארץ ויאמר לדוד לאמר לא תבוא הנה כי אם הסירך העורים והפסחים לאמר לא יבוא דוד הנה׃"],["10","5","7","그러나 다윗은 시온 산성을 점령하였다. 그곳이 바로 다윗 성이다.","그러나 다윗은 그 견고한 시온 성을 점령하였다. 그리하여 이것이 다윗의 도성이 되었다.","다윗이 시온 산성을 빼앗았으니 이는 다윗 성이더라","다윗이 시온 산성을 빼앗았으니 이는 다윗성이더라","(6절에 포함되어 있음)","David nevertheless captured the fortress of Zion, which is the City of David.","Nevertheless David took the strong hold of Zion: the same is the city of David.","Nevertheless, David captured the fortress of Zion, the City of David.","Cepit autem David arcem Sion: haec est civitas David.","וילכד דוד את מצדת ציון היא עיר דוד׃"],["10","5","8","그날 다윗이 이렇게 말하였다. “누구든지 여부스족을 치려는 자는 지하 수로로 올라가, 이 다윗이 미워하는 저 다리저는 이들과 눈먼 이들을 쳐라.” 여기에서 “다리저는 이와 눈먼 이는 궁 안에 들어가지 못한다.”는 말이 생겨났다.","그 날, 다윗은 이런 명령을 내렸다. \"누가 여부스인을 치려느냐? 물을 길어 올리는 바위벽을 타고 올라가 절름발이와 소경들을 쳐라. 이 다윗은 그자들이 사무치게 밉다.\" 이리하여 소경과 절름발이는 왕궁에 들어가지 못하게 되었다.","그 날에 다윗이 이르기를 누구든지 여부스 사람을 치거든 물 긷는 데로 올라가서 다윗의 마음에 미워하는 다리 저는 사람과 맹인을 치라 하였으므로 속담이 되어 이르기를 맹인과 다리 저는 사람은 집에 들어오지 못하리라 하더라","그 날에 다윗이 이르기를 누구든지 여부스 사람을 치거든 수구로 올라가서 다윗의 마음에 미워하는 절뚝발이와 소경을 치라 하였으므로 속담이 되어 이르기를 소경과 절뚝발이는 집에 들어 오지 못하리라 하더라","그날 다윗은 이런 명령을 내렸다. \"누구든지 여부스 족속을 쳐죽일 사람은 수로를 타고 들어가거라! 이 도성의 동쪽 언덕에 있는 기혼 샘이 성안으로 연결된 유일한 식수원이다. 그러므로 누구든지 이 물길을 따라 들어가서 절뚝발이나 소경과 다름없는 주민들을 쳐죽여라. 나는 그 사람을 군대 총사령관으로 삼겠다\" 그러자 스루야의 아들 요압이 맨 먼저 물을 타고 성안으로 기어올라가 군대 총사령관이 되었다. 여부스 족속들이 절뚝발이나 소경들이 라는 말로 다윗을 조롱하였기 때문에 다윗이 그들을 미워하여 \"소경과 절뚝발이는 왕궁에 들어올 수 없다.\"는 속담이 생겼다.","On that day David said: “All who wish to strike at the Jebusites must attack through the water shaft. The lame and the blind shall be the personal enemies of David.” That is why it is said, “The blind and the lame shall not enter the palace.”","And David said on that day, Whosoever getteth up to the gutter, and smiteth the Jebusites, and the lame and the blind that are hated of David's soul, he shall be chief and captain. Wherefore they said, The blind and the lame shall not come into the house.","On that day, David said, \"Anyone who conquers the Jebusites will have to use the water shaft to reach those 'lame and blind' who are David's enemies.\" That is why they say, \"The 'blind and lame' will not enter the palace.\"","Dixerat enim David in die illa:  “Omnis, qui percutiet Iebusaeum, attingat per cuniculum fontis claudos et caecos exosos animae David “. Idcirco dicitur in proverbio:  “Caecus et claudus non intrabunt in domum “.","ויאמר דוד ביום ההוא כל מכה יבסי ויגע בצנור ואת הפסחים ואת העורים שנאו נפש דוד על כן יאמרו עור ופסח לא יבוא אל הבית׃"],["10","5","9","다윗은 그 산성에 살면서, 그곳을 ‘다윗 성’이라고 하였다. 다윗은 밀로 안쪽으로 성곽을 둘러쌓았다.","다윗은 그 견고한 성에서 살며 그 성을 다윗의 도성이라고 불렀다. 그는 밀로의 안쪽으로 다시 성곽을 둘러 쌓았다.","다윗이 그 산성에 살면서 다윗 성이라 이름하고 다윗이 밀로에서부터 안으로 성을 둘러 쌓으니라","다윗이 그 산성에 거하여 다윗성이라 이름하고 밀로에서부터 안으로 성을 둘러 쌓으니라","다윗은 이 도성을 거처로 삼고, 밀로 쪽에서부터 성벽을 쌓아 더욱 튼튼한 도성을 만들었다.","David took up residence in the fortress which he called the City of David. David built up the city on all sides, from the Millo toward the center.","So David dwelt in the fort, and called it the city of David. And David built round about from Millo and inward.","David then took up residence in the fortress and called it the City of David. He built up the area around it, from the supporting terraces inward.","Habitavit autem David in arce et vocavit eam Civitatem David; et aedificavit per gyrum a Mello et intrinsecus.","וישב דוד במצדה ויקרא לה עיר דוד ויבן דוד סביב מן המלוא וביתה׃"],["10","5","10","다윗은 세력이 점점 커졌다. 주 만군의 하느님께서 그와 함께 계셨기 때문이다.","만군의 하느님 야훼께서 다윗과 함께 계시므로, 그의 세력은 날로 뻗어갔다.","만군의 하나님 여호와께서 함께 계시니 다윗이 점점 강성하여 가니라","만군의 하나님 여호와께서 함께 계시니 다윗이 점점 강성하여 가니라","이스라엘의 하나님 여호와께서 다윗과 함께 하셨기 때문에 다윗은 점점 더 세력을 굳히게 되었다.","David became ever more powerful, for the LORD of hosts was with him.","And David went on, and grew great, and the LORD God of hosts was with him.","And he became more and more powerful, because the LORD God Almighty was with him.","Et ibat proficiens atque succrescens, et Dominus, Deus exercituum, erat cum eo.","וילך דוד הלוך וגדול ויהוה אלהי צבאות עמו׃"],["10","5","11","티로 임금 히람이 다윗에게 사절단과 함께 향백나무와 목수와 석수들을 보내어, 다윗에게 궁을 지어 주게 하였다.","2)띠로 왕 히람은 다윗에게 사절단을 보내며 송백 재목과 함께 목수와 석수를 딸려 보내어 다윗의 궁을 짓게 하였다.5:11-25에 대해서는 1역대 14:1-16 참조.","두로 왕 히람이 다윗에게 사절들과 백향목과 목수와 석수를 보내매 그들이 다윗을 위하여 집을 지으니","두로 왕 히람이 다윗에게 사자들과 백향목과 목수와 석수를 보내매 저희가 다윗을 위하여 집을 지으니","다윗의 세력이 이렇게 커지자 나라 밖에서는 사절단을 보내 왔다. 두로 왕 히람이 맨먼저 다윗의 궁전 건축을 위하여 송백 재목도 보내고 건축 기술자인 목수와 석수들도 보냈다.","Hiram, king of Tyre, sent envoys to David along with cedar wood, and carpenters and masons, who built a house for David.","And Hiram king of Tyre sent messengers to David, and cedar trees, and carpenters, and masons: and they built David an house.","Now Hiram king of Tyre sent messengers to David, along with cedar logs and carpenters and stonemasons, and they built a palace for David.","Misit quoque Hiram rex Tyri nuntios ad David et ligna cedrina et artifices lignorum artificesque lapidum pro parietibus; et aedificaverunt domum David.","וישלח חירם מלך צר מלאכים אל דוד ועצי ארזים וחרשי עץ וחרשי אבן קיר ויבנו בית לדוד׃"],["10","5","12","그리하여 다윗은 주님께서 자기를 이스라엘의 임금으로 튼튼히 세우시고, 당신 백성 이스라엘을 위하여 자기 왕권을 높여 주신 것을 알게 되었다.","다윗은 야훼께서 자기를 이스라엘 왕으로 튼튼히 세우시고 자기의 왕권을 떨치게 하신 것은 당신의 백성 이스라엘을 잘되게 하시려는 데 그 뜻이 있다는 것을 알게 되었다.","다윗이 여호와께서 자기를 세우사 이스라엘 왕으로 삼으신 것과 그의 백성 이스라엘을 위하여 그 나라를 높이신 것을 알았더라","다윗이 여호와께서 자기를 세우사 이스라엘 왕을 삼으신 것과 그 백성 이스라엘을 위하여 그 나라를 높이신 것을 아니라","이런 일을 보고 다윗은 하나님의 도우심을 확실히 깨닫게 되었다. \"나를 이스라엘 왕으로 삼으시고, 나의 왕국을 튼튼히 세워 주신 분은 여호와이시다. 여호와께서 자신의 백성 이스라엘을 사랑하시기 때문에 나를 높이 세우신 것이다.\"","David now knew that the LORD had truly established him as king over Israel and had exalted his kingdom for the sake of his people Israel.","And David perceived that the LORD had established him king over Israel, and that he had exalted his kingdom for his people Israel's sake.","And David knew that the LORD had established him as king over Israel and had exalted his kingdom for the sake of his people Israel.","Et cognovit David quoniam confirmasset eum Dominus regem super Israel et quoniam exaltasset regnum eius super populum suum Israel.","וידע דוד כי הכינו יהוה למלך על ישראל וכי נשא ממלכתו בעבור עמו ישראל׃"],["10","5","13","다윗은 헤브론을 떠나온 뒤에 예루살렘에서 후궁과 아내들을 더 얻었는데, 그들이 아들과 딸들을 더 낳아 주었다.","다윗은 헤브론에서 예루살렘으로 자리를 옮긴 뒤 후궁들을 더 얻어 아들딸을 많이 낳았다.","다윗이 헤브론에서 올라온 후에 예루살렘에서 처첩들을 더 두었으므로 아들과 딸들이 또 다윗에게서 나니","다윗이 헤브론에서 올라온 후에 예루살렘에서 처첩들을 더 취하였으므로 아들과 딸들이 또 다윗에게서 나니","다윗은 헤브론에서 예루살렘으로 수도를 옮긴 후에도 아내와 첩들을 더 얻어서 아들딸들을 많이 낳았다.","David took more concubines and wives in Jerusalem after he had come from Hebron, and more sons and daughters were born to him.","And David took him more concubines and wives out of Jerusalem, after he was come from Hebron: and there were yet sons and daughters born to David.","After he left Hebron, David took more concubines and wives in Jerusalem, and more sons and daughters were born to him.","Accepitque David adhuc concubinas et uxores de Ierusalem, postquam venerat de Hebron; natique sunt David et alii filii et filiae.","ויקח דוד עוד פלגשים ונשים מירושלם אחרי באו מחברון ויולדו עוד לדוד בנים ובנות׃"],["10","5","14","그가 예루살렘에서 낳은 아들들의 이름은 삼무아, 소밥, 나탄, 솔로몬,","3)그가 예루살렘에서 낳은 아들들의 이름은 삼무아, 소밥, 나단, 솔로몬,5:14-16에 대해서는 1역대 3:5-8, 14:4-7 참조.","예루살렘에서 그에게서 난 자들의 이름은 삼무아와 소밥과 나단과 솔로몬과","예루살렘에서 그에게서 난 자의 이름은 삼무아와 소밥과 나단과 솔로몬과","예루살렘에서 태어난 그의 아들들의 이름은 삼무아와 소밥과 나단과 솔로몬과","These are the names of those who were born to him in Jerusalem: Shammua, Shobab, Nathan, Solomon,","And these be the names of those that were born unto him in Jerusalem; Shammuah, and Shobab, and Nathan, and Solomon,","These are the names of the children born to him there: Shammua, Shobab, Nathan, Solomon,","Et haec nomina eorum, qui nati sunt ei in Ierusalem: Samua et Sobab et Nathan et Salomon","ואלה שמות הילדים לו בירושלם שמוע ושובב ונתן ושלמה׃"],["10","5","15","입하르, 엘리수아, 네펙, 야피아,","이브할, 엘리수아, 네벡, 야비아,","입할과 엘리수아와 네벡과 야비아와","입할과 엘리수아와 네벡과 야비아와","입할과 엘리수아와 네벡과 야비아와","Ibhar, Elishua, Nepheg, Japhia,","Ibhar also, and Elishua, and Nepheg, and Japhia,","Ibhar, Elishua, Nepheg, Japhia,","et Iebahar et Elisua et Napheg","ויבחר ואלישוע ונפג ויפיע׃"],["10","5","16","엘리사마, 엘야다, 엘리펠렛이다.","엘리사마, 엘리아다, 엘리벨렛이었다.","엘리사마와 엘랴다와 엘리벨렛이었더라","엘리사마와 엘랴다와 엘리벨렛이었더라","엘리사마와 엘랴다와 엘리벨렛이었다.","Elishama, Beeliada, and Eliphelet.","And Elishama, and Eliada, and Eliphalet.","Elishama, Eliada and Eliphelet.","et Iaphia et Elisama et Eliada et Eliphalet.","ואלישמע ואלידע ואליפלט׃"],["10","5","17","필리스티아인들은 사람들이 다윗에게 기름을 부어 그를 이스라엘의 임금으로 세웠다는 소식을 들었다. 필리스티아인들이 다윗을 잡으려고 모두 올라오자, 다윗은 그 보고를 듣고 산성으로 내려갔다.","이스라엘이 다윗에게 기름 부어 왕으로 모셨다는 말을 듣고 불레셋 군은 다윗을 잡으려고 쳐 올라왔다. 다윗이 이 소식을 듣고 요새로 내려갔을 때","이스라엘이 다윗에게 기름을 부어 이스라엘 왕으로 삼았다 함을 블레셋 사람들이 듣고 블레셋 사람들이 다윗을 찾으러 다 올라오매 다윗이 듣고 요새로 나가니라","이스라엘이 다윗에게 기름을 부어 이스라엘 왕을 삼았다 함을 블레셋 사람이 듣고 다윗을 찾으러 다 올라오매 다윗이 듣고 요해처로 나가니라","블레셋 족속은 다윗이 온 이스라엘의 왕이 되었다는 소문을 듣고 병력을 동원하여 그를 붙잡아 가려고 올라왔다. 그러나 다윗은 그러한 사실을 미리 알고 먼저 산성으로 들어가 안전하게 피신하였다.","When the Philistines had heard that David was anointed king over Israel, they marched out in force to come after him. When David heard this, he went down to the refuge.","But when the Philistines heard that they had anointed David king over Israel, all the Philistines came up to seek David; and David heard of it, and went down to the hold.","When the Philistines heard that David had been anointed king over Israel, they went up in full force to search for him, but David heard about it and went down to the stronghold.","Audierunt vero Philisthim quod unxissent David regem super Israel et ascenderunt universi, ut quaererent David. Quod cum audisset David, descendit in praesidium;","וישמעו פלשתים כי משחו את דוד למלך על ישראל ויעלו כל פלשתים לבקש את דוד וישמע דוד וירד אל המצודה׃"],["10","5","18","그때에 필리스티아인들은 이미 르파임 골짜기로 와서 그곳에 퍼져 있었다.","불레셋 군은 이미 르바임 골짜기를 가득 메우고 있었다.","블레셋 사람들이 이미 이르러 르바임 골짜기에 가득한지라","블레셋 사람이 이미 이르러 르바임 골짜기에 편만한지라","블레셋 족속은 이제 힌놈 골짜기에서 가까운 르바임 골짜기의 평원을 가득 메우고 있었다.","Meanwhile the Philistines had come and deployed themselves in the valley of Rephaim.","The Philistines also came and spread themselves in the valley of Rephaim.","Now the Philistines had come and spread out in the Valley of Rephaim;","Philisthim autem venientes diffusi sunt in valle Raphaim.","ופלשתים באו וינטשו בעמק רפאים׃"],["10","5","19","다윗이 주님께 “필리스티아인들을 치러 올라가도 되겠습니까? 그들을 제 손에 넘겨주시겠습니까?” 하고 여쭈어 보자, 주님께서 다윗에게 이르셨다. “올라가거라. 내가 반드시 필리스티아인들을 네 손에 넘겨주겠다.”","다윗이 야훼께 물었다. \"불레셋 군을 쳐 올라가도 되겠습니까? 야훼께서는 그들을 제 손에 넘겨주시겠습니까?\" 야훼께서 다윗에게 대답하셨다. \"쳐 올라가라. 내가 기어이 불레셋 군을 네 손에 넘겨주리라.\" 다윗은 야훼의 응낙을 받고","다윗이 여호와께 여쭈어 이르되 내가 블레셋 사람에게로 올라가리이까 여호와께서 그들을 내 손에 넘기시겠나이까 하니 여호와께서 다윗에게 말씀하시되 올라가라 내가 반드시 블레셋 사람을 네 손에 넘기리라 하신지라","다윗이 여호와께 물어 가로되 내가 블레셋 사람에게로 올라가리이까 여호와께서 저희를 내 손에 붙이시겠나이까 여호와께서 다윗에게 말씀하시되 올라가라 내가 단정코 블레셋 사람을 네 손에 붙이리라 하신지라","다윗이 이것을 보고 여호와께 물었다. \"제가 저 블레셋 족속을 공격하면 어떻겠습니까? 주께서 제게 승리하도록 도와주시겠습니까?\" 여호와께서 대답하셨다. \"어서 가서 쳐라! 내가 틀림없이 네게 승리를 안겨 주겠다\"","David inquired of the LORD, “Shall I attack the Philistines, and will you deliver them into my power?” The LORD answered David: Attack, for I will surely deliver the Philistines into your power.","And David enquired of the LORD, saying, Shall I go up to the Philistines? wilt thou deliver them into mine hand? And the LORD said unto David, Go up: for I will doubtless deliver the Philistines into thine hand.","so David inquired of the LORD, \"Shall I go and attack the Philistines? Will you hand them over to me?\" The LORD answered him, \"Go, for I will surely hand the Philistines over to you.\"","Et consuluit David Dominum dicens:  “Si ascendam ad Philisthim? Et si dabis eos in manu mea? “. Et dixit Dominus ad David: “Ascende, quia tradens dabo Philisthim in manu tua “.","וישאל דוד ביהוה לאמר האעלה אל פלשתים התתנם בידי ויאמר יהוה אל דוד עלה כי נתן אתן את הפלשתים בידך׃"],["10","5","20","그래서 다윗은 바알 프라침으로 들어가 그곳에서 그들을 쳐부순 다음, 이렇게 말하였다. “큰물로 무너뜨리듯, 주님께서는 내 앞에서 원수를 무너뜨리셨다.” 그리하여 그곳의 이름을 바알 프라침이라 하였다.","바알브라심으로 가서 그들을 쳐부수었다. 그리고 그는 \"물이 둑을 무너뜨리듯 야훼께서 원수를 내 앞에서 무너뜨리셨다.\"고 하여 그 곳을 바알브라심이라 불렀다.","다윗이 바알브라심에 이르러 거기서 그들을 치고 다윗이 말하되 여호와께서 물을 흩음 같이 내 앞에서 내 대적을 흩으셨다 하므로 그 곳 이름을 바알브라심이라 부르니라","다윗이 바알브라심에 이르러 거기서 저희를 치고 가로되 여호와께서 물을 흩음 같이 내 앞에서 내 대적을 흩으셨다 하므로 그곳 이름을 바알브라심이라 칭하니라","그러자 다윗이 출전하여 블레셋 족속을 거침없이 쳐부수고 이렇게 말하였다. \"물이 둑을 무너뜨리고 모든 것을 휩쓸어 가듯, 여호와께서 나의 원수들을 모두 휩쓸어 가버리셨다.\" 그래서 사람들은 그곳을 바알브라심이라고 부르게 되었는데, 이는 둑같은 것을 \"무너뜨리시는 주님\" 이란 뜻이다.","So David went to Baal-perazim, and he defeated them there. He said, “The LORD has broken through my enemies before me just as water breaks through a dam.” Therefore that place was called Baal-perazim.","And David came to Baalperazim, and David smote them there, and said, The LORD hath broken forth upon mine enemies before me, as the breach of waters. Therefore he called the name of that place Baalperazim.","So David went to Baal Perazim, and there he defeated them. He said, \"As waters break out, the LORD has broken out against my enemies before me.\" So that place was called Baal Perazim.","Venit ergo David in Baalpharasim (id est Dominus diruptionum); et percussit eos ibi et dixit: “Divisit Dominus inimicos meos coram me, sicut dividuntur aquae “. Propterea vocatum est nomen loci illius Baalpharasim.","ויבא דוד בבעל פרצים ויכם שם דוד ויאמר פרץ יהוה את איבי לפני כפרץ מים על כן קרא שם המקום ההוא בעל פרצים׃"],["10","5","21","필리스티아인들이 그곳에 자기 우상들을 버리고 갔으므로, 다윗은 부하들과 함께 그것들을 치웠다.","다윗은 불레셋 군이 그 곳에 버리고 간 우상들을 부하들과 함께 말끔히 치웠다.","거기서 블레셋 사람들이 그들의 우상을 버렸으므로 다윗과 그의 부하들이 치우니라","거기서 블레셋 사람들이 그 우상을 버렸으므로 다윗과 그 종자들이 치우니라","블레셋 족속들이 도주하기에 바빠 그들의 온갖 신상들을 버리고 떠났기 때문에 다윗은 자기의 부하들과 함께 그것들을 치워버렸다.","The Philistines abandoned their gods there, and David and his men carried them away.","And there they left their images, and David and his men burned them.","The Philistines abandoned their idols there, and David and his men carried them off.","Et reliquerunt ibi sculptilia sua, quae tulit David et viri eius.","ויעזבו שם את עצביהם וישאם דוד ואנשיו׃"],["10","5","22","필리스티아인들이 다시 올라와 르파임 골짜기에 퍼졌다.","불레셋 군이 다시 쳐 올라와 르바임 골짜기를 메웠다.","블레셋 사람들이 다시 올라와서 르바임 골짜기에 가득한지라","블레셋 사람이 다시 올라와서 르바임 골짜기에 편만한지라","그런데 얼마 지나지 않아서 블레셋 족속이 또 다윗을 치러 올라와 르바임 골짜기를 가득 메웠다.","Once again the Philistines came up and deployed themselves in the valley of Rephaim,","And the Philistines came up yet again, and spread themselves in the valley of Rephaim.","Once more the Philistines came up and spread out in the Valley of Rephaim;","Et addiderunt adhuc Philisthim ut ascenderent et diffusi sunt in valle Raphaim.","ויספו עוד פלשתים לעלות וינטשו בעמק רפאים׃"],["10","5","23","다윗이 주님께 여쭈어 보자, 주님께서 이렇게 이르셨다. “바로 올라가지 말고, 그들 뒤로 돌아 발삼 향나무 숲 맞은쪽에서 그들에게 다가가거라.","다윗이 야훼께 물으니 야훼께서 이렇게 일러주셨다. \"곧장 올라가지 말고 적의 뒤로 돌아가 바카 향나무 맞은편에서 습격하여라.","다윗이 여호와께 여쭈니 이르시되 올라가지 말고 그들 뒤로 돌아서 뽕나무 수풀 맞은편에서 그들을 기습하되","다윗이 여호와께 묻자온대 가라사대 올라가지 말고 저희 뒤로 돌아서 뽕나무 수풀 맞은편에서 저희를 엄습하되","이번에도 다윗이 여호와께 묻자, 여호와께서 이렇게 대답하셨다. \"너는 그들을 정면에서 공격하지 말고 그들의 뒤로 돌아가 바카향나무 숲속에 숨어 있다가","and again David inquired of the LORD, who replied: Do not attack the front—circle behind them and come against them near the balsam trees.","And when David enquired of the LORD, he said, Thou shalt not go up; but fetch a compass behind them, and come upon them over against the mulberry trees.","so David inquired of the LORD, and he answered, \"Do not go straight up, but circle around behind them and attack them in front of the balsam trees.","Consuluit autem David Dominum, qui respondit:  “Non ascendas, sed gyra post tergum eorum et venies ad eos ex adverso arborum celthium","וישאל דוד ביהוה ויאמר לא תעלה הסב אל אחריהם ובאת להם ממול בכאים׃"],["10","5","24","발삼 향나무 꼭대기에서 발걸음 소리가 들리거든, 그때 습격하여라. 주님이 앞장서 나가 필리스티아인들의 군대를 칠 것이다.”","그 바카나무 숲 위에서 발소리가 나거든 곧 진격하여라. 나 야훼가 앞장서서 불레셋 군을 치러 나가는 것이다.\"","뽕나무 꼭대기에서 걸음 걷는 소리가 들리거든 곧 공격하라 그 때에 여호와가 너보다 앞서 나아가서 블레셋 군대를 치리라 하신지라","뽕나무 꼭대기에서 걸음 걷는 소리가 들리거든 곧 동작하라 그 때에 여호와가 네 앞서 나아가서 블레셋 군대를 치리라 하신지라","바카나무의 가랑잎에서 행군하는 발자국 소리가 나거든 그때 나가 싸워라.\"","When you hear the sound of marching in the tops of the balsam trees, act decisively, for then the LORD has already gone before you to strike the army of the Philistines.","And let it be, when thou hearest the sound of a going in the tops of the mulberry trees, that then thou shalt bestir thyself: for then shall the LORD go out before thee, to smite the host of the Philistines.","As soon as you hear the sound of marching in the tops of the balsam trees, move quickly, because that will mean the LORD has gone out in front of you to strike the Philistine army.\"","et, cum audieris sonitum gradientis in cacumine arborum celthium, tunc inibis proelium, quia tunc egredietur Dominus ante faciem tuam, ut percutiat castra Philisthim “.","ויהי בשמעך את קול צעדה בראשי הבכאים אז תחרץ כי אז יצא יהוה לפניך להכות במחנה פלשתים׃"],["10","5","25","다윗은 주님께서 명령하신 대로 하여, 게바에서 게제르까지 필리스티아인들을 쳤다.","이리하여 다윗은 야훼의 명령을 따라 불레셋 군을 기브온에서 게젤까지 쫓아가며 무찔렀다.","이에 다윗이 여호와의 명령대로 행하여 블레셋 사람을 쳐서 게바에서 게셀까지 이르니라","이에 다윗이 여호와의 명대로 행하여 블레셋 사람을 쳐서 게바에서 게셀까지 이르니라","그래서 다윗은 여호와의 명령대로 움직여 예루살렘 북쪽의 기브온 근처에 있는 게바에서부터 욥바의 남쪽으로 블레셋 국경에 있는 게셀에 이르기까지 블레셋 족속을 쫓아가면서 쳐부쉈다.","David did as the LORD commanded him, and routed the Philistines from Gibeon as far as Gezer.","And David did so, as the LORD had commanded him; and smote the Philistines from Geba until thou come to Gazer.","So David did as the LORD commanded him, and he struck down the Philistines all the way from Gibeon to Gezer.","Fecit itaque David, sicut praeceperat ei Dominus; et percussit Philisthim de Gabaon usque dum venias Gazer.","ויעש דוד כן כאשר צוהו יהוה ויך את פלשתים מגבע עד באך גזר׃"],["10","6","1","다윗이 다시 이스라엘에서 정병 삼만 명을 모두 소집하였다.","1)다윗은 이스라엘에서 정병 삼만 명을 소집했다.6:2-11에 대해서는 1역대 13:6-14참조.","다윗이 이스라엘에서 뽑은 무리 삼만 명을 다시 모으고","다윗이 이스라엘에서 뺀 무리 삼만을 다시 모으고","다윗은 이스라엘 영내에서 블레셋 족속을 몰아내고, 그동안 그들의 지배 아래 있던 국경지대의 마을에서 여호와의 궤를 다시 찾아올 수 있었다. 다윗은 우선 온 이스라엘에서 가장 뛰어난 장병을 모았는데, 3만 명쯤 되었다.","David again assembled all the picked men of Israel, thirty thousand in number.","Again, David gathered together all the chosen men of Israel, thirty thousand.","David again brought together out of Israel chosen men, thirty thousand in all.","Congregavit autem rursum Da vid omnes electos ex Israel tri ginta milia.","ויסף עוד דוד את כל בחור בישראל שלשים אלף׃"],["10","6","2","다윗은 유다 바알라에서 하느님의 궤를 모셔 오려고, 모든 군대를 거느리고 그곳으로 떠났다. 그 궤는 커룹들 위에 좌정하신 만군의 주님의 이름으로 불렸다.","다윗은 이 전군을 거느리고 유다 바알라에 가서 하느님의 궤를 옮겨오려는 것이었다. 그 궤는 거룹을 타고 계시는 만군의 야훼의 이름으로 불리는 궤였다.","다윗이 일어나 자기와 함께 있는 모든 사람과 더불어 바알레유다로 가서 거기서 하나님의 궤를 메어 오려 하니 그 궤는 그룹들 사이에 좌정하신 만군의 여호와의 이름으로 불리는 것이라","일어나서 그 함께 있는 모든 사람으로 더불어 바알레유다로 가서 거기서 하나님의 궤를 메어 오려하니 그 궤는 그룹들 사이에 좌정하신 만군의 여호와의 이름으로 이름하는 것이라","다윗은 그들을 거느리고 예루살렘에서 서쪽으로 12킬로미터쯤 나가 유다 지파의 바알레 마을에 이르렀다. 이곳은 나중에 기럇여아림이라고도 불렸다. 바로 이 마을에 보관되었던 법궤를 다윗이 예루살렘으로 운반할 작정이었다. 이 법궤는 그룹 천사들의 보좌 위에 앉아 계시는 이스라엘의 하나님께 바친 것으로서, 그 궤 위에는 하나님의 보좌가 있었다.","Then David and all the people who were with him set out for Baala of Judah to bring up from there the ark of God, which bears the name “the LORD of hosts enthroned above the cherubim.”","And David arose, and went with all the people that were with him from Baale of Judah, to bring up from thence the ark of God, whose name is called by the name of the LORD of hosts that dwelleth between the cherubims.","He and all his men set out from Baalah of Judah to bring up from there the ark of God, which is called by the Name, the name of the LORD Almighty, who is enthroned between the cherubim that are on the ark.","Surrexitque David et abiit, et universus populus, qui erat cum eo, in Baala Iudae, ut adducerent inde arcam Dei, super quam invocatum est nomen Domini exercituum sedentis in cherubim super eam.","ויקם וילך דוד וכל העם אשר אתו מבעלי יהודה להעלות משם את ארון האלהים אשר נקרא שם שם יהוה צבאות ישב הכרבים עליו׃"],["10","6","3","그들은 하느님의 궤를 새 수레에 싣고, 언덕 위에 있는 아비나답의 집에서 내갔다. 아비나답의 아들 우짜와 아흐요가 그 새 수레를 몰았다.","그들이 언덕 위에 있는 아비나답의 집에서 하느님의 궤를 새 수레에 싣고 나올 때, 아비나답의 아들 우짜와 아효가 그 새 수레를 몰았다.","그들이 하나님의 궤를 새 수레에 싣고 산에 있는 아비나답의 집에서 나오는데 아비나답의 아들 웃사와 아효가 그 새 수레를 모니라","저희가 하나님의 궤를 새 수레에 싣고 산에 있는 아비나답의 집에서 나오는데 아비나답의 아들 웃사와 아효가 그 새 수레를 모니라","이 법궤는 본래 언덕 위에 있는 아비나답의 집에 맡겨 놓고 그에게 지키게 하였으나 그 사이에 그는 이미 늙고, 그의 아들과 손자들이 그 임무를 계승하였다. 법궤를 운반하기 위해서는 다른 일에 쓰던 낡은 수레를 쓸 수 없기 때문에, 이제까지 한번도 사용한 일이 없는 새 수레에 법궤를 싣고 아비나답의 두아들 웃사와 아효가 수레를 몰았다.","They transported the ark of God on a new cart and took it away from the house of Abinadab on the hill. Uzzah and Ahio, sons of Abinadab, were guiding the cart,","And they set the ark of God upon a new cart, and brought it out of the house of Abinadab that was in Gibeah: and Uzzah and Ahio, the sons of Abinadab, drave the new cart.","They set the ark of God on a new cart and brought it from the house of Abinadab, which was on the hill. Uzzah and Ahio, sons of Abinadab, were guiding the new cart","Et imposuerunt arcam Dei super plaustrum novum tuleruntque eam de domo Abinadab, qui erat in colle. Oza autem et Ahio filii Abinadab minabant plaustrum:","וירכבו את ארון האלהים אל עגלה חדשה וישאהו מבית אבינדב אשר בגבעה ועזא ואחיו בני אבינדב נהגים את העגלה חדשה׃"],["10","6","4","그들이 언덕 위에 있는 아비나답의 집에서 하느님의 궤를 내갈 때, 아흐요가 궤 앞에서 걸었다.","우짜는 궤 옆에서 따르고, 아효는 궤 앞에서 인도했다.","그들이 산에 있는 아비나답의 집에서 하나님의 궤를 싣고 나올 때에 아효는 궤 앞에서 가고","저희가 산에 있는 아비나답의 집에서 하나님의 궤를 싣고 나올 때에 아효는 궤 앞에서 행하고","웃사는 하나님의 법궤 곁에서 따라가고, 야효는 법궤 앞에서 걸어갔다.","with Ahio walking before it,","And they brought it out of the house of Abinadab which was at Gibeah, accompanying the ark of God: and Ahio went before the ark.","with the ark of God on it, and Ahio was walking in front of it.","Oza ambulabat iuxta arcam, et Ahio praecedebat eam.","וישאהו מבית אבינדב אשר בגבעה עם ארון האלהים ואחיו הלך לפני הארון׃"],["10","6","5","다윗과 이스라엘 온 집안은 주님 앞에서 방백나무로 만든 온갖 악기와 비파와 수금과 손북과 요령과 자바라에 맞추어 춤추었다.","다윗과 온 이스라엘 백성은 수금과 거문고를 뜯고 소구와 땡땡이와 바라를 치면서 마음껏 노래부르며 춤을 추었다.","다윗과 이스라엘 온 족속은 잣나무로 만든 여러 가지 악기와 수금과 비파와 소고와 양금과 제금으로 여호와 앞에서 연주하더라","다윗과 이스라엘 온 족속이 잣나무로 만든 여러가지 악기와 수금과 비파와 소고와 양금과 제금으로 여호와 앞에서 주악하더라","그리고 다윗과 온 이스라엘 사람들은 여호와의 영광을 찬양하며 행진하고, 여러 가지 악기와 수금과 비파와 소고와 양금과 제금으로 모두 목청껏 하나님을 찬양하였다.","while David and all the house of Israel danced before the LORD with all their might, with singing, and with lyres, harps, tambourines, sistrums, and cymbals.","And David and all the house of Israel played before the LORD on all manner of instruments made of fir wood, even on harps, and on psalteries, and on timbrels, and on cornets, and on cymbals.","David and the whole house of Israel were celebrating with all their might before the LORD, with songs and with harps, lyres, tambourines, sistrums and cymbals.","David autem et omnis Israel ludebant coram Domino omni virtute in canticis et citharis et lyris et tympanis et sistris et cymbalis.","ודוד וכל בית ישראל משחקים לפני יהוה בכל עצי ברושים ובכנרות ובנבלים ובתפים ובמנענעים ובצלצלים׃"],["10","6","6","그들이 나콘의 타작마당에 이르렀을 때였다. 소들이 비틀거리는 바람에 우짜가 손을 뻗어 하느님의 궤를 붙들었다.","그들이 나곤이라는 사람의 타작 마당을 지날 때였다. 소가 뛰는 바람에 하느님의 궤가 떨어지려고 하자 우짜가 손을 대어 붙들었는데","그들이 나곤의 타작 마당에 이르러서는 소들이 뛰므로 웃사가 손을 들어 하나님의 궤를 붙들었더니","저희가 나곤의 타작 마당에 이르러서는 소들이 뛰므로 웃사가 손을 들어 하나님의 궤를 붙들었더니","그런데 그들이 나곤이라는 사람의 타작마당에 이르렀을 때 수레를 끌던 소들이 뛰는 바람에 궤가 떨어지려고 하자 그 곁에 따라가던 웃사가 얼른 궤를 꼭 붙잡았다.","As they reached the threshing floor of Nodan, Uzzah stretched out his hand to the ark of God and steadied it, for the oxen were tipping it.","And when they came to Nachon's threshingfloor, Uzzah put forth his hand to the ark of God, and took hold of it; for the oxen shook it.","When they came to the threshing floor of Nacon, Uzzah reached out and took hold of the ark of God, because the oxen stumbled.","Postquam autem venerunt ad aream Nachon, extendit manum Oza ad arcam Dei et tenuit eam, quoniam boves lascivientes proruperunt.","ויבאו עד גרן נכון וישלח עזא אל ארון האלהים ויאחז בו כי שמטו הבקר׃"],["10","6","7","그러자 우짜를 향하여 주님의 분노가 타올랐다. 하느님께서 그의 잘못 때문에 거기에서 그를 치시니, 그는 거기 하느님의 궤 곁에서 죽었다.","야훼 하느님께서 우짜의 잘못을 보시고 진노하여 그를 치셨다. 우짜는 하느님의 궤 옆에서 죽었다.","여호와 하나님이 웃사가 잘못함으로 말미암아 진노하사 그를 그 곳에서 치시니 그가 거기 하나님의 궤 곁에서 죽으니라","여호와 하나님이 웃사의 잘못함을 인하여 진노하사 저를 그곳에서 치시니 저가 거기 하나님의 궤 곁에서 죽으니라","그러나 웃사가 함부로 법궤를 만졌기 때문에 여호와께서는 몹시 진노하셔서 그를 치셨다. 웃사는 법궤 곁에서 죽었다.","Then the LORD became angry with Uzzah; God struck him on that spot, and he died there in God’s presence.","And the anger of the LORD was kindled against Uzzah; and God smote him there for his error; and there he died by the ark of God.","The LORD'S anger burned against Uzzah because of his irreverent act; therefore God struck him down and he died there beside the ark of God.","Iratusque est indignatione Dominus contra Ozam et percussit eum super temeritate; qui mortuus est ibi iuxta arcam Dei.","ויחר אף יהוה בעזה ויכהו שם האלהים על השל וימת שם עם ארון האלהים׃"],["10","6","8","다윗은 주님께서 우짜를 그렇게 내리치신 일 때문에 화가 났다. 그래서 그는 그곳을 페레츠 우짜라고 하였는데, 그곳이 오늘날까지 그렇게 불린다.","다윗은 야훼께서 우짜를 치신 일이 몹시 마음에 걸렸다. 그래서 그 곳을 베레스우짜라 불렀는데, 그 이름이 지금까지 남아 있다.","여호와께서 웃사를 치시므로 다윗이 분하여 그 곳을 베레스웃사라 부르니 그 이름이 오늘까지 이르니라","여호와께서 웃사를 충돌하시므로 다윗이 분하여 그곳을 1)베레스웃사라 칭하니 그 이름이 오늘까지 이르니라 웃사를 침이라는 뜻","여호와께서 웃사를 이렇게 현장에서 쳐죽이시자, 이것을 보고 몹시 언짢아진 다윗은 그곳을 가리켜 베레스 웃사라고 불렀다. 이는 \"웃사가 찢겨 죽은 곳\"이라는 뜻이다.","David was angry because the LORD’s wrath had broken out against Uzzah. Therefore that place has been called Perez-uzzah even to this day.","And David was displeased, because the LORD had made a breach upon Uzzah: and he called the name of the place Perezuzzah to this day.","Then David was angry because the LORD'S wrath had broken out against Uzzah, and to this day that place is called Perez Uzzah.","Contristatus autem est David, eo quod diruptionem dirupisset Dominus in Ozam; et vocatum est nomen loci illius Pharesoza (id est Diruptio Ozae) usque in diem hanc.","ויחר לדוד על אשר פרץ יהוה פרץ בעזה ויקרא למקום ההוא פרץ עזה עד היום הזה׃"],["10","6","9","그날 다윗은 주님을 두려워하며, “이래서야 어떻게 주님의 궤를 내가 있는 곳으로 옮겨 갈 수 있겠는가?” 하고 말하였다.","다윗은 그 날, 야훼가 너무 두려워, \"이래서야 어찌 야훼의 궤를 모실 것인가!\" 하였다.","다윗이 그 날에 여호와를 두려워하여 이르되 여호와의 궤가 어찌 내게로 오리요 하고","다윗이 그 날에 여호와를 두려워하여 가로되 여호와의 궤가 어찌 내게로 오리요 하고","이때부터 다윗은 여호와께 겁을 먹고 \"이래 가지고서야 내가 어떻게 감히 여호와의 법궤를 가져다가 모실 수가 있겠는가? 잘못하다가는 식구들만 다 죽일지 모르겠다\"고 한탄하면서","David became frightened of the LORD that day, and he said, “How can the ark of the LORD come to me?”","And David was afraid of the LORD that day, and said, How shall the ark of the LORD come to me?","David was afraid of the LORD that day and said, \"How can the ark of the LORD ever come to me?\"","Et extimuit David Dominum in die illa dicens:  “Quomodo ingredietur ad me arca Domini? “.","וירא דוד את יהוה ביום ההוא ויאמר איך יבוא אלי ארון יהוה׃"],["10","6","10","그래서 다윗은 주님의 궤를 자기가 있는 다윗 성으로 가져가려 하지 않고, 갓 사람 오벳 에돔의 집으로 옮겼다.","그래서 다윗은 야훼의 궤를 자기 도성으로 맞아들이려 하지 않고 갓 사람 오베데돔의 집으로 옮겨 모셨다.","다윗이 여호와의 궤를 옮겨 다윗 성 자기에게로 메어 가기를 즐겨하지 아니하고 가드 사람 오벧에돔의 집으로 메어 간지라","여호와의 궤를 옮겨 다윗성 자기에게로 메어 가기를 즐겨하지 아니하고 치우쳐 가드 사람 오벧에돔의 집으로 메어 간지라","처음과는 다른 결심을 하였다. 그래서 다윗은 법궤를 예루살렘에 있는 성으로 모셔 가지 않고, 단 지파의 영역에 있는 레위족의 마을 가드로 보내 그 마을에 사는 오벧에돔의 집에 맡겼다.","So David was unwilling to take the ark of the LORD with him into the City of David. David deposited it instead at the house of Obed-edom the Gittite.","So David would not remove the ark of the LORD unto him into the city of David: but David carried it aside into the house of Obededom the Gittite.","He was not willing to take the ark of the LORD to be with him in the City of David. Instead, he took it aside to the house of Obed-Edom the Gittite.","Et noluit divertere ad se arcam Domini in civitate David, sed divertit eam in domum Obededom Getthaei.","ולא אבה דוד להסיר אליו את ארון יהוה על עיר דוד ויטהו דוד בית עבד אדום הגתי׃"],["10","6","11","주님의 궤가 갓 사람 오벳 에돔의 집에서 석 달을 머무르는 동안, 주님께서는 오벳 에돔과 그의 온 집안에 복을 내리셨다.","야훼의 궤를 오베데돔의 집에 모셔둔 석 달 동안, 야훼께서는 오베데돔과 그 집안 식구에게 복을 내려주셨다.","여호와의 궤가 가드 사람 오벧에돔의 집에 석 달을 있었는데 여호와께서 오벧에돔과 그의 온 집에 복을 주시니라","여호와의 궤가 가드 사람 오벧에돔의 집에 석달을 있었는데 여호와께서 오벧에돔과 그 온 집에 복을 주시니라","법궤가 그곳에서 석 달 동안 있었는데, 그 사이에 여호와께서 오벧에돔과 그의 온 집안에 복을 내려 주셨다.","The ark of the LORD remained in the house of Obed-edom the Gittite for three months, and the LORD blessed Obed-edom and all his household.","And the ark of the LORD continued in the house of Obededom the Gittite three months: and the LORD blessed Obededom, and all his household.","The ark of the LORD remained in the house of Obed-Edom the Gittite for three months, and the LORD blessed him and his entire household.","Et habitavit arca Domini in domo Obededom Getthaei tribus mensibus, et benedixit Dominus Obededom et omnem domum eius.","וישב ארון יהוה בית עבד אדם הגתי שלשה חדשים ויברך יהוה את עבד אדם ואת כל ביתו׃"],["10","6","12","주님께서 하느님의 궤 때문에 오벳 에돔과 그의 모든 재산에 복을 내리셨다는 소식이 다윗 임금에게 전해지자, 다윗은 기뻐하며 오벳 에돔의 집에서 다윗 성으로 하느님의 궤를 모시고 올라갔다.","2)오베데돔의 집에 하느님의 궤를 모셔두었기 때문에 야훼께서 그 집 식구들과 모든 재산에 복을 내려주신다는 소식을 듣고 다윗 왕은 너무나도 기뻐 하느님의 궤를 오베데돔의 집에서 자기 도성으로 모시고 올라왔다.6:12-19에 대해서는 1역대 15:25-16:3 참조.","어떤 사람이 다윗 왕에게 아뢰어 이르되 여호와께서 하나님의 궤로 말미암아 오벧에돔의 집과 그의 모든 소유에 복을 주셨다 한지라 다윗이 가서 하나님의 궤를 기쁨으로 메고 오벧에돔의 집에서 다윗 성으로 올라갈새","혹이 다윗왕에게 고하여 가로되 여호와께서 하나님의 궤를 인하여 오벧에돔의 집과 그 모든 소유에 복을 주셨다 한지라 다윗이 가서 하나님의 궤를 기쁨으로 메고 오벧에돔의 집에서 다윗성으로 올라갈쌔","오벧에돔이 법궤를 모시고 나서 온 집안까지 복을 받게 되자 그 소문이 다윗에게 전해졌다. 이것이 다윗에게는 여호와께서 진노를 거두시고 은혜를 베푸시기 시작한 징표로 보였다. 그래서 다윗은 기뻐하며 가드로 내려가서 오벧에돔의 집에서 법궤를 모시고 다윗성으로 올라왔다.","When it was reported to King David that the LORD had blessed the household of Obed-edom and all that he possessed because of the ark of God, David went to bring up the ark of God from the house of Obed-edom into the City of David with joy.","And it was told king David, saying, The LORD hath blessed the house of Obededom, and all that pertaineth unto him, because of the ark of God. So David went and brought up the ark of God from the house of Obededom into the city of David with gladness.","Now King David was told, \"The LORD has blessed the household of Obed-Edom and everything he has, because of the ark of God.\" So David went down and brought up the ark of God from the house of Obed-Edom to the City of David with rejoicing.","Nuntiatumque est regi David:  “Benedixit Dominus Obededom et omnia eius propter arcam Dei “. Abiit ergo David et adduxit arcam Dei de domo Obededom in civitatem David cum gaudio.","ויגד למלך דוד לאמר ברך יהוה את בית עבד אדם ואת כל אשר לו בעבור ארון האלהים וילך דוד ויעל את ארון האלהים מבית עבד אדם עיר דוד בשמחה׃"],["10","6","13","주님의 궤를 멘 이들이 여섯 걸음을 옮기자, 다윗은 황소와 살진 송아지를 제물로 바쳤다.","야훼의 궤를 멘 사람들이 여섯 걸음을 옮긴 다음 다윗은 살진 황소를 잡아 바쳤다.","여호와의 궤를 멘 사람들이 여섯 걸음을 가매 다윗이 소와 살진 송아지로 제사를 드리고","여호와의 궤를 멘 사람들이 여섯 걸음을 행하매 다윗이 소와 살진 것으로 제사를 드리고","이때에 다윗은 법궤를 멘 사람들이 여섯 걸음이나 옮기도록 아무런 사고가 없자 법궤를 다시 내려놓고 살찐 황소 한 마리를 잡아 감사제물로 바쳤다. 첫걸음을 탈없이 내디딘 것에 대한 감사로서, 법궤를 예루살렘으로 운반해도 좋다는 하나님의 허락으로 해석하였기 때문이다.","As soon as the bearers of the ark of the LORD had advanced six steps, he sacrificed an ox and a fatling.","And it was so, that when they that bare the ark of the LORD had gone six paces, he sacrificed oxen and fatlings.","When those who were carrying the ark of the LORD had taken six steps, he sacrificed a bull and a fattened calf.","Cumque progressi essent, qui portabant arcam Domini, sex passus, immolavit bovem et vitulum saginatum,","ויהי כי צעדו נשאי ארון יהוה ששה צעדים ויזבח שור ומריא׃"],["10","6","14","다윗은 아마포 에폿을 입고, 온 힘을 다하여 주님 앞에서 춤을 추었다.","그리고 다윗은 모시 에봇을 입고 야훼 앞에서 덩실거리며 춤을 추었다.","다윗이 여호와 앞에서 힘을 다하여 춤을 추는데 그 때에 다윗이 베 에봇을 입었더라","여호와 앞에서 힘을 다하여 춤을 추는데 때에 베 에봇을 입었더라","법궤를 운반하는 행렬이 다시 계속되자, 다윗은 감격을 이기지 못하여 빙글빙글 돌며 춤을 추면서 여호와의 법궤를 따라갔다. 이때에 그는 세마포로 된 제사장의 예복인 에봇만을 입고서 제물도 바치고 백성에게 직접 축복도 하면서 제사장의 일까지 하였다.","Then David came dancing before the LORD with abandon, girt with a linen ephod.","And David danced before the LORD with all his might; and David was girded with a linen ephod.","David, wearing a linen ephod, danced before the LORD with all his might,","et David saltabat totis viribus ante Dominum. Porro David erat accinctus ephod lineo.","ודוד מכרכר בכל עז לפני יהוה ודוד חגור אפוד בד׃"],["10","6","15","다윗과 온 이스라엘 집안은 함성을 올리고 나팔을 불며, 주님의 궤를 모시고 올라갔다.","다윗은 온 이스라엘 백성들과 함께 나팔을 불고 함성을 지르며 야훼의 궤를 모시고 올라왔다.","다윗과 온 이스라엘 족속이 즐거이 환호하며 나팔을 불고 여호와의 궤를 메어오니라","다윗과 온 이스라엘 족속이 즐거이 부르며 나팔을 불고 여호와의 궤를 메어 오니라","다윗은 이렇게 온 이스라엘 백성과 함께 환호성을 올리고 나팔을 불면서 법궤를 예루살렘으로 모셔 왔다.","David and all the house of Israel were bringing up the ark of the LORD with shouts of joy and sound of horn.","So David and all the house of Israel brought up the ark of the LORD with shouting, and with the sound of the trumpet.","while he and the entire house of Israel brought up the ark of the LORD with shouts and the sound of trumpets.","Et David et omnis domus Israel ducebant arcam Domini in iubilo et in clangore bucinae.","ודוד וכל בית ישראל מעלים את ארון יהוה בתרועה ובקול שופר׃"],["10","6","16","주님의 궤가 다윗 성으로 들어갈 때, 다윗 임금이 주님 앞에서 뛰며 춤추는 것을 사울의 딸 미칼이 창문으로 내려다보고, 속으로 그를 비웃었다.","야훼의 궤가 다윗의 도성에 들어올 때 다윗 왕이 야훼 앞에서 덩실 덩실 춤추는 것을 사울의 딸 미갈이 창으로 내려다보고는 속으로 비웃었다.","여호와의 궤가 다윗 성으로 들어올 때에 사울의 딸 미갈이 창으로 내다보다가 다윗 왕이 여호와 앞에서 뛰놀며 춤추는 것을 보고 심중에 그를 업신여기니라","여호와의 궤가 다윗성으로 들어올 때에 사울의 딸 미갈이 창으로 내다보다가 다윗왕이 여호와 앞에서 뛰놀며 춤추는 것을 보고 심중에 저를 업신여기니라","그런데 법궤가 다윗성으로 들어올 때에, 사울의 딸 미갈이 창가에 서서 내려다보고 있었다. 마침 다윗왕이 빙글빙글 돌며 춤을 추면서 여호와의 영광을 찬양하자 미갈은 이러한 다윗을 보고 왕의 체통을 떨어뜨리는 일이라고 마음속으로 멸시하였다.","As the ark of the LORD was entering the City of David, Michal, daughter of Saul, looked down from her window, and when she saw King David jumping and dancing before the LORD, she despised him in her heart.","And as the ark of the LORD came into the city of David, Michal Saul's daughter looked through a window, and saw king David leaping and dancing before the LORD; and she despised him in her heart.","As the ark of the LORD was entering the City of David, Michal daughter of Saul watched from a window. And when she saw King David leaping and dancing before the LORD, she despised him in her heart.","Cumque intrasset arca Domini in civitatem David, Michol filia Saul prospiciens per fenestram vidit regem David subsilientem atque saltantem coram Domino et despexit eum in corde suo.","והיה ארון יהוה בא עיר דוד ומיכל בת שאול נשקפה בעד החלון ותרא את המלך דוד מפזז ומכרכר לפני יהוה ותבז לו בלבה׃"],["10","6","17","그들은 다윗이 미리 쳐 둔 천막 안 제자리에 주님의 궤를 옮겨 놓았다. 그러고 나서 다윗은 주님 앞에 번제물과 친교 제물을 바쳤다.","다윗은 미리 성막을 쳐서 마련해 놓은 자리에 야훼의 궤를 모셔놓고 야훼께 번제와 친교제를 드렸다.","여호와의 궤를 메고 들어가서 다윗이 그것을 위하여 친 장막 가운데 그 준비한 자리에 그것을 두매 다윗이 번제와 화목제를 여호와 앞에 드리니라","여호와의 궤를 메고 들어가서 다윗이 위하여 친 장막 가운데 그 예비한 자리에 두매 다윗이 번제와 화목제를 여호와 앞에 드리니라","다윗은 이미 도성에 성막을 치고, 그 한 가운데에 법궤 모실 자리를 마련해 놓았는데, 사람들이 무사히 그곳에 법궤를 가져다 놓았다. 그러자 다윗은 번제물을 살라서 여호와께 바치고, 화목제물도 바친 다음 그 고기를 모인 사람들과 나누어 먹었다.","They brought in the ark of the LORD and set it in its place within the tent which David had pitched for it. Then David sacrificed burnt offerings and communion offerings before the LORD.","And they brought in the ark of the LORD, and set it in his place, in the midst of the tabernacle that David had pitched for it: and David offered burnt offerings and peace offerings before the LORD.","They brought the ark of the LORD and set it in its place inside the tent that David had pitched for it, and David sacrificed burnt offerings and fellowship offerings before the LORD.","Et introduxerunt arcam Domini et posuerunt eam in loco suo in medio tabernaculi, quod tetenderat ei David; et obtulit David coram Domino holocausta et pacifica.","ויבאו את ארון יהוה ויצגו אתו במקומו בתוך האהל אשר נטה לו דוד ויעל דוד עלות לפני יהוה ושלמים׃"],["10","6","18","다윗은 번제물과 친교 제물을 다 바친 다음에 만군의 주님의 이름으로 백성에게 축복하였다.","이렇게 번제와 친교제를 드린 다음 다윗은 만군의 야훼의 이름으로 백성들에게 복을 빌어주었다.","다윗이 번제와 화목제 드리기를 마치고 만군의 여호와의 이름으로 백성에게 축복하고","다윗이 번제와 화목제 드리기를 마치고 만군의 여호와의 이름으로 백성에게 축복하고","그리고 온 백성을 축복해 주고 집으로 돌려보냈는데,","When David had finished sacrificing burnt offerings and communion offerings, he blessed the people in the name of the LORD of hosts,","And as soon as David had made an end of offering burnt offerings and peace offerings, he blessed the people in the name of the LORD of hosts.","After he had finished sacrificing the burnt offerings and fellowship offerings, he blessed the people in the name of the LORD Almighty.","Cumque complesset offerens holocaustum et pacifica, benedixit populo in nomine Domini exercituum.","ויכל דוד מהעלות העולה והשלמים ויברך את העם בשם יהוה צבאות׃"],["10","6","19","그는 온 백성에게, 남녀를 가리지 않고 이스라엘 모든 군중에게 빵 과자 하나와 대추야자 과자 하나, 그리고 건포도 과자 한 뭉치씩을 나누어 주었다. 그 뒤 온 백성은 저마다 자기 집으로 돌아갔다.","그리고 모여든 온 이스라엘 백성들에게 남녀를 가리지 않고 떡 한 개, 마른 대추야자 한 뭉치, 건포도떡 한 개씩을 나누어주었다. 백성들은 모두 이것을 받아가지고 자기 집으로 돌아갔다.","모든 백성 곧 온 이스라엘 무리에게 남녀를 막론하고 떡 한 개와 고기 한 조각과 건포도 떡 한 덩이씩 나누어 주매 모든 백성이 각기 집으로 돌아가니라","모든 백성 곧 온 이스라엘 무리의 무론 남녀하고 떡 한개와 고기 한 조각과 건포도떡 한덩이씩 나눠주매 모든 백성이 각기 집으로 돌아가니라","그곳에 있던 사람들은 남녀를 가리지 않고 모두 떡 한 덩이와 구운 쇠고기 한점과 건포도 과자 한개씩을 받아 집으로 가는 길에서 먹었다.","and distributed among all the people, the entire multitude of Israel, to every man and every woman, one loaf of bread, one piece of meat, and one raisin cake. Then all the people returned to their homes.","And he dealt among all the people, even among the whole multitude of Israel, as well to the women as men, to every one a cake of bread, and a good piece of flesh, and a flagon of wine. So all the people departed every one to his house.","Then he gave a loaf of bread, a cake of dates and a cake of raisins to each person in the whole crowd of Israelites, both men and women. And all the people went to their homes.","Et partitus est multitudini universae Israel tam viro quam mulieri singulis collyridam panis unam et laganum palmarum unum et palatham unam. Et abiit omnis populus unusquisque in domum suam.","ויחלק לכל העם לכל המון ישראל למאיש ועד אשה לאיש חלת לחם אחת ואשפר אחד ואשישה אחת וילך כל העם איש לביתו׃"],["10","6","20","다윗이 자기 집안을 축복하러 돌아오니, 사울의 딸 미칼이 다윗을 맞이하러 나와서 말하였다. “오늘 이스라엘의 임금님이 건달패 가운데 하나가 알몸을 드러내듯이, 자기 신하들의 여종들이 보는 앞에서 벗고 나서니, 그 모습이 참 볼 만하더군요!”","다윗이 자기 식구들에게 복을 빌어주려고 돌아오자 사울의 딸 미갈이 나가 다윗을 맞으며 말하였다. \"오늘 이스라엘의 임금으로서 체통이 참 볼만하더군요. 건달처럼 신하들의 여편네들 보는 앞에서 몸을 온통 드러내시다니.\"","다윗이 자기의 가족에게 축복하러 돌아오매 사울의 딸 미갈이 나와서 다윗을 맞으며 이르되 이스라엘 왕이 오늘 어떻게 영화로우신지 방탕한 자가 염치 없이 자기의 몸을 드러내는 것처럼 오늘 그의 신복의 계집종의 눈앞에서 몸을 드러내셨도다 하니","다윗이 자기의 가족에게 축복하러 돌아오매 사울의 딸 미갈이 나와서 다윗을 맞으며 가로되 이스라엘 왕이 오늘날 어떻게 영화로우신지 방탕한 자가 염치 없이 자기의 몸을 드러내는 것처럼 오늘날 그 신복의 계집종의 눈 앞에서 몸을 드러내셨도다","다윗도 자기의 식구들을 축복해 주려고 집으로 돌아갔다. 그런데 미갈이 나와서 남편을 맞으며 이렇게 빈정거리며 헐뜯었다. \"오늘 이스라엘의 임금님을 보니, 참으로 영광스럽습니다! 그래 신하의 부인들이 다 보는 앞에서 부끄러운 줄도 모르고 옷을 다 벗어버리시다니, 그런 행동은 방탕한 자들에게서나 볼 수 있는 것이 아닙니까?\"","When David went home to bless his own house, Michal, the daughter of Saul, came out to meet him and said, “How well the king of Israel has honored himself today, exposing himself to the view of the slave girls of his followers, as a commoner might expose himself!”","Then David returned to bless his household. And Michal the daughter of Saul came out to meet David, and said, How glorious was the king of Israel to day, who uncovered himself to day in the eyes of the handmaids of his servants, as one of the vain fellows shamelessly uncovereth himself!","When David returned home to bless his household, Michal daughter of Saul came out to meet him and said, \"How the king of Israel has distinguished himself today, disrobing in the sight of the slave girls of his servants as any vulgar fellow would!\"","Reversusque est et David, ut benediceret domui suae, et egressa Michol filia Saul in occursum David ait:  “Quam gloriosus fuit hodie rex Israel discooperiens se ante ancillas servorum suorum, quasi si nudetur unus de scurris! “.","וישב דוד לברך את ביתו ותצא מיכל בת שאול לקראת דוד ותאמר מה נכבד היום מלך ישראל אשר נגלה היום לעיני אמהות עבדיו כהגלות נגלות אחד הרקים׃"],["10","6","21","다윗이 미칼에게 대답하였다. “주님께서는 당신 아버지와 그 집안 대신 나를 뽑으시고, 나를 주님의 백성 이스라엘의 영도자로 세우셨소. 바로 그 주님 앞에서 내가 흥겨워한 것이오.","다윗이 미갈에게 대답하였다. \"야훼께서는 그대 아버지와 그대 집안을 다 제쳐놓으시고 나를 택하여 당신의 백성 이스라엘의 왕으로 세워주셨소. 나는 그 야훼 앞에서 춤을 추었소. 나는 앞으로도 야훼 앞에서 춤출 것이며","다윗이 미갈에게 이르되 이는 여호와 앞에서 한 것이니라 그가 네 아버지와 그의 온 집을 버리시고 나를 택하사 나를 여호와의 백성 이스라엘의 주권자로 삼으셨으니 내가 여호와 앞에서 뛰놀리라","다윗이 미갈에게 이르되 이는 여호와 앞에서 한 것이니라 저가 네 아비와 그 온 집을 버리시고 나를 택하사 나로 여호와의 백성 이스라엘의 주권자를 삼으셨으니 내가 여호와 앞에서 뛰놀리라","그러나 다윗은 미갈에게 이와 같이 대답하였다. \"내가 어떤 행동을 하였든지, 그것은 여호와의 영광을 찬양한 것뿐이오! 당신의 아버지와 당신의 집안에서 이 나라를 빼앗아 내게 주시고, 하나님의 백성 이스라엘의 영도자로 나를 세워 주신 분이 바로 여호와이시기 때문이오. 나는 앞으로도 여호와의 영광을 드러내기 위해서는 기뻐 뛰며 춤을 추겠소.","But David replied to Michal: “I was dancing before the LORD. As the LORD lives, who chose me over your father and all his house when he appointed me ruler over the LORD’s people, Israel, not only will I make merry before the LORD,","And David said unto Michal, It was before the LORD, which chose me before thy father, and before all his house, to appoint me ruler over the people of the LORD, over Israel: therefore will I play before the LORD.","David said to Michal, \"It was before the LORD, who chose me rather than your father or anyone from his house when he appointed me ruler over the LORD'S people Israel--I will celebrate before the LORD.","Dixitque David ad Michol:  “Ante Dominum salto. Benedictus Dominus, qui elegit me potius quam patrem tuum et quam omnem domum eius, ut constitueret me ducem super populum Domini, super Israel!","ויאמר דוד אל מיכל לפני יהוה אשר בחר בי מאביך ומכל ביתו לצות אתי נגיד על עם יהוה על ישראל ושחקתי לפני יהוה׃"],["10","6","22","나는 이보다 더 자신을 낮추고, 내가 보기에도 천하게 될 것이오. 그러나 당신이 말하는 저 여종들에게는 존경을 받게 될 것이오.”","이번보다도 더 경망히 굴 것이오. 그대는 천하게 보겠지만 지금 말한 그 여편네들은 나를 더욱 우러를 것이오.\"","내가 이보다 더 낮아져서 스스로 천하게 보일지라도 네가 말한 바 계집종에게는 내가 높임을 받으리라 한지라","내가 이보다 더 낮아져서 스스로 천하게 보일찌라도 네가 말한바 계집종에게는 내가 높임을 받으리라 한지라","나는 앞으로도 여호와를 위해서라면 오늘보다도 더 천해지고 싶소. 여호와 앞에서는 언제나 낮고 천한 사람이 되고 싶소! 그래도 당신이 말하는 그 여인들에게는 내가 여전히 존경받을 왕이 아니겠소!\"","but I will demean myself even more. I will be lowly in your eyes, but in the eyes of the slave girls you spoke of I will be somebody.”","And I will yet be more vile than thus, and will be base in mine own sight: and of the maidservants which thou hast spoken of, of them shall I be had in honour.","I will become even more undignified than this, and I will be humiliated in my own eyes. But by these slave girls you spoke of, I will be held in honor.\"","Ludam in conspectu Domini et vilior fiam plus quam factus sum et ero deiectus in oculis meis, sed apud ancillas, de quibus locuta es, gloriosior apparebo “.","ונקלתי עוד מזאת והייתי שפל בעיני ועם האמהות אשר אמרת עמם אכבדה׃"],["10","6","23","그 뒤 사울의 딸 미칼에게는 죽는 날까지 아이가 없었다.","그 뒤 사울의 딸 미갈은 죽는 날까지 자식을 낳지 못했다.","그러므로 사울의 딸 미갈이 죽는 날까지 그에게 자식이 없으니라","그러므로 사울의 딸 미갈이 죽는 날까지 자식이 없으니라","이런 일로 인하여 다윗은 더 이상 미갈과 동침하지 않았다. 그래서 미갈은 죽는 날까지 자식을 낳지 못하였다.","Saul’s daughter Michal was childless to the day she died.","Therefore Michal the daughter of Saul had no child unto the day of her death.","And Michal daughter of Saul had no children to the day of her death.","Igitur Michol filiae Saul non est natus filius usque ad diem mortis suae.","ולמיכל בת שאול לא היה לה ילד עד יום מותה׃"],["10","7","1","임금이 자기 궁에 자리 잡고, 주님께서 그를 사방의 모든 원수에게서 평온하게 해 주셨을 때이다.","1)야훼께서 사면의 원수를 다 물리쳐주셨으므로 다윗 왕은 궁에서 마음놓고 살게 되었다.7:1-29에 대해서는 1역대 17장 참조.","여호와께서 주위의 모든 원수를 무찌르사 왕으로 궁에 평안히 살게 하신 때에","여호와께서 사방의 모든 대적을 파하사 왕으로 궁에 평안히 거하게 하신 때에","이제 다윗왕은 여호와께서 사방에 있는 모든 원수들로부터 그를 지켜 주셨기 때문에 자기의 왕궁에서 편안하게 살아갔다.","After the king had taken up residence in his house, and the LORD had given him rest from his enemies on every side,","And it came to pass, when the king sat in his house, and the LORD had given him rest round about from all his enemies;","After the king was settled in his palace and the LORD had given him rest from all his enemies around him,","Factum est autem cum sedisset rex in domo sua, et Dominus de disset ei requiem undique ab universis inimicis suis,","ויהי כי ישב המלך בביתו ויהוה הניח לו מסביב מכל איביו׃"],["10","7","2","임금이 나탄 예언자에게 말하였다. “보시오, 나는 향백나무 궁에 사는데, 하느님의 궤는 천막에 머무르고 있소.”","그렇게 되자 왕은 예언자 나단에게 말하였다. \"내 말을 들으시오. 나는 이렇게 송백으로 지은 궁에서 사는데, 하느님의 궤는 아직도 휘장 안에 모셔둔 채 그대로 있소.\"","왕이 선지자 나단에게 이르되 볼지어다 나는 백향목 궁에 살거늘 하나님의 궤는 휘장 가운데에 있도다","왕이 선지자 나단에게 이르되 볼찌어다 나는 백향목 궁에 거하거늘 하나님의 궤는 휘장 가운데 있도다","그러던 어느날 왕은 자기만 좋은 집에서 살게 된 것을 송구스럽게 생각하고 예언자 나단에게 이와같이 상의하였다. \"나는 이렇게 송백으로 지은 왕궁에서 호화롭게 살고 있는데, 하나님의 법궤는 아직도 천막 안에 있습니다. 이렇게 해서 되겠습니까?\"","the king said to Nathan the prophet, “Here I am living in a house of cedar, but the ark of God dwells in a tent!”","That the king said unto Nathan the prophet, See now, I dwell in an house of cedar, but the ark of God dwelleth within curtains.","he said to Nathan the prophet, \"Here I am, living in a palace of cedar, while the ark of God remains in a tent.\"","dixit ad Nathan prophetam:  “Videsne quod ego habitem in domo cedrina, et arca Dei posita sit in medio pellium? “.","ויאמר המלך אל נתן הנביא ראה נא אנכי יושב בבית ארזים וארון האלהים ישב בתוך היריעה׃"],["10","7","3","나탄이 임금에게 말하였다. “주님께서 임금님과 함께 계시니, 가셔서 무엇이든 마음 내키시는 대로 하십시오.”","나단이 왕에게 아뢰었다. \"야훼께서 함께 계시니 무엇이든지 뜻대로 하십시오.\"","나단이 왕께 아뢰되 여호와께서 왕과 함께 계시니 마음에 있는 모든 것을 행하소서 하니라","나단이 왕께 고하되 여호와께서 왕과 함께 계시니 무릇 마음에 있는 바를 행하소서","나단이 아뢰었다. \"무슨 일이든지 임금님께서 계획하신 대로 하십시오! 여호와께서 임금님을 도와주실 것입니다.\"","Nathan answered the king, “Whatever is in your heart, go and do, for the LORD is with you.”","And Nathan said to the king, Go, do all that is in thine heart; for the LORD is with thee.","Nathan replied to the king, \"Whatever you have in mind, go ahead and do it, for the LORD is with you.\"","Dixitque Nathan ad regem:  “Omne, quod est in corde tuo, vade, fac, quia Dominus tecum est “.","ויאמר נתן אל המלך כל אשר בלבבך לך עשה כי יהוה עמך׃"],["10","7","4","그런데 그날 밤, 주님의 말씀이 나탄에게 내렸다.","그 날 밤, 야훼의 말씀이 나단에게 내렸다.","그 밤에 여호와의 말씀이 나단에게 임하여 이르시되","그 밤에 여호와의 말씀이 나단에게 임하여 가라사대","그런데 바로 그날 밤에 여호와께서 나단에게 나타나셔서 이렇게 말씀하셨다.","But that same night the word of the LORD came to Nathan:","And it came to pass that night, that the word of the LORD came unto Nathan, saying,","That night the word of the LORD came to Nathan, saying:","Factum est autem in nocte illa, et ecce sermo Domini ad Nathan dicens:","ויהי בלילה ההוא ויהי דבר יהוה אל נתן לאמר׃"],["10","7","5","“나의 종 다윗에게 가서 말하여라. ‘주님이 이렇게 말한다. 내가 살 집을 네가 짓겠다는 말이냐?","\"너는 나의 종 다윗에게 가서 나 야훼의 말이라 하고 이렇게 일러라. '내가 살 집을 네가 짓겠다는 말이냐?","가서 내 종 다윗에게 말하기를 여호와께서 이와 같이 말씀하시되 네가 나를 위하여 내가 살 집을 건축하겠느냐","가서 내 종 다윗에게 말하기를 여호와의 말씀이 네가 나를 위하여 나의 거할 집을 건축하겠느냐","\"너는 나의 종 다윗을 찾아가서 이 말을 전하여라. \"온 세상의 주인인 여호와가 네게 말한다. 너는 내가 거주할 성전을 지으려고 하느냐?","Go and tell David my servant, Thus says the LORD: Is it you who would build me a house to dwell in?","Go and tell my servant David, Thus saith the LORD, Shalt thou build me an house for me to dwell in?","\"Go and tell my servant David, 'This is what the LORD says: Are you the one to build me a house to dwell in?","Vade et loquere ad servum meum David: Haec dicit Dominus: Numquid tu aedificabis mihi domum ad habitandum?","לך ואמרת אל עבדי אל דוד כה אמר יהוה האתה תבנה לי בית לשבתי׃"],["10","7","6","나는 이집트에서 이스라엘 자손들을 데리고 올라온 날부터 오늘까지, 어떤 집에서도 산 적이 없다. 천막과 성막 안에만 있으면서 옮겨 다녔다.","나는 이스라엘 자손을 이집트에서 이끌어내던 때부터 지금까지 천막을 치고 옮겨 다녔고, 집 안에서 살아본 적이 없다.","내가 이스라엘 자손을 애굽에서 인도하여 내던 날부터 오늘까지 집에 살지 아니하고 장막과 성막 안에서 다녔나니","내가 이스라엘 자손을 애굽에서 인도하여 내던 날부터 오늘날까지 집에 거하지 아니하고 장막과 회막에 거하며 행하였나니","나는 이스라엘 백성을 애굽에서 해방시킨 날로부터 이제까지 한번도 어떤 집에서 산 적이 없다. 나는 언제나 천막 안에 살면서 너희와 함께 이리저리 옮겨 다녔다.","I have never dwelt in a house from the day I brought Israel up from Egypt to this day, but I have been going about in a tent or a tabernacle.","Whereas I have not dwelt in any house since the time that I brought up the children of Israel out of Egypt, even to this day, but have walked in a tent and in a tabernacle.","I have not dwelt in a house from the day I brought the Israelites up out of Egypt to this day. I have been moving from place to place with a tent as my dwelling.","Numquam enim habitavi in domo ex die, qua eduxi filios Israel de terra Aegypti, usque in diem hanc, sed ambulabam in tabernaculo et in tentorio.","כי לא ישבתי בבית למיום העלתי את בני ישראל ממצרים ועד היום הזה ואהיה מתהלך באהל ובמשכן׃"],["10","7","7","내가 이스라엘의 모든 자손과 함께 옮겨 다니던 그 모든 곳에서, 내 백성 이스라엘을 돌보라고 명령한 이스라엘의 어느 지파에게, 어찌하여 나에게 향백나무 집을 지어 주지 않느냐고 한마디라도 말한 적이 있느냐?’","내가 이스라엘 백성들과 함께 여기 저기 옮겨 다니는 동안, 내 백성 이스라엘을 맡겨 보살피게 한 어느 영웅에게 어찌하여 나의 집을 송백으로 지어주지 않느냐고 말한 적이 있었더냐?'","이스라엘 자손과 더불어 다니는 모든 곳에서 내가 내 백성 이스라엘을 먹이라고 명령한 이스라엘 어느 지파들 가운데 하나에게 내가 말하기를 너희가 어찌하여 나를 위하여 백향목 집을 건축하지 아니하였느냐고 말하였느냐","무릇 이스라엘 자손으로 더불어 행하는 곳에서 내가 내 백성 이스라엘을 먹이라고 명한 이스라엘 1)어느 지파에게 내가 말하기를 너희가 어찌하여 나를 위하여 백향목 집을 건축하지 아니하였느냐고 말하였느냐 사사 [대상 17:6]","나는 그동안 수많은 사사와 영도자들을 내세워 내 백성 이스라엘을 양 떼처럼 돌보게 하였으나 그들 중에서 어느 누구에게도 왜 나를 위하여 송백으로 집을 지어 주지 않느냐고 꾸짖은 일이 없다.\"","As long as I have wandered about among the Israelites, did I ever say a word to any of the judges whom I commanded to shepherd my people Israel: Why have you not built me a house of cedar?","In all the places wherein I have walked with all the children of Israel spake I a word with any of the tribes of Israel, whom I commanded to feed my people Israel, saying, Why build ye not me an house of cedar?","Wherever I have moved with all the Israelites, did I ever say to any of their rulers whom I commanded to shepherd my people Israel, \"Why have you not built me a house of cedar?\"'","Per cuncta loca, quae transivi cum omnibus filiis Israel, numquid loquens locutus sum ad unum de iudicibus Israel, cui praecepi, ut pasceret populum meum Israel, dicens: Quare non aedificastis mihi domum cedrinam?","בכל אשר התהלכתי בכל בני ישראל הדבר דברתי את אחד שבטי ישראל אשר צויתי לרעות את עמי את ישראל לאמר למה לא בניתם לי בית ארזים׃"],["10","7","8","그러므로 이제 너는 나의 종 다윗에게 말하여라. ‘만군의 주님이 이렇게 말한다. 나는 양 떼를 따라다니던 너를 목장에서 데려다가, 내 백성 이스라엘의 영도자로 세웠다.","너는 이제 나의 종 다윗에게 만군의 야훼의 말이라 하며 이렇게 일러주어라. '나는 양떼를 따라다니던 너를 목장에서 데려내다가 내 백성 이스라엘의 영도자로 삼았다.","그러므로 이제 내 종 다윗에게 이와 같이 말하라 만군의 여호와께서 이와 같이 말씀하시기를 내가 너를 목장 곧 양을 따르는 데에서 데려다가 내 백성 이스라엘의 주권자로 삼고","그러므로 이제 내 종 다윗에게 이처럼 말하라 만군의 여호와께서 이처럼 말씀하시기를 내가 너를 목장 곧 양을 따르는데서 취하여 내 백성 이스라엘의 주권자를 삼고","그러므로 나단아, 너는 이제 내 종 다윗에게 이와 같이 말하여라. \"온 세상의 주인인 여호와가 네게 말한다. 내가 너를 양치는 초원에서 데려다가 내 백성을 다스리는 통치자로 세워 놓았다.","Now then, speak thus to my servant David, Thus says the LORD of hosts: I took you from the pasture, from following the flock, to become ruler over my people Israel.","Now therefore so shalt thou say unto my servant David, Thus saith the LORD of hosts, I took thee from the sheepcote, from following the sheep, to be ruler over my people, over Israel:","\"Now then, tell my servant David, 'This is what the LORD Almighty says: I took you from the pasture and from following the flock to be ruler over my people Israel.","Et nunc haec dices servo meo David: Haec dicit Dominus exercituum: Ego tuli te de pascuis sequentem greges, ut esses dux super populum meum Israel,","ועתה כה תאמר לעבדי לדוד כה אמר יהוה צבאות אני לקחתיך מן הנוה מאחר הצאן להיות נגיד על עמי על ישראל׃"],["10","7","9","또한 네가 어디를 가든지 너와 함께 있으면서, 모든 원수를 네 앞에서 물리쳤다. 나는 너의 이름을 세상 위인들의 이름처럼 위대하게 만들어 주었다.","그리고 나는 네가 어디를 가든지 너와 함께 있으면서 모든 원수들을 네 앞에서 쳐 없애버렸다. 세상에서 이름난 어떤 위인 못지않게 네 이름을 떨치게 해주리라.","네가 가는 모든 곳에서 내가 너와 함께 있어 네 모든 원수를 네 앞에서 멸하였은즉 땅에서 위대한 자들의 이름 같이 네 이름을 위대하게 만들어 주리라","네가 어디를 가든지 내가 너와 함께 있어 네 모든 대적을 네 앞에서 멸하였은즉 세상에서 존귀한 자의 이름 같이 네 이름을 존귀케 만들어 주리라","나는 언제나 네 편이 되어서 네가 무슨 일을 하든지 그 일이 잘되게 도와주었고, 너를 미워하던 모든 원수와 대적들 또한 모두 제거해 주었다. 나는 이미 이렇게 너를 유명하게 키워 주었으나 앞으로도 계속 너를 도와주어 네가 세상에서 영원히 위대한 사람들 중의 하나가 되게 하겠다.","I was with you wherever you went, and I cut down all your enemies before you. And I will make your name like that of the greatest on earth.","And I was with thee whithersoever thou wentest, and have cut off all thine enemies out of thy sight, and have made thee a great name, like unto the name of the great men that are in the earth.","I have been with you wherever you have gone, and I have cut off all your enemies from before you. Now I will make your name great, like the names of the greatest men of the earth.","et fui tecum in omnibus, ubicumque ambulasti, et interfeci universos inimicos tuos a facie tua; fecique tibi nomen grande iuxta nomen magnorum, qui sunt in terra.","ואהיה עמך בכל אשר הלכת ואכרתה את כל איביך מפניך ועשתי לך שם גדול כשם הגדלים אשר בארץ׃"],["10","7","10","나는 내 백성 이스라엘을 위하여 한 곳을 정하고, 그곳에 그들을 심어 그들이 제자리에서 살게 하겠다. 그러면 이스라엘은 더 이상 불안해하지 않아도 되고, 다시는 전처럼, 불의한 자들이 그들을 괴롭히지 않을 것이다.","또 나는 내 백성 이스라엘이 머무를 곳을 정해 주어 그 곳에 뿌리를 박고 전처럼 악한들에게 억압당하는 일이 없이 안심하고 살게 하리라.","내가 또 내 백성 이스라엘을 위하여 한 곳을 정하여 그를 심고 그를 거주하게 하고 다시 옮기지 못하게 하며 악한 종류로 전과 같이 그들을 해하지 못하게 하여","내가 또 내 백성 이스라엘을 위하여 한 곳을 정하여 저희를 심고 저희로 자기 곳에 거하여 다시 옮기지 않게 하며 악한 유로 전과 같이 저희를 해하지 못하게 하여","내 백성 이스라엘에게도 이제는 안전한 거처를 주고, 그들이 안심하고 살수 있는 나라를 만들어 주겠다. 내가 그들을 평화로운 동산의 나무처럼 그곳에 심어 주어, 그들이 자기들의 땅에 집을 짓고 평화롭게 살면서 더 이상 다른 민족을 두려워하지도 않고, 어떤 악인들에게 억눌림을 당하지도 않도록 하겠다.","I will assign a place for my people Israel and I will plant them in it to dwell there; they will never again be disturbed, nor shall the wicked ever again oppress them, as they did at the beginning,","Moreover I will appoint a place for my people Israel, and will plant them, that they may dwell in a place of their own, and move no more; neither shall the children of wickedness afflict them any more, as beforetime,","And I will provide a place for my people Israel and will plant them so that they can have a home of their own and no longer be disturbed. Wicked people will not oppress them anymore, as they did at the beginning","Et ponam locum populo meo Israel et plantabo eum, et habitabit in eo et non turbabitur amplius; nec addent filii iniquitatis ut affligant eum sicut prius","ושמתי מקום לעמי לישראל ונטעתיו ושכן תחתיו ולא ירגז עוד ולא יסיפו בני עולה לענותו כאשר בראשונה׃"],["10","7","11","곧 내가 나의 백성 이스라엘에게 판관을 임명하던 때부터 해 온 것처럼, 나는 너를 모든 원수에게서 평온하게 해 주겠다. 더 나아가 주님이 너에게 한 집안을 일으켜 주리라고 선언한다.","지난날 내가 위정자들을 시켜 내 백성 이스라엘을 다스리게 하던 때와는 달리 너희를 모든 원수에게서 구해 내어 평안하게 하리라. 나 야훼가 한 왕조를 일으켜 너희를 위대하게 만들어주리라.","전에 내가 사사에게 명령하여 내 백성 이스라엘을 다스리던 때와 같지 아니하게 하고 너를 모든 원수에게서 벗어나 편히 쉬게 하리라 여호와가 또 네게 이르노니 여호와가 너를 위하여 집을 짓고","전에 내가 사사를 명하여 내 백성 이스라엘을 다스리던 때와 같지 않게 하고 너를 모든 대적에게서 벗어나 평안케 하리라 여호와가 또 네게 이르노니 여호와가 너를 위하여 집을 이루고","옛날에 내가 사사들을 세워 내 백성을 외세로부터 안전하게 지켜 주었던 것처럼, 너도 내가 안전하게 살도록 지켜 주고 원수들을 네게서 멀리 쫓아내 버리겠다. 네가 나를 위하여 성전을 지으려고 좋은 계획을 세웠으나, 사실은 내가 너를 위하여 ㄱ) 집을 하나 지어 주겠다. (ㄱ. 다윗이 여호와의 집을 지으려고 결심하였기 때문에 그에 대한 보상으로 오히려 여호와께서는 그를 위하여 집을 지어 주시겠다고 약속하셨다. 이것은 다윗 왕조를 세워 주신다는 약속이다)","and from the day when I appointed judges over my people Israel. I will give you rest from all your enemies. Moreover, the LORD also declares to you that the LORD will make a house for you:","And as since the time that I commanded judges to be over my people Israel, and have caused thee to rest from all thine enemies. Also the LORD telleth thee that he will make thee an house.","and have done ever since the time I appointed leaders over my people Israel. I will also give you rest from all your enemies. \"'The LORD declares to you that the LORD himself will establish a house for you:","et ex die, qua constitui iudices super populum meum Israel, et requiem dabo tibi ab omnibus inimicis tuis. Praedicitque tibi Dominus quod domum faciat tibi Dominus.","ולמן היום אשר צויתי שפטים על עמי ישראל והניחתי לך מכל איביך והגיד לך יהוה כי בית יעשה לך יהוה׃"],["10","7","12","너의 날수가 다 차서 조상들과 함께 잠들게 될 때, 네 몸에서 나와 네 뒤를 이을 후손을 내가 일으켜 세우고, 그의 나라를 튼튼하게 하겠다.","네가 살 만큼 다 살고 조상들 옆에 누워 잠든 다음, 네 몸에서 난 자식 하나를 후계자로 삼을 터이니 그가 국권을 튼튼히 하고","네 수한이 차서 네 조상들과 함께 누울 때에 내가 네 몸에서 날 네 씨를 네 뒤에 세워 그의 나라를 견고하게 하리라","네 수한이 차서 네 조상들과 함께 잘 때에 내가 네 몸에서 날 자식을 네 뒤에 세워 그 나라를 견고케 하리라","네가 이 땅에서 장수하고 죽은 다음에도, 나는 네 아들을 세워 왕위에 앉게 하고 그의 나라도 튼튼히 세워 주겠다.","when your days have been completed and you rest with your ancestors, I will raise up your offspring after you, sprung from your loins, and I will establish his kingdom.","And when thy days be fulfilled, and thou shalt sleep with thy fathers, I will set up thy seed after thee, which shall proceed out of thy bowels, and I will establish his kingdom.","When your days are over and you rest with your fathers, I will raise up your offspring to succeed you, who will come from your own body, and I will establish his kingdom.","Cumque completi fuerint dies tui, et dormieris cum patribus tuis, suscitabo semen tuum post te, quod egredietur de visceribus tuis; et firmabo regnum eius.","כי ימלאו ימיך ושכבת את אבתיך והקימתי את זרעך אחריך אשר יצא ממעיך והכינתי את ממלכתו׃"],["10","7","13","그는 나의 이름을 위하여 집을 짓고, 나는 그 나라의 왕좌를 영원히 튼튼하게 할 것이다.","나에게 집을 지어 바쳐 나의 이름을 빛낼 것이며, 나는 그의 나라를 영원히 든든하게 다지리라.","그는 내 이름을 위하여 집을 건축할 것이요 나는 그의 나라 왕위를 영원히 견고하게 하리라","저는 내 이름을 위하여 집을 건축할 것이요 나는 그 나라 위를 영원히 견고케 하리라","그러면 그가 나를 위하여 성전을 짓도록 하겠으며 나는 그의 왕권을 영원히 붙들어 주겠다.","He it is who shall build a house for my name, and I will establish his royal throne forever.","He shall build an house for my name, and I will stablish the throne of his kingdom for ever.","He is the one who will build a house for my Name, and I will establish the throne of his kingdom forever.","Ipse aedificabit domum nomini meo, et stabiliam thronum regni eius usque in sempiternum.","הוא יבנה בית לשמי וכננתי את כסא ממלכתו עד עולם׃"],["10","7","14","나는 그의 아버지가 되고 그는 나의 아들이 될 것이다. 그가 죄를 지으면 사람의 매와 인간의 채찍으로 그를 징벌하겠다.","내가 친히 그의 아비가 되고 그는 내 아들이 되리라. 만일 그가 죄를 지으면 나는 사람이 제 자식을 매와 채찍으로 징계하듯 치리라.","나는 그에게 아버지가 되고 그는 내게 아들이 되리니 그가 만일 죄를 범하면 내가 사람의 매와 인생의 채찍으로 징계하려니와","나는 그 아비가 되고 그는 내 아들이 되리니 저가 만일 죄를 범하면 내가 사람 막대기와 인생 채찍으로 징계하려니와","내가 바로 그의 아버지가 되어 그를 내 아들로 키워 주겠다. 그가 무슨 잘못을 저지르면 내가 그에게 엄한 벌을 주어 마치 제 자식에게 매를 들고 채찍으로 치는 사람들과 같이 나도 그를 아들처럼 때리며 가르치겠다.","I will be a father to him, and he shall be a son to me. If he does wrong, I will reprove him with a human rod and with human punishments;","I will be his father, and he shall be my son. If he commit iniquity, I will chasten him with the rod of men, and with the stripes of the children of men:","I will be his father, and he will be my son. When he does wrong, I will punish him with the rod of men, with floggings inflicted by men.","Ego ero ei in patrem, et ipse erit mihi in filium; qui si inique aliquid gesserit, arguam eum in virga virorum et in plagis filiorum hominum.","אני אהיה לו לאב והוא יהיה לי לבן אשר בהעותו והכחתיו בשבט אנשים ובנגעי בני אדם׃"],["10","7","15","그러나 일찍이 사울에게서 내 자애를 거둔 것과는 달리, 그에게서는 내 자애를 거두지 않겠다.","그러나 내가 일찍이 사울에게서 내 사랑을 거두었지만 그에게서도 그처럼 내 사랑을 거두지는 않으리라.","내가 네 앞에서 물러나게 한 사울에게서 내 은총을 빼앗은 것처럼 그에게서 빼앗지는 아니하리라","내가 네 앞에서 폐한 사울에게서 내 은총을 빼앗은것 같이 그에게서는 빼앗지 아니하리라","그렇더라도 내가 사울을 징계하고 결국 내 앞에서 제거해 버렸던 것처럼 하지는 않겠다. 내가 어떠한 경우에도 네 아들에게서는 내 사랑을 거두어 가지 않고 언제나 그를 도와주겠다.","but I will not withdraw my favor from him as I withdrew it from Saul who was before you.","But my mercy shall not depart away from him, as I took it from Saul, whom I put away before thee.","But my love will never be taken away from him, as I took it away from Saul, whom I removed from before you.","Misericordiam autem meam non auferam ab eo, sicut abstuli a Saul, quem amovi a facie tua;","וחסדי לא יסור ממנו כאשר הסרתי מעם שאול אשר הסרתי מלפניך׃"],["10","7","16","너의 집안과 나라가 네 앞에서 영원히 굳건해지고, 네 왕좌가 영원히 튼튼하게 될 것이다.’”","네 왕조, 네 나라는 내 앞에서 길이 뻗어나갈 것이며 네 왕위는 영원히 흔들리지 아니하리라.'\"","네 집과 네 나라가 내 앞에서 영원히 보전되고 네 왕위가 영원히 견고하리라 하셨다 하라","네 집과 네 나라가 내 앞에서 영원히 보전되고 네 위가 영원히 견고하리라 하셨다 하라","그러면 네 후손들이 앞으로 영영 끊임없이 네 왕위를 계승할 것이며, 네 왕조가 영원히 존속될 것이다.\"","Your house and your kingdom are firm forever before me; your throne shall be firmly established forever.","And thine house and thy kingdom shall be established for ever before thee: thy throne shall be established for ever.","Your house and your kingdom will endure forever before me; your throne will be established forever.'\"","et stabilis erit domus tua et regnum tuum usque in aeternum ante faciem meam, et thronus tuus erit firmus iugiter “.","ונאמן ביתך וממלכתך עד עולם לפניך כסאך יהיה נכון עד עולם׃"],["10","7","17","나탄은 이 모든 말씀과 환시를 다윗에게 그대로 전하였다.","나단은 계시받은 대로 이 모든 말씀을 다윗에게 전하였다.","나단이 이 모든 말씀들과 이 모든 계시대로 다윗에게 말하니라","나단이 이 모든 말씀과 이 모든 묵시대로 다윗에게 고하니라","예언자 나단은 여호와께서 자기에게 계시하신 모든 말씀을 다윗에게 그대로 전하였다.","In accordance with all these words and this whole vision Nathan spoke to David.","According to all these words, and according to all this vision, so did Nathan speak unto David.","Nathan reported to David all the words of this entire revelation.","Secundum omnia verba haec et iuxta universam visionem istam sic locutus est Nathan ad David.","ככל הדברים האלה וככל החזיון הזה כן דבר נתן אל דוד׃"],["10","7","18","다윗 임금이 주님 앞에 나아가 앉아 아뢰었다. “주 하느님, 제가 누구이기에, 또 제 집안이 무엇이기에, 당신께서 저를 여기까지 데려오셨습니까?","이 말을 듣고 다윗 왕은 야훼 앞에 나아가 꿇어 앉아 아뢰었다. \"야훼 나의 주님, 제가 무엇이며 제 집안이 무엇이기에 저를 이런 자리에까지 끌어올려 주셨습니까?","다윗 왕이 여호와 앞에 들어가 앉아서 이르되 주 여호와여 나는 누구이오며 내 집은 무엇이기에 나를 여기까지 이르게 하셨나이까","다윗왕이 여호와 앞에 들어가 앉아서 가로되 주 여호와여 나는 누구오며 내 집은 무엇이관대 나로 이에 이르게 하셨나이까","다윗이 나단의 예언을 듣고 성막으로 들어가 법궤 위의 그룹들 위에 앉아 계시는 여호와 앞에 꿇어 앉아 이렇게 기도하였다. \"나의 하나님 여호와여, 주께서 저와 제 후손을 그토록 귀중하게 생각하시고 저를 이런 자리에까지 높여 주셨으나 제게 무슨 공로가 있습니까? 제게는 그만한 자격이 없습니다.","Then King David went in and sat in the LORD’s presence and said, “Who am I, Lord GOD, and what is my house, that you should have brought me so far?","Then went king David in, and sat before the LORD, and he said, Who am I, O Lord GOD? and what is my house, that thou hast brought me hitherto?","Then King David went in and sat before the LORD, and he said: \"Who am I, O Sovereign LORD, and what is my family, that you have brought me this far?","Ingressus est autem rex David et sedit coram Domino et dixit:  “Quis ego sum, Domine Deus, et quae domus mea, quia adduxisti me hucusque?","ויבא המלך דוד וישב לפני יהוה ויאמר מי אנכי אדני יהוה ומי ביתי כי הביאתני עד הלם׃"],["10","7","19","주 하느님, 당신 눈에는 이것도 부족하게 보이셨는지, 당신 종의 집안에 일어날 먼 장래의 일까지도 일러 주셨습니다. 주 하느님, 이 또한 사람들을 위한 가르침이 되기를 바랍니다.","야훼 나의 주님, 이것만도 분에 넘치는 일인데 훗날에 이 종의 집안에 있을 일까지 말씀해 주시고 알려주시니,","주 여호와여 주께서 이것을 오히려 적게 여기시고 또 종의 집에 있을 먼 장래의 일까지도 말씀하셨나이다 주 여호와여 이것이 사람의 법이니이다","주 여호와여 주께서 이것을 오히려 적게 여기시고 또 종의 집에 영구히 이를 일을 2)말씀하실뿐 아니라 주 여호와여 인간의 규례대로 하셨나이다 말씀하셨사오니 주 여호와여 이것이 어찌 인간의 규례리이까","그런데도 나의 하나님 여호와여, 주께서 이제 더 큰일을 계획하시고 먼 후손들에게까지 좋은 일을 약속해 주셨습니다.","And yet even this is too little in your sight, Lord GOD! For you have made a promise regarding your servant’s house reaching into the future, and giving guidance to the people, Lord GOD!","And this was yet a small thing in thy sight, O Lord GOD; but thou hast spoken also of thy servant's house for a great while to come. And is this the manner of man, O Lord GOD?","And as if this were not enough in your sight, O Sovereign LORD, you have also spoken about the future of the house of your servant. Is this your usual way of dealing with man, O Sovereign LORD?","Sed et hoc parum visum est in conspectu tuo, Domine Deus, et locutus es etiam de domo servi tui in longinquum, et ista est lex hominis, Domine Deus!","ותקטן עוד זאת בעיניך אדני יהוה ותדבר גם אל בית עבדך למרחוק וזאת תורת האדם אדני יהוה׃"],["10","7","20","이 다윗이 당신께 무슨 말씀을 더 드릴 수 있겠습니까? 주 하느님, 당신께서는 당신 종을 알고 계십니다.","고마운 마음 이루 다 헤아릴 수 없습니다. 야훼 나의 주님께서는 종 다윗의 심정을 너무나 잘 알고 계십니다.","주 여호와는 주의 종을 아시오니 다윗이 다시 주께 무슨 말씀을 하오리이까","주 여호와는 종을 아시오니 다윗이 다시 주께 무슨 말씀을 하오리이까","그러므로 주님, 제가 더 이상 무슨 말씀을 주께 드릴 수 있겠습니까? 주께서는 저의 은밀한 생각까지도 다 알고 계십니다.","What more can David say to you? You know your servant, Lord GOD!","And what can David say more unto thee? for thou, Lord GOD, knowest thy servant.","\"What more can David say to you? For you know your servant, O Sovereign LORD.","Quid ergo addere poterit adhuc David, ut loquatur ad te? Tu enim scis servum tuum, Domine Deus.","ומה יוסיף דוד עוד לדבר אליך ואתה ידעת את עבדך אדני יהוה׃"],["10","7","21","당신께서 이 위대한 일을 모두 이루시고 그것을 당신 종에게 알려 주신 것은, 당신의 말씀 때문이며 또 그것은 당신의 뜻이었습니다.","개만도 못한 이 종을 돌보시어 이처럼 크신 일을 하심으로써 소인을 알려지도록 하셨습니다.","주의 말씀으로 말미암아 주의 뜻대로 이 모든 큰 일을 행하사 주의 종에게 알게 하셨나이다","주의 말씀을 인하여 주의 뜻대로 이 모든 큰 일을 행하사 주의 종에게 알게 하셨나이다","주께서 저를 먼저 사랑하시어 주님의 일을 하도록 불러 세우셨고, 이재는 주께서 약속하신 일을 모두 그대로 이루어 주실 줄 확신합니다.","For your servant’s sake and as you have had at heart, you have brought about this whole magnificent disclosure to your servant.","For thy word's sake, and according to thine own heart, hast thou done all these great things, to make thy servant know them.","For the sake of your word and according to your will, you have done this great thing and made it known to your servant.","Propter verbum tuum et secundum cor tuum fecisti omnia magnalia haec, ita ut nota faceres servo tuo.","בעבור דברך וכלבך עשית את כל הגדולה הזאת להודיע את עבדך׃"],["10","7","22","그러므로 주 하느님, 당신께서는 위대하시고 당신 같으신 분은 없습니다. 저희 귀로 들어 온 그대로, 당신 말고는 다른 하느님이 없습니다.","야훼 나의 주님은 진정 위대하십니다. 우리는 일찍이 하느님과 같은 분이 또 있다는 말을 들어본 적이 없고, 다른 신이 있다는 말을 들어본 적도 없습니다.","그런즉 주 여호와여 주는 위대하시니 이는 우리 귀로 들은 대로는 주와 같은 이가 없고 주 외에는 신이 없음이니이다","여호와 하나님이여 이러므로 주는 광대하시니 이는 우리 귀로 들은대로는 주와 같은 이가 없고 주 외에는 참 신이 없음이니이다","나의 주 여호와여! 저는 오직 주님의 위대하심을 찬양할 수밖에 없습니다. 주님과 같으신 분은 하나도 없습니다. 저희가 지금까지 들어온 모든 사실이 \"주님밖에는 다른 신이 없다!\"는 진리를 증명해 주고 있습니다.","Therefore, great are you, Lord GOD! There is no one like you, no God but you, as we have always heard.","Wherefore thou art great, O LORD God: for there is none like thee, neither is there any God beside thee, according to all that we have heard with our ears.","\"How great you are, O Sovereign LORD! There is no one like you, and there is no God but you, as we have heard with our own ears.","Idcirco magnus es, Domine Deus, quia non est similis tui; neque est Deus extra te, iuxta omnia, quae audivimus auribus nostris.","על כן גדלת אדני יהוה כי אין כמוך ואין אלהים זולתך בכל אשר שמענו באזנינו׃"],["10","7","23","이 세상 어느 민족이 당신 백성 이스라엘과 같겠습니까? 하느님께서 그들을 찾아가 건져 내시어, 당신 백성으로 삼으시고 그들에게 이름을 주셨습니다. 또한 당신께서는 이집트에서 손수 건져 내신 당신 백성 앞에서 다른 민족들과 그 신들을 몰아내시려고, 위대한 일과 무서운 일들을 행하셨습니다.","세상에 고생하는 민족을 찾아가서 손수 건져내어 자기 백성으로 삼고 유명하게 만들어준 신이 또 어디 있습니까? 그런데 당신께서는 두렵고 놀라운 일을 하셔서 하느님의 백성을 이집트에서 건져내시고, 여러 민족을 그들이 섬기던 신과 함께 몰아내셨습니다. 하느님의 백성 이스라엘 같은 민족이 천하에 어디 있겠습니까?","땅의 어느 한 나라가 주의 백성 이스라엘과 같으리이까 하나님이 가서 구속하사 자기 백성으로 삼아 주의 명성을 내시며 그들을 위하여 큰 일을, 주의 땅을 위하여 두려운 일을 애굽과 많은 나라들과 그의 신들에게서 구속하신 백성 앞에서 행하셨사오며","땅의 어느 한 나라가 주의 백성 이스라엘과 같으리이까 하나님이 가서 구속하사 자기 백성을 삼아 주의 명성을 내시며 저희를 위하여 큰 일을, 주의 땅을 위하여 두려운 일을 애굽과 열국과 그 신들에게서 구속하신 백성 앞에서 행하셨사오며","또 이 세상에서 주님의 백성 이스라엘과 같은 족속이 어디에 있습니까? 노예생활에 시달리는 백성을 해방시켜서 자기에게 딸린 백성으로 삼으신 신이 어디에 또 있습니까? 주님은 이런 주님의 백성을 위하여 크고 놀라운 일들을 베풀어 주셔서 주님의 위대한 성호를 온 세상에 알리셨습니다. 주께서 이 백성을 애굽에서 해방시켜 오늘날까지 보호하시고 그 앞에서는 다른 민족과 다른 신들을 모조리 쫓아내 버리셨습니다.","What other nation on earth is there like your people Israel? What god has ever led a nation, redeeming it as his people and making a name by great and awesome deeds, as you drove out the nations and their gods before your people, whom you redeemed for yourself from Egypt?","And what one nation in the earth is like thy people, even like Israel, whom God went to redeem for a people to himself, and to make him a name, and to do for you great things and terrible, for thy land, before thy people, which thou redeemedst to thee from Egypt, from the nations and their gods?","And who is like your people Israel--the one nation on earth that God went out to redeem as a people for himself, and to make a name for himself, and to perform great and awesome wonders by driving out nations and their gods from before your people, whom you redeemed from Egypt?","Quae est autem ut populus tuus Israel una gens in terra, propter quam ivit Deus, ut redimeret eam sibi in populum et poneret sibi nomen faceretque eis magnalia et horribilia, ut eiceres a facie populi tui, quem redemisti tibi ex Aegypto, gentes et deos eorum?","ומי כעמך כישראל גוי אחד בארץ אשר הלכו אלהים לפדות לו לעם ולשום לו שם ולעשות לכם הגדולה ונראות לארצך מפני עמך אשר פדית לך ממצרים גוים ואלהיו׃"],["10","7","24","또한 당신을 위하여 당신 백성 이스라엘을 영원히 당신의 백성으로 튼튼하게 하시고, 주님, 당신 친히 그들의 하느님이 되셨습니다.","하느님께서는 이 백성 이스라엘을 영원히 움직일 수 없는 하느님의 백성으로 삼으셨습니다. 그리고 야훼께서는 그들의 하느님이 되어주셨습니다.","주께서 주의 백성 이스라엘을 세우사 영원히 주의 백성으로 삼으셨사오니 여호와여 주께서 그들의 하나님이 되셨나이다","주께서 주의 백성 이스라엘을 세우사 영원히 주의 백성을 삼으셨사오니 여호와여 주께서 저희 하나님이 되셨나이다","온 세계의 주인이신 여호와여, 주께서 그토록 놀라운 일들을 베푸시고 이스라엘을 영원히 주님의 백성으로 삼으시고 주께서 친히 그들의 하나님이 되셨습니다.","You have established for yourself your people Israel as your people forever, and you, LORD, have become their God.","For thou hast confirmed to thyself thy people Israel to be a people unto thee for ever: and thou, LORD, art become their God.","You have established your people Israel as your very own forever, and you, O LORD, have become their God.","Et firmasti tibi populum tuum Israel in populum sempiternum; et tu, Domine, factus es eis in Deum.","ותכונן לך את עמך ישראל לך לעם עד עולם ואתה יהוה היית להם לאלהים׃"],["10","7","25","그러니 이제 주 하느님, 당신 종과 그 집안을 두고 하신 말씀을 영원히 변치 않게 하시고, 친히 말씀하신 대로 이루어 주십시오.","야훼 하느님, 이제 이 종과 종의 왕실을 두고 하신 말씀을 길이 변치 마시고 이루어주십시오.","여호와 하나님이여 이제 주의 종과 종의 집에 대하여 말씀하신 것을 영원히 세우시며 말씀하신 대로 행하사","여호와 하나님이여 이제 주의 종과 종의 집에 대하여 말씀하신 것을 영원히 확실케 하옵시며 말씀하신대로 행하사","그러므로 이제 주께서 저와 제 후손을 위하여 약속해 주신 말씀을 영원히 그대로 이루어 주소서!","Now, LORD God, confirm the promise that you have spoken concerning your servant and his house forever. Bring about what you have promised","And now, O LORD God, the word that thou hast spoken concerning thy servant, and concerning his house, establish it for ever, and do as thou hast said.","\"And now, LORD God, keep forever the promise you have made concerning your servant and his house. Do as you promised,","Nunc ergo, Domine Deus, verbum, quod locutus es super servum tuum et super domum eius, confirma in sempiternum et fac, sicut locutus es!","ועתה יהוה אלהים הדבר אשר דברת על עבדך ועל ביתו הקם עד עולם ועשה כאשר דברת׃"],["10","7","26","그러면 당신의 이름이 영원히 위대하게 되고, 사람들이 ‘만군의 주님께서 이스라엘의 하느님이시다.’ 하고 말할 것입니다. 또한 당신 종 다윗의 집안도 당신 앞에서 튼튼해질 것입니다.","그러면 사람들이 하느님의 이름을 드높여 만군의 야훼는 이스라엘의 하느님이라 할 것입니다.","사람이 영원히 주의 이름을 크게 높여 이르기를 만군의 여호와는 이스라엘의 하나님이라 하게 하옵시며 주의 종 다윗의 집이 주 앞에 견고하게 하옵소서","사람으로 영원히 주의 이름을 높여 이르기를 만군의 여호와는 이스라엘의 하나님이라 하게 하옵시며 주의 종 다윗의 집으로 주 앞에 견고하게 하옵소서","그러면 주님의 이름이 어느 시대에나 영원히 찬양받으실 것이며, 세계 만민들도 \"이스라엘의 하나님만이 온 세계의 주인이시다!\"라고 고백할 것입니다. 또한 이 종 다윗의 왕조도 주님의 도우심을 받아 영원히 존속할 것입니다.","so that your name may be forever great. People will say: ‘The LORD of hosts is God over Israel,’ when the house of your servant David is established in your presence.","And let thy name be magnified for ever, saying, The LORD of hosts is the God over Israel: and let the house of thy servant David be established before thee.","so that your name will be great forever. Then men will say, 'The LORD Almighty is God over Israel!' And the house of your servant David will be established before you.","Et magnificetur nomen tuum usque in sempiternum, atque dicatur: “Dominus exercituum est Deus super Israel “. Et domus servi tui David erit stabilita coram te,","ויגדל שמך עד עולם לאמר יהוה צבאות אלהים על ישראל ובית עבדך דוד יהיה נכון לפניך׃"],["10","7","27","만군의 주 이스라엘의 하느님이신 당신께서는 당신 종의 귀를 열어 주시며, ‘내가 너에게서 한 집안을 세워 주겠다.’고 말씀하셨습니다. 그래서 당신 종은 이런 기도를 당신께 드릴 용기를 얻게 되었습니다.","만군의 야훼 이스라엘의 하느님, 하느님께서 친히 이 종의 왕실을 세워주시겠다고 밝히셨기에, 이 종은 감히 이렇게 기도를 드립니다.","만군의 여호와 이스라엘의 하나님이여 주의 종의 귀를 여시고 이르시기를 내가 너를 위하여 집을 세우리라 하셨으므로 주의 종이 이 기도로 주께 간구할 마음이 생겼나이다","만군의 여호와 이스라엘의 하나님이여 주의 종에게 알게 하여 이르시기를 내가 너를 위하여 집을 세우리라 하신고로 주의 종이 이 기도로 구할 마음이 생겼나이다","온 세계의 주인이시며 이스라엘의 하나님이신 여호와여, 주께서 이 종에게 \"내가 너를 위하여 집을 지어 주겠다!\"고 약속하셨기 때문에, 제가 감히 주께 이런 기도를 드릴 담력을 얻었습니다.","Because you, LORD of hosts, God of Israel, have revealed to your servant, ‘I will build you a house,’ your servant now finds the courage to make this prayer before you.","For thou, O LORD of hosts, God of Israel, hast revealed to thy servant, saying, I will build thee an house: therefore hath thy servant found in his heart to pray this prayer unto thee.","\"O LORD Almighty, God of Israel, you have revealed this to your servant, saying, 'I will build a house for you.' So your servant has found courage to offer you this prayer.","quia tu, Domine exercituum, Deus Israel, revelasti aurem servi tui dicens: “Domum aedificabo tibi “. Propterea invenit servus tuus cor suum, ut oraret te oratione hac.","כי אתה יהוה צבאות אלהי ישראל גליתה את אזן עבדך לאמר בית אבנה לך על כן מצא עבדך את לבו להתפלל אליך את התפלה הזאת׃"],["10","7","28","이제 주 하느님, 당신은 하느님이시며 당신의 말씀은 참되십니다. 당신 종에게 이 좋은 일을 일러 주셨으니,","야훼 나의 주님, 주님이야말로 참 하느님이시며, 하시는 말씀에 거짓이 없으십니다. 하느님께서 이 종에게 이토록 좋은 말씀을 내려주셨으니,","주 여호와여 오직 주는 하나님이시며 주의 말씀들이 참되시니이다 주께서 이 좋은 것을 주의 종에게 말씀하셨사오니","주 여호와여 오직 주는 하나님이시며 말씀이 참되시니이다 주께서 이 좋은 것으로 종에게 허락하셨사오니","여호와여, 주님은 진실하신 신이시요, 약속하신 것을 그대로 이루시는 분이십니다. 이러한 주께서 바로 제게 위대한 약속을 해주셨습니다.","Since you, Lord GOD, are truly God and your words are truth and you have made this generous promise to your servant,","And now, O Lord GOD, thou art that God, and thy words be true, and thou hast promised this goodness unto thy servant:","O Sovereign LORD, you are God! Your words are trustworthy, and you have promised these good things to your servant.","Nunc ergo, Domine Deus, tu es Deus, et verba tua erunt vera; cum ergo locutus sis ad servum tuum bona haec,","ועתה אדני יהוה אתה הוא האלהים ודבריך יהיו אמת ותדבר אל עבדך את הטובה הזאת׃"],["10","7","29","이제 당신 종의 집안에 기꺼이 복을 내리시어, 당신 앞에서 영원히 있게 해 주십시오. 주 하느님, 당신께서 말씀하셨으니, 당신 종의 집안은 영원히 당신의 복을 받을 것입니다.”","부디 종의 왕실에 복을 내려주시어 하느님 앞에 영원히 서게 해주십시오. 야훼 나의 주님, 주님의 말씀대로 이 종의 왕실은 복을 길이 받아 누리겠습니다.\"","이제 청하건대 종의 집에 복을 주사 주 앞에 영원히 있게 하옵소서 주 여호와께서 말씀하셨사오니 주의 종의 집이 영원히 복을 받게 하옵소서 하니라","이제 청컨대 종의 집에 복을 주사 주 앞에 영원히 있게 하옵소서 주 여호와께서 말씀하셨사오니 주의 은혜로 종의 집이 영원히 복을 받게 하옵소서 하니라","그러므로 이제 제가 비오니, 이 종의 왕가에 복을 내려 주셔서 제 후손들이 언제나 끊임없이 제 왕위를 계승하여 다스리게 하소서! 이것은 주께서 약속한 것이니 저의 왕가가 영원히 복받을 줄을 확신합니다\"","do, then, bless the house of your servant, that it may be in your presence forever—since you, Lord GOD, have promised, and by your blessing the house of your servant shall be blessed forever.”","Therefore now let it please thee to bless the house of thy servant, that it may continue for ever before thee: for thou, O Lord GOD, hast spoken it: and with thy blessing let the house of thy servant be blessed for ever.","Now be pleased to bless the house of your servant, that it may continue forever in your sight; for you, O Sovereign LORD, have spoken, and with your blessing the house of your servant will be blessed forever.\"","dignare igitur benedicere domui servi tui, ut sit in sempiternum coram te, quia tu, Domine Deus, locutus es, et benedictione tua benedicetur domus servi tui in sempiternum “.","ועתה הואל וברך את בית עבדך להיות לעולם לפניך כי אתה אדני יהוה דברת ומברכתך יברך בית עבדך לעולם׃"],["10","8","1","그 뒤에 다윗은 필리스티아인들을 쳐서 굴복시키고, 필리스티아인들의 손에서 메텍 암마를 빼앗았다.","1)그 뒤 다윗은 불레셋을 쳐서 굴복시키고, 메덱암마를 불레셋 사람들에게서 빼앗았다.8:1-14에 대해서는 1역대 18:1-13 참조.","그 후에 다윗이 블레셋 사람들을 쳐서 항복을 받고 블레셋 사람들의 손에서 메덱암마를 빼앗으니라","이 후에 다윗이 블레셋 사람을 쳐서 항복 받고 블레셋 사람의 손에서 1)메덱암마를 빼앗으니라 모성의 굴레","얼마 동안을 조용히 지내던 다윗은 이제 주변 국가들을 정벌하여 예속시키기 시작하였다. 그는 맨 먼저 남서쪽으로 진출하여 블레셋 족속을 정복하고, 그들의 독자적인 통치권을 빼앗아 버렸다.","After this, David defeated the Philistines and subdued them; and David took… from the Philistines.","And after this it came to pass that David smote the Philistines, and subdued them: and David took Methegammah out of the hand of the Philistines.","In the course of time, David defeated the Philistines and subdued them, and he took Metheg Ammah from the control of the Philistines.","Factum est autem post haec, percussit David Philisthim et humiliavit eos; et tulit David Geth et urbes eius de manu Philisthim.","ויהי אחרי כן ויך דוד את פלשתים ויכניעם ויקח דוד את מתג האמה מיד פלשתים׃"],["10","8","2","그는 또 모압을 치고 그들을 땅에 눕힌 다음 줄로 쟀다. 두 줄 길이 안에 든 사람들은 죽이고, 한 줄 길이 안에 든 사람들은 살려 주었다. 그러자 모압은 다윗의 신하가 되어 조공을 바치게 되었다.","또 다윗은 모압을 쳐서 이기고 그 사람들을 땅에 엎드리게 한 다음 줄로 재어 두 줄 길이 안에 든 사람들은 죽이고, 한 줄 길이 안에 든 사람들은 살려두게 하였다. 이리하여 모압은 다윗에게 조공을 바치는 속국이 되었다.","다윗이 또 모압을 쳐서 그들로 땅에 엎드리게 하고 줄로 재어 그 두 줄 길이의 사람은 죽이고 한 줄 길이의 사람은 살리니 모압 사람들이 다윗의 종들이 되어 조공을 드리니라","다윗이 또 모압을 쳐서 저희로 땅에 엎드리게 하고 줄로 재어 그 두 줄 길이의 사람은 죽이고 한 줄 길이의 사람은 살리니 모압 사람이 다윗의 종이 되어 조공을 바치니라","그 다음에 다윗은 사해 동쪽의 모압 족속을 쳐서 정복하였다. 그는 모압 족속의 포로들을 모조리 땅바닥에 한 줄로 뉘어 놓고, 나란히 누워 있는 머리 위로 줄을 띄우고 죽일 사람과 살려 둘 사람을 구별하였다. 곧 두줄을 재어서는 죽이고, 그 다음에 한줄을 재어서는 살려 줌으로써 그 백성의 3분의 1만을 살아 남게 하였다. 다윗은 이렇게 모압을 굴복시켜 조공을 바치는 예속 국가로 만들었다.","He also defeated Moab and measured them with a line. Making them lie down on the ground, he measured two lengths of line for death, and a full length for life. Thus the Moabites became subject to David, paying tribute.","And he smote Moab, and measured them with a line, casting them down to the ground; even with two lines measured he to put to death, and with one full line to keep alive. And so the Moabites became David's servants, and brought gifts.","David also defeated the Moabites. He made them lie down on the ground and measured them off with a length of cord. Every two lengths of them were put to death, and the third length was allowed to live. So the Moabites became subject to David and brought tribute.","Et percussit Moab et mensus est eos funiculo sternens eos in terra; mensus est autem duos funiculos ad occidendum et unum funiculum plenum ad vivificandum; factusque est Moab David serviens sub tributo.","ויך את מואב וימדדם בחבל השכב אותם ארצה וימדד שני חבלים להמית ומלא החבל להחיות ותהי מואב לדוד לעבדים נשאי מנחה׃"],["10","8","3","다윗은 르홉의 아들, 초바 임금 하닷에제르가 유프라테스 강 가에 자기 세력을 일으키러 갈 때 그를 쳐서,","또 다윗은 르홉의 아들, 소바 왕 하다데젤이 세력을 되찾으려고 유프라테스 강으로 가는 것을 쳐서","르홉의 아들 소바 왕 하닷에셀이 자기 권세를 회복하려고 유브라데 강으로 갈 때에 다윗이 그를 쳐서","르홉의 아들 소바 왕 하닷에셀이 자기 권세를 회복하려고 유브라데강으로 갈 때에 다윗이 저를 쳐서","그 다음에 다윗은 북쪽으로 출격하여 다메섹 북쪽에 있는 아람 족속의 나라 소바를 쳤다. 마침 르홉의 아들 하닷에셀왕이 유브라데강 상류 지역으로 출정하여 거기서 자기 세력을 회복하려고 싸웠기 때문에 다윗은 아람 족속을 치기가 유리하였다.","David then defeated Hadadezer, son of Rehob, king of Zobah, when he went to re-establish his dominion at the River.","David smote also Hadadezer, the son of Rehob, king of Zobah, as he went to recover his border at the river Euphrates.","Moreover, David fought Hadadezer son of Rehob, king of Zobah, when he went to restore his control along the Euphrates River.","Et percussit David Adadezer filium Rohob regem Soba, quando profectus est, ut dominaretur super flumen Euphraten.","ויך דוד את הדדעזר בן רחב מלך צובה בלכתו להשיב ידו בנהר׃"],["10","8","4","기병 천칠백과 보병 이만을 사로잡았다. 그러고 나서 병거 백 대를 끌 말만 남겨 놓고, 나머지 말은 모두 뒷다리 힘줄을 끊어 버렸다.","기병 천칠백과 보병 이만을 사로잡고, 병거도 백 대만 남기고 나머지는 못쓰게 만들었다.","그에게서 마병 천칠백 명과 보병 이만 명을 사로잡고 병거 일백 대의 말만 남기고 다윗이 그 외의 병거의 말은 다 발의 힘줄을 끊었더니","그 마병 일천 칠백과 보병 이만을 사로잡고 병거 일백승의 말만 남기고 그 외의 병거의 말은 다 발의 힘줄을 끊었더니","다윗은 하닷에셀의 병력 중에서 전차부대 1700명과 보병 2만 명을 포로로 잡고, 전차를 끄는 군마들 중에서는 100필만 전리품으로 가져오고 나머지는 모조리 발목의 힘줄을 끊어 놓았다.","David captured from him one thousand seven hundred horsemen and twenty thousand foot soldiers. David hamstrung all the chariot horses, but left one hundred for his chariots.","And David took from him a thousand chariots, and seven hundred horsemen, and twenty thousand footmen: and David houghed all the chariot horses, but reserved of them for an hundred chariots.","David captured a thousand of his chariots, seven thousand charioteers and twenty thousand foot soldiers. He hamstrung all but a hundred of the chariot horses.","Et captis David ex parte eius mille septingentis equitibus et viginti milibus peditum, subnervavit omnes iugales curruum; dereliquit autem ex eis centum currus.","וילכד דוד ממנו אלף ושבע מאות פרשים ועשרים אלף איש רגלי ויעקר דוד את כל הרכב ויותר ממנו מאה רכב׃"],["10","8","5","다마스쿠스의 아람인들이 초바 임금 하닷에제르를 도우러 오자, 다윗은 아람인 이만 이천 명을 쳐 죽이고,","다마스쿠스의 아람인들이 소바 왕 하다데젤을 도우러 왔으나 다윗은 그 아람인들을 이만 이천 명이나 죽이고","다메섹의 아람 사람들이 소바 왕 하닷에셀을 도우러 온지라 다윗이 아람 사람 이만 이천 명을 죽이고","다메섹 아람 사람들이 소바 왕 하닷에셀을 도우러 온지라 다윗이 아람 사람 이만 이천을 죽이고","다메섹의 아람 족속들이 소바 왕을 지원하러 올라오자, 다윗은 그들도 격파하여 2만 2천 명을 죽였다.","The Arameans of Damascus came to help Hadadezer, king of Zobah, but David also defeated twenty-two thousand of them in Aram.","And when the Syrians of Damascus came to succour Hadadezer king of Zobah, David slew of the Syrians two and twenty thousand men.","When the Arameans of Damascus came to help Hadadezer king of Zobah, David struck down twenty-two thousand of them.","Venit quoque Syria Damasci, ut praesidium ferret Adadezer regi Soba, et percussit David de Syria viginti duo milia virorum;","ותבא ארם דמשק לעזר להדדעזר מלך צובה ויך דוד בארם עשרים ושנים אלף איש׃"],["10","8","6","다마스쿠스의 아람인들 가운데에 수비대를 두었다. 그리하여 아람인들도 다윗의 신하가 되어 조공을 바쳤다. 주님께서는 다윗이 어디를 가든지 도와주셨다.","다마스쿠스에 주둔군을 두어 아람인들을 다스리게 하였다. 그리하여 아람인들도 다윗에게 조공을 바치는 속국민이 되었다. 이렇게 야훼께서는 다윗이 어디를 가든지 그에게 승리를 안겨주셨다.","다윗이 다메섹 아람에 수비대를 두매 아람 사람이 다윗의 종이 되어 조공을 바치니라 다윗이 어디로 가든지 여호와께서 이기게 하시니라","다메섹 아람에 수비대를 두매 아람 사람이 다윗의 종이 되어 조공을 바치니라 다윗이 어디를 가든지 여호와께서 이기게 하시니라","다윗은 이제 소바와 다메섹에 주둔군을 배치한 뒤 그 나라들로부터 정기적으로 조공을 받아 냈다. 이렇게 여호와께서는 다윗편이 되어 그가 무슨 일을 하든지 항상 승리하도록 도와주셨다.","David then placed garrisons in the Damascus region of Aram, and the Arameans became David’s subjects, paying tribute. The LORD brought David victory in all his undertakings.","Then David put garrisons in Syria of Damascus: and the Syrians became servants to David, and brought gifts. And the LORD preserved David whithersoever he went.","He put garrisons in the Aramean kingdom of Damascus, and the Arameans became subject to him and brought tribute. The LORD gave David victory wherever he went.","et posuit David praesidium in Syria Damasci; factaque est Syria David serviens sub tributo. Et auxiliatus est Dominus David in omnibus, ad quaecumque profectus est.","וישם דוד נצבים בארם דמשק ותהי ארם לדוד לעבדים נושאי מנחה וישע יהוה את דוד בכל אשר הלך׃"],["10","8","7","다윗은 하닷에제르의 신하들이 가지고 있던 금 방패들을 거두어 예루살렘으로 가져왔다.","다윗은 하다데젤의 부하들이 몸에 걸고 다니던 금 장신구를 거두어 예루살렘으로 가져왔다.","다윗이 하닷에셀의 신복들이 가진 금 방패를 빼앗아 예루살렘으로 가져오고","다윗이 하닷에셀의 신복들의 가진 금방패를 빼앗아 예루살렘으로 가져오고","이때에 다윗은 하닷에셀의 부하들이 들고 다니던 금방패도 모조리 약탈하여 예루살렘으로 가져왔다.","David took the golden shields that were carried by Hadadezer’s attendants and brought them to Jerusalem. (These Shishak, king of Egypt, took away when he came to Jerusalem in the days of Rehoboam, son of Solomon.)","And David took the shields of gold that were on the servants of Hadadezer, and brought them to Jerusalem.","David took the gold shields that belonged to the officers of Hadadezer and brought them to Jerusalem.","Et tulit David arma aurea, quae habebant servi Adadezer, et detulit ea in Ierusalem;","ויקח דוד את שלטי הזהב אשר היו אל עבדי הדדעזר ויביאם ירושלם׃"],["10","8","8","또한 다윗 임금은 하닷에제르의 성읍 베타와 베로타이에서 매우 많은 청동을 거두었다.","다윗은 또한 하다데젤이 차지하고 있던 베타와 베로대에서 놋쇠도 많이 빼앗아왔다.","또 다윗 왕이 하닷에셀의 고을 베다와 베로대에서 매우 많은 놋을 빼앗으니라","또 하닷에셀의 고을 베다와 베로대에서 매우 많은 놋을 빼앗으니라","그리고 하닷에셀이 오론테스 강변의 두 성읍 베다와 베로대도 다스렸기 때문에, 다윗은 그곳도 정벌하여 아주 많은 놋쇠를 예루살렘으로 실어 왔다. 팔레스타인에는 이런 지하자원이 없기 때문에, 이렇게 약탈한 금과 놋쇠는 나중에 성전을 짓는 기본 재료가 되었다.","From Tebah and Berothai, cities of Hadadezer, King David removed a very large quantity of bronze.","And from Betah, and from Berothai, cities of Hadadezer, king David took exceeding much brass.","From Tebah and Berothai, towns that belonged to Hadadezer, King David took a great quantity of bronze.","et de Tebah et de Berothai civitatibus Adadezer tulit rex David aes multum nimis.","ומבטח ומברתי ערי הדדעזר לקח המלך דוד נחשת הרבה מאד׃"],["10","8","9","하맛 임금 토이는 다윗이 하닷에제르의 군대를 모두 쳐부수었다는 소식을 듣고,","하맛 왕 도이는 다윗이 하다데젤의 전군을 무찔렀다는 소식을 듣고","하맛 왕 도이가 다윗이 하닷에셀의 온 군대를 쳐서 무찔렀다 함을 듣고","하맛왕 도이가 다윗이 하닷에셀의 온 군대를 쳐서 파하였다 함을 듣고","다윗이 하닷에셀의 군대를 모조리 쳐서 멸했다는 소문이 하맛 왕 도이에게 전해졌다.","When Toi, king of Hamath, heard that David had defeated the entire army of Hadadezer,","When Toi king of Hamath heard that David had smitten all the host of Hadadezer,","When Tou king of Hamath heard that David had defeated the entire army of Hadadezer,","Audivit autem Thou rex Emath quod percussisset David omne robur Adadezer","וישמע תעי מלך חמת כי הכה דוד את כל חיל הדדעזר׃"],["10","8","10","자기 아들 요람을 다윗 임금에게 보내어 문안하고, 다윗이 하닷에제르와 싸워 그를 쳐부순 것을 축하하였다. 토이는 하닷에제르와 전쟁 중이었기 때문이다. 그는 은 기물과 금 기물과 청동 기물들을 보내왔다.","아들 하도람을 다윗 왕에게 보내어 문안하고 하다데젤을 쳐서 이긴 것을 축하하게 하였다. 도이는 하다데젤과 적대 관계에 있었던 것이다. 하도람은 금과 은과 놋으로 만든 기물들을 가지고 왔다.","도이가 그의 아들 요람을 보내 다윗 왕에게 문안하고 축복하게 하니 이는 하닷에셀이 도이와 더불어 전쟁이 있던 터에 다윗이 하닷에셀을 쳐서 무찌름이라 요람이 은 그릇과 금 그릇과 놋 그릇을 가지고 온지라","그 아들 요람을 보내어 다윗왕에게 문안하고 축복하게 하니 이는 하닷에셀이 도이로 더불어 전쟁이 있던 터에 다윗이 하닷에셀을 쳐서 파함이라 요람이 은 그릇과 금 그릇과 놋 그릇을 가지고 온지라","도이는 하닷에셀과 적대관계에 있었기 때문에 즉각 자기 아들 요람을 다윗에게 보내서 전승을 축하하였다. 이때 요람은 다윗에게 금과 은과 놋쇠로 만든 많은 물건들을 선물로 가져왔다.","Toi sent his son Hadoram to wish King David well and to congratulate him on having waged a victorious war against Hadadezer; for Hadadezer had been at war with Toi. Hadoram also brought with him articles of silver, gold, and bronze.","Then Toi sent Joram his son unto king David, to salute him, and to bless him, because he had fought against Hadadezer, and smitten him: for Hadadezer had wars with Toi. And Joram brought with him vessels of silver, and vessels of gold, and vessels of brass:","he sent his son Joram to King David to greet him and congratulate him on his victory in battle over Hadadezer, who had been at war with Tou. Joram brought with him articles of silver and gold and bronze.","et misit Thou Adoram filium suum ad regem David, ut salutaret eum congratulans et gratias ageret eo quod pugnasset cum Adadezer et percussisset eum; hostis quippe erat Thou Adadezer. Attulit autem Adoram et vasa argentea et vasa aurea et vasa aerea,","וישלח תעי את יורם בנו אל המלך דוד לשאל לו לשלום ולברכו על אשר נלחם בהדדעזר ויכהו כי איש מלחמות תעי היה הדדעזר ובידו היו כלי כסף וכלי זהב וכלי נחשת׃"],["10","8","11","그래서 다윗 임금은 이것들도 그가 정복한 모든 민족들에게서 거둔 은과 금과 함께 주님께 바쳤는데,","다윗 왕은 이것을 다른 나라들을 정복하고 가져온 금은과 함께 야훼께 성별하여 바쳤다.","다윗 왕이 그것도 여호와께 드리되 그가 정복한 모든 나라에서 얻은 은금","다윗왕이 그것도 여호와께 드리되 저가 정복한 모든 나라에서 얻은 은금","다윗은 이런 선물을 하나도 탐내지 않고 모두 여호와께 성별하여 바쳤다. 그는 지금까지 에돔 족속과 모압 족속과 암몬 족속과 블레셋 족속과 아말렉 족속과 아람 족속들을 쳐서 이기고 약탈한 귀중품들도 성별하여 함께 여호와께 바쳤다.","These also King David consecrated to the LORD along with the silver and gold that he had taken for this purpose from all the nations he had subdued:","Which also king David did dedicate unto the LORD, with the silver and gold that he had dedicated of all nations which he subdued;","King David dedicated these articles to the LORD, as he had done with the silver and gold from all the nations he had subdued:","quae et ipsa sanctificavit rex David Domino cum argento et auro, quae sanctificaverat de universis gentibus, quas subegerat:","גם אתם הקדיש המלך דוד ליהוה עם הכסף והזהב אשר הקדיש מכל הגוים אשר כבש׃"],["10","8","12","그것들은 아람과 모압과 암몬의 자손들과 필리스티아인들과 아말렉에게서 거둔 것과 초바 임금 르홉의 아들 하닷에제르의 전리품에서 떼어 놓은 것이었다.","아람과 모압과 암몬 백성들과 불레셋과 아말렉에서 가져온 전리품에다 소바 왕 하다데젤한테서 가져온 전리품도 바쳤던 것이다.","곧 아람과 모압과 암몬 자손과 블레셋 사람과 아말렉에게서 얻은 것들과 소바 왕 르홉의 아들 하닷에셀에게서 노략한 것과 같이 드리니라","곧 아람과 모압과 암몬 자손과 블레셋 사람과 아말렉에게서 얻은 것들과 소바 왕 르홉의 아들 하닷에셀에게서 노략한 것과 같이 드리니라","(11절에 포함되어 있음)","from Edom, Moab, the Ammonites, the Philistines, and Amalek, and from the spoils of Hadadezer, son of Rehob, king of Zobah.","Of Syria, and of Moab, and of the children of Ammon, and of the Philistines, and of Amalek, and of the spoil of Hadadezer, son of Rehob, king of Zobah.","Edom and Moab, the Ammonites and the Philistines, and Amalek. He also dedicated the plunder taken from Hadadezer son of Rehob, king of Zobah.","de Syria et Moab et filiis Ammon et Philisthim et Amalec et de manibus Adadezer filii Rohob regis Soba.","מארם וממואב ומבני עמון ומפלשתים ומעמלק ומשלל הדדעזר בן רחב מלך צובה׃"],["10","8","13","다윗은 돌아오는 길에 ‘소금 골짜기’에서 에돔인 만 팔천 명을 쳐 죽여 이름을 떨쳤다.","다윗은 돌아오는 길에 소금 골짜기에 사는 에돔 사람 만 팔천 명을 쳐죽여 이름을 떨치고,","다윗이 소금 골짜기에서 에돔 사람 만 팔천 명을 쳐죽이고 돌아와서 명성을 떨치니라","다윗이 염곡에서 2)에돔 사람 일만 팔천을 쳐죽이고 돌아와서 명예를 얻으니라 히, 아람 〔시편 60편 제목과 대상 18:11, 12]","다윗은 이제 이웃 나라에도 점점 그 이름을 떨치고 있었다. 그는 북쪽에서 아람 족속들을 치고 돌아온 다음에도 염곡에서 에돔 족속들을 1만 8천 명이나 더 죽였다.","On his return, David made a name for himself by defeating eighteen thousand Edomites in the Valley of Salt.","And David gat him a name when he returned from smiting of the Syrians in the valley of salt, being eighteen thousand men.","And David became famous after he returned from striking down eighteen thousand Edomites in the Valley of Salt.","Fecit quoque sibi David nomen cum reverteretur, percussa Idumaea in valle Salis, caesis decem et octo milibus.","ויעש דוד שם בשבו מהכותו את ארם בגיא מלח שמונה עשר אלף׃"],["10","8","14","그는 에돔에도 수비대를 두었다. 에돔 전지역에 수비대를 두자 에돔 전체가 다윗의 신하가 되었다. 주님께서는 다윗이 어디를 가든지 도와주셨다.","에돔에도 주둔군을 두었다. 그래서 온 에돔이 다윗의 속국이 되었다. 다윗이 어디를 가든지 야훼께서는 그에게 승리를 안겨주셨다.","다윗이 에돔에 수비대를 두되 온 에돔에 수비대를 두니 에돔 사람이 다 다윗의 종이 되니라 다윗이 어디로 가든지 여호와께서 이기게 하셨더라","다윗이 에돔에 수비대를 두되 온 에돔에 수비대를 두니 에돔 사람이 다 다윗의 종이 되니라 다윗이 어디를 가든지 여호와께서 이기게 하셨더라","다윗은 에돔 전지역에 주둔군과 총독을 배치하여 그 백성을 자기의 통치권 밑에 예속시켜 놓았다. 여호와께서 이렇게 다윗편에 서 계셨기 때문에 다윗은 어디에 가든지 승리하게 되었다.","He set up garrisons in Edom, and all the Edomites became David’s subjects. Thus the LORD brought David victory in all his undertakings.","And he put garrisons in Edom; throughout all Edom put he garrisons, and all they of Edom became David's servants. And the LORD preserved David whithersoever he went.","He put garrisons throughout Edom, and all the Edomites became subject to David. The LORD gave David victory wherever he went.","Et posuit in Idumaea praesidia; et facta est universa Idumaea serviens David. Et auxiliatus est Dominus David in omnibus, ad quaecumque profectus est.","וישם באדום נצבים בכל אדום שם נצבים ויהי כל אדום עבדים לדוד ויושע יהוה את דוד בכל אשר הלך׃"],["10","8","15","다윗은 온 이스라엘을 다스리며, 모든 백성에게 공정과 정의를 실천하였다.","2)다윗은 온 이스라엘의 왕으로서 백성을 공평 무사하게 다스렸다.8:15-18에 대해서는 1열왕 4:2-6, 1역대 18:14-17 참조.","다윗이 온 이스라엘을 다스려 다윗이 모든 백성에게 정의와 공의를 행할새","다윗이 온 이스라엘을 다스려 모든 백성에게 공과 의를 행할쌔","다윗은 이스라엘의 왕이 되어 다스릴 때에 온 백성을 언제나 법에 따라 올바르게 다스렸다.","David was king over all Israel; he dispensed justice and right to all his people.","And David reigned over all Israel; and David executed judgment and justice unto all his people.","David reigned over all Israel, doing what was just and right for all his people.","Et regnavit David super omnem Israel; faciebat quoque David iudicium et iustitiam omni populo suo.","וימלך דוד על כל ישראל ויהי דוד עשה משפט וצדקה לכל עמו׃"],["10","8","16","츠루야의 아들 요압은 군대 지휘관이었고, 아힐룻의 아들 여호사팟은 기록관이었다.","군 총사령관에는 스루야의 아들 요압, 공보대신에는 아힐룻의 아들 여호사밧,","스루야의 아들 요압은 군사령관이 되고 아힐룻의 아들 여호사밧은 사관이 되고","스루야의 아들 요압은 군대장관이 되고 아힐룻의 아들 여호사밧은 사관이 되고","그 당시 군대 총사령관은 스루야의 아들 요압이 맡고 있었으며, 왕에게 내정 문제를 보고하며 왕의 성명을 발표하던 사관은 아히룻의 아들인 여호사밧이 맡고 있었다.","Joab, son of Zeruiah, was in command of the army. Jehoshaphat, son of Ahilud, was chancellor.","And Joab the son of Zeruiah was over the host; and Jehoshaphat the son of Ahilud was recorder;","Joab son of Zeruiah was over the army; Jehoshaphat son of Ahilud was recorder;","Ioab autem filius Sarviae erat super exercitum; porro Iosaphat filius Ahilud erat a commentariis,","ויואב בן צרויה על הצבא ויהושפט בן אחילוד מזכיר׃"],["10","8","17","아히툽의 아들 차독과 에브야타르의 아들 아히멜렉은 사제였고 스라야는 서기관이었다.","사제 일은 아히툽의 아들 사독과 아히멜렉의 아들 에비아달, 비서 일은 스라야,","아히둡의 아들 사독과 아비아달의 아들 아히멜렉은 제사장이 되고 스라야는 서기관이 되고","아히둡의 아들 사독과 아비아달의 아들 아히멜렉은 제사장이 되고 스라야는 서기관이 되고","아히둡의 아들 사독과 아비아달의 아들 아히멜렉은 제사장이었다. 외교 문서를 포함한 국가의 모든 문서를 처리하던 서기관은 스라야였다.","Zadok, son of Ahitub, and Ahimelech, son of Abiathar, were priests. Shavsha was scribe.","And Zadok the son of Ahitub, and Ahimelech the son of Abiathar, were the priests; and Seraiah was the scribe;","Zadok son of Ahitub and Ahimelech son of Abiathar were priests; Seraiah was secretary;","et Sadoc filius Achitob et Abiathar filius Achimelech sacerdotes, et Saraias scriba.","וצדוק בן אחיטוב ואחימלך בן אביתר כהנים ושריה סופר׃"],["10","8","18","여호야다의 아들 브나야는 크렛족과 펠렛족을 지휘하였다. 다윗의 아들들은 사제였다.","그렛 외인부대와 벨렛 외인부대의 지휘관에는 여호야다의 아들 브나야. 다윗의 아들들도 사제 일을 보았다.","여호야다의 아들 브나야는 그렛 사람과 블렛 사람을 관할하고 다윗의 아들들은 대신들이 되니라","여호야다의 아들 브나야는 그렛 사람과 블렛 사람을 관할하고 다윗의 아들들은 대신이 되니라","여호야다의 아들 브나야는 다윗의 경호대장이 되었는데, 블레셋 남부에 살던 그렛 족속과 블렛 족속으로 구성된 용병 부대가 다윗의 경호대를 이루고 있었다. 그리고 다윗의 아들들도 제사장으로 봉직하였다.","Benaiah, son of Jehoiada, was in command of the Cherethites and the Pelethites; and David’s sons were priests.","And Benaiah the son of Jehoiada was over both the Cherethites and the Pelethites; and David's sons were chief rulers.","Benaiah son of Jehoiada was over the Kerethites and Pelethites; and David's sons were royal advisers.","Banaias autem filius Ioiadae super Cherethi et Phelethi; filii autem David sacerdotes erant.","ובניהו בן יהוידע והכרתי והפלתי ובני דוד כהנים היו׃"],["10","9","1","하루는 다윗이 물었다. “사울 집안에 아직 살아남은 사람이 있느냐? 내가 요나탄을 기억하여 그에게 자애를 베풀고자 한다.”","다윗은 요나단을 생각해서 그 은혜를 갚고 싶은데 사울의 집안에 살아 남은 자가 하나도 없느냐고 물었다.","다윗이 이르되 사울의 집에 아직도 남은 사람이 있느냐 내가 요나단으로 말미암아 그 사람에게 은총을 베풀리라 하니라","다윗이 가로되 사울의 집에 오히려 남은 사람이 있느냐 내가 요나단을 인하여 그 사람에게 은총을 베풀리라 하니라","어느 날 다윗이 신하들에게 물었다. \"사울의 집안에서 아직도 살아 남은 사람이 누가 있느냐? 그런 사람이 있으면 내가 친구 요나단을 생각해서 그를 잘 돌보아주겠다\"","David asked, “Is there any survivor of Saul’s house to whom I may show kindness for the sake of Jonathan?”","And David said, Is there yet any that is left of the house of Saul, that I may shew him kindness for Jonathan's sake?","David asked, \"Is there anyone still left of the house of Saul to whom I can show kindness for Jonathan's sake?\"","Et dixit David:  “Putasne est aliquis, qui remanserit adhuc de domo Saul, ut faciam cum eo misericordiam propter Ionathan? “.","ויאמר דוד הכי יש עוד אשר נותר לבית שאול ואעשה עמו חסד בעבור יהונתן׃"],["10","9","2","마침 사울 집안에 치바라는 종이 하나 있었는데, 사람들이 그를 다윗에게 데려왔다. 임금이 “네가 치바냐?” 하고 물으니, 치바가 “예, 그렇습니다.” 하고 대답하였다.","마침 사울 가문을 섬겨오던 종이 하나 있었는데 이름은 시바였다. 사람들이 그를 불러 다윗에게 데리고 오자 왕은 \"네가 시바냐?\"하고 물었다. \"그러하옵니다.\" 하고 그가 대답하자","사울의 집에는 종 한 사람이 있으니 그의 이름은 시바라 그를 다윗의 앞으로 부르매 왕이 그에게 말하되 네가 시바냐 하니 이르되 당신의 종이니이다 하니라","사울의 종 하나가 있으니 그 이름은 시바라 저를 다윗의 앞으로 부르매 왕이 저에게 묻되 네가 시바냐 가로되 종이 그로소이다","사울의 집안에는 시바라는 종이 있었는데, 마침 누가 그를 기억하여 다윗에게로 데려왔다. \"네가 시바냐?\" 하고 왕이 묻자, \"예, 그렇습니다. 제가 임금님께 무엇을 도와드릴 수 있겠습니까?\" 하고 시바가 대답하였다.","Now there was an official of the house of Saul named Ziba. He was summoned to David, and the king asked him, “Are you Ziba?” He replied, “Your servant.”","And there was of the house of Saul a servant whose name was Ziba. And when they had called him unto David, the king said unto him, Art thou Ziba? And he said, Thy servant is he.","Now there was a servant of Saul's household named Ziba. They called him to appear before David, and the king said to him, \"Are you Ziba?\" \"Your servant,\" he replied.","Erat autem de domo Saul servus nomine Siba; quem cum vocasset rex ad se, dixit ei:  “Tune es Siba? “. Et ille respondit:  “Ego sum, servus tuus “.","ולבית שאול עבד ושמו ציבא ויקראו לו אל דוד ויאמר המלך אליו האתה ציבא ויאמר עבדך׃"],["10","9","3","그러자 임금은 “사울 집안에 아직 살아남은 사람이 없느냐? 그에게 하느님의 자애를 베풀고자 한다.” 하고 말하였다. 치바가 임금에게 “요나탄의 아들이 하나 있는데, 두 다리를 접니다.” 하고 대답하였다.","왕은 다시 물었다. \"내가 하느님께 맹세한 대로 은혜를 갚아야 할 텐데, 사울의 집안에 아무도 남은 자가 없느냐?\" 시바가 대답하였다. \"다리를 저는 요나단의 아들 하나가 남아 있습니다.\"","왕이 이르되 사울의 집에 아직도 남은 사람이 없느냐 내가 그 사람에게 하나님의 은총을 베풀고자 하노라 하니 시바가 왕께 아뢰되 요나단의 아들 하나가 있는데 다리 저는 자니이다 하니라","왕이 가로되 사울의 집에 남은 사람이 없느냐 내가 그 사람에게 하나님의 은총을 베풀고자 하노라 시바가 왕께 고하되 요나단의 아들 하나가 있는데 절뚝발이니이다","왕이 그에게 물었다. \"사울의 집안에서 살아 남은 자가 아무도 없느냐? 그런 사람이 있다면 내가 이미 하나님께 서약한 대로 그에게 호의를 베풀어 주겠다\" 시바가 대답하였다. \"요나단의 아들이 한사람 살아 있는데, 두 다리를 다 접니다.\" 시바는 이렇게 짧은 대답속에서도 요나단의 아들이 절뚝발이라는 사실을 알려 줌으로써 그가 다윗에게 정적이 될 수 없음을 처음부터 밝혀 주었다. 이는 상전을 살리려는 의도였다.","Then the king asked, “Is there any survivor of Saul’s house to whom I may show God’s kindness?” Ziba answered the king, “There is still Jonathan’s son, the one whose feet are crippled.”","And the king said, Is there not yet any of the house of Saul, that I may shew the kindness of God unto him? And Ziba said unto the king, Jonathan hath yet a son, which is lame on his feet.","The king asked, \"Is there no one still left of the house of Saul to whom I can show God's kindness?\" Ziba answered the king, \"There is still a son of Jonathan; he is crippled in both feet.\"","Et ait rex:  “Num superest aliquis de domo Saul, ut faciam cum eo misericordiam Dei? “. Dixitque Siba regi:  “Superest filius Ionathan, debilis pedibus “.","ויאמר המלך האפס עוד איש לבית שאול ואעשה עמו חסד אלהים ויאמר ציבא אל המלך עוד בן ליהונתן נכה רגלים׃"],["10","9","4","임금이 치바에게 “그가 어디에 있느냐?” 하고 묻자, “그는 로 드바르에 사는 암미엘의 아들 마키르의 집에 있습니다.” 하고 그가 대답하였다.","왕은 그가 어디 있느냐고 물었다. 시바는 그가 로드발에 있는 암미엘의 아들 마길의 집에 있다고 대답하였다.","왕이 그에게 말하되 그가 어디 있느냐 하니 시바가 왕께 아뢰되 로드발 암미엘의 아들 마길의 집에 있나이다 하니라","왕이 저에게 묻되 그가 어디 있느냐 시바가 왕에게 고하되 로드발 암미엘의 아들 마길의 집에 있나이다","\"그가 어디에 있느냐?\" 하고 왕이 물었다. \"로드발에 있는 암미엘의 아들 마길의 집에 있습니다.\"라고 시바가 대답하였다.","The king asked him, “Where is he?” and Ziba answered the king, “He is in the house of Machir, son of Ammiel, in Lodebar.”","And the king said unto him, Where is he? And Ziba said unto the king, Behold, he is in the house of Machir, the son of Ammiel, in Lodebar.","\"Where is he?\" the king asked. Ziba answered, \"He is at the house of Makir son of Ammiel in Lo Debar.\"","Ubi, inquit, est?. Et Siba ad regem:  “Ecce, ait, in domo est Machir filii Ammiel in Lodabar “.","ויאמר לו המלך איפה הוא ויאמר ציבא אל המלך הנה הוא בית מכיר בן עמיאל בלו דבר׃"],["10","9","5","다윗 임금은 사람을 보내어, 로 드바르에 사는 암미엘의 아들 마키르의 집에서 그를 데려왔다.","다윗은 사람을 로드발로 보내어 암미엘의 아들 마길의 집에서 그를 데려왔다.","다윗 왕이 사람을 보내어 로드발 암미엘의 아들 마길의 집에서 그를 데려오니","다윗왕이 사람을 보내어 로드발 암미엘의 아들 마길의 집에서 저를 데려오니","왕이 요단강 동쪽 마하나밈 근처의 로드발로 사람을 보내어 요나단의 아들을 왕궁으로 데려왔다.","So King David sent for him and had him brought from the house of Machir, son of Ammiel, from Lodebar.","Then king David sent, and fetched him out of the house of Machir, the son of Ammiel, from Lodebar.","So King David had him brought from Lo Debar, from the house of Makir son of Ammiel.","Misit ergo rex David et tulit eum de domo Machir filii Ammiel de Lodabar.","וישלח המלך דוד ויקחהו מבית מכיר בן עמיאל מלו דבר׃"],["10","9","6","사울의 손자이며 요나탄의 아들인 므피보셋은 다윗에게 와서 엎드려 절하였다. 다윗이 “므피보셋아!” 하고 부르자, “예, 당신 종이 여기 있습니다.” 하고 므피보셋이 대답하였다.","이리하여 사울의 손자이자 요나단의 아들인 므비보셋이 다윗 앞에 나오게 되었다. 그가 엎드려 절을 하자 다윗이 \"그대가 므비보셋이오?\" 하고 물었다. \"예, 그러하옵니다.\" 하고 그가 대답하였다.","사울의 손자 요나단의 아들 므비보셋이 다윗에게 나아와 그 앞에 엎드려 절하매 다윗이 이르되 므비보셋이여 하니 그가 이르기를 보소서 당신의 종이니이다","사울의 손자 요나단의 아들 므비보셋이 다윗에게 나아와서 엎드려 절하매 다윗이 가로되 므비보셋이여 하니 대답하되 주의 종이 여기 있나이다","사울의 손자이며 요나단의 아들인 므비보셋은 왕 앞에 이르자 엎드려 큰절을 하였다. \"그대가 므비보셋이오?\" 하고 다윗이 묻자 \"예, 그렇습니다.\"하고 그가 대답하였다.","When Meribbaal, son of Jonathan, son of Saul, came to David, he fell face down in homage. David said, “Meribbaal,” and he answered, “Your servant.”","Now when Mephibosheth, the son of Jonathan, the son of Saul, was come unto David, he fell on his face, and did reverence. And David said, Mephibosheth. And he answered, Behold thy servant!","When Mephibosheth son of Jonathan, the son of Saul, came to David, he bowed down to pay him honor. David said, \"Mephibosheth!\" \"Your servant,\" he replied.","Cum autem venisset Meribbaal filius Ionathan filii Saul ad David, corruit in faciem suam et adoravit. Dixitque David:  “Meribbaal “. Qui respondit:  “Adsum servus tuus “.","ויבא מפיבשת בן יהונתן בן שאול אל דוד ויפל על פניו וישתחו ויאמר דוד מפיבשת ויאמר הנה עבדך׃"],["10","9","7","다윗이 그에게 말하였다. “두려워하지 마라. 내가 너의 아버지 요나탄을 기억하여 너에게 자애를 베풀고자 한다. 너의 할아버지 사울의 모든 땅을 너에게 돌려주겠다. 그리고 너는 늘 내 식탁에서 음식을 먹어라.”","다윗이 말하였다. \"두려워하지 마시오. 나는 그대의 선친 요나단에게 입은 은혜를 이제 그대에게 갚고자 하오. 그대의 조부인 사울이 부치던 밭을 모두 그대에게 돌려주겠소. 그리고 그대는 늘 나와 한 식탁에서 음식을 들도록 하오.\"","다윗이 그에게 이르되 무서워하지 말라 내가 반드시 네 아버지 요나단으로 말미암아 네게 은총을 베풀리라 내가 네 할아버지 사울의 모든 밭을 다 네게 도로 주겠고 또 너는 항상 내 상에서 떡을 먹을지니라 하니","다윗이 가로되 무서워 말라 내가 반드시 네 아비 요나단을 인하여 네게 은총을 베풀리라 내가 네 조부 사울의 밭을 다 네게 도로 주겠고 또 너는 항상 내 상에서 먹을찌니라","그러자 다윗은 그를 위로하고 안심시켜 주었다. \"조금도 두려워하지 마시오. 나는 그대의 선친 요나단과의 우정을 생각해서 그대에게 호의를 베풀 작정이오. 그대의 할아버지 사울이 옛날에 차지하였던 토지는 모두 그대 앞으로 되돌려주겠오. 그리고 이후로 그대는 언제나 나의 식탁에서 함께 식사하도록 하시오.\"","“Do not be afraid,” David said to him, “I will surely be kind to you for the sake of Jonathan your father. I will restore to you all the lands of Saul your grandfather, and you shall eat at my table always.”","And David said unto him, Fear not: for I will surely shew thee kindness for Jonathan thy father's sake, and will restore thee all the land of Saul thy father; and thou shalt eat bread at my table continually.","\"Don't be afraid,\" David said to him, \"for I will surely show you kindness for the sake of your father Jonathan. I will restore to you all the land that belonged to your grandfather Saul, and you will always eat at my table.\"","Et ait ei David: “Ne timeas, quia faciens faciam in te misericordiam propter Ionathan patrem tuum; et restituam tibi omnes agros Saul patris tui, et tu comedes panem in mensa mea semper “.","ויאמר לו דוד אל תירא כי עשה אעשה עמך חסד בעבור יהונתן אביך והשבתי לך את כל שדה שאול אביך ואתה תאכל לחם על שלחני תמיד׃"],["10","9","8","그러자 므피보셋이 절하며 말하였다. “당신 종이 무엇이기에 죽은 개와 같은 저를 보살펴 주십니까?”","므비보셋이 엎드려 절하며 말하였다. \"이 죽은 개만도 못한 소인이 무엇이기에 이렇듯이 살펴주십니까?\"","그가 절하여 이르되 이 종이 무엇이기에 왕께서 죽은 개 같은 나를 돌아보시나이까 하니라","저가 절하여 가로되 이 종이 무엇이관대 왕께서 죽은 개 같은 나를 돌아보시나이까","므비보셋이 다시 엎드려 큰절을 하고 아뢰었다. \"이 종은 그토록 크신 임금님의 은총을 받을 자격이 없습니다. 저는 한 마리 죽은 개보다도 나을 것이 없습니다.\"","Bowing low, he answered, “What am I, your servant, that you should pay attention to a dead dog like me?”","And he bowed himself, and said, What is thy servant, that thou shouldest look upon such a dead dog as I am?","Mephibosheth bowed down and said, \"What is your servant, that you should notice a dead dog like me?\"","Qui adorans eum dixit:  “Quis ego sum servus tuus, quoniam respexisti super canem mortuum similem mei? “.","וישתחו ויאמר מה עבדך כי פנית אל הכלב המת אשר כמוני׃"],["10","9","9","임금이 사울의 시종 치바를 불러 말하였다. “내가 사울에게 속한 모든 것과 그의 집안에 속한 모든 것을 네 상전의 아들에게 주었으니,","왕은 사울의 시종 시바를 불러서 일렀다. \"네 상전 사울의 유산과 그 집안 재산을 다 그의 유족인 이분에게 돌려주었다.","왕이 사울의 시종 시바를 불러 그에게 이르되 사울과 그의 온 집에 속한 것은 내가 다 네 주인의 아들에게 주었노니","왕이 사울의 사환 시바를 불러서 이르되 사울과 그 온 집에 속한 것은 내가 다 네 주인의 아들에게 주었노니","그러나 왕은 시바를 불러서 이렇게 명령하였다. \"사울과 그의 집안이 차지하였던 토지를 모두 내가 그의 손자인 므비보셋에게 주었다.","The king then called Ziba, Saul’s attendant, and said to him: “All that belonged to Saul and to his entire house, I am giving to your lord’s son.","Then the king called to Ziba, Saul's servant, and said unto him, I have given unto thy master's son all that pertained to Saul and to all his house.","Then the king summoned Ziba, Saul's servant, and said to him, \"I have given your master's grandson everything that belonged to Saul and his family.","Vocavit itaque rex Sibam puerum Saul et dixit ei:  “Omnia, quaecumque fuerunt Saul et universae domui eius, do filio domini tui.","ויקרא המלך אל ציבא נער שאול ויאמר אליו כל אשר היה לשאול ולכל ביתו נתתי לבן אדניך׃"],["10","9","10","너는 그를 위해서 네 자식들과 종들을 거느리고 그 밭을 갈고 거두어들여, 네 상전의 아들이 먹을 수 있도록 음식을 마련하여라. 그러나 네 상전의 아들 므피보셋은 늘 나의 식탁에서 음식을 먹을 것이다.” 치바에게는 아들 열다섯 명과 종 스무 명이 있었다.","그러니 너는 네 아들들과 종들을 거느리고 그 밭을 갈고 거두어들여 네 상전의 유족을 부양하도록 하여라. 네 상전의 유족 므비보셋은 늘 나와 한 식탁에서 음식을 들 것이다.\" 시바는 아들 열다섯에 종이 스물이나 있었다.","너와 네 아들들과 네 종들은 그를 위하여 땅을 갈고 거두어 네 주인의 아들에게 양식을 대주어 먹게 하라 그러나 네 주인의 아들 므비보셋은 항상 내 상에서 떡을 먹으리라 하니라 시바는 아들이 열다섯 명이요 종이 스무 명이라","너와 네 아들들과 네 종들은 저를 위하여 밭을 갈고 거두어 네 주인의 아들을 공궤하라 그러나 네 주인의 아들 므비보셋은 항상 내 상에서 먹으리라 하니라 시바는 아들이 열 다섯이요 종이 스물이라","너는 이제 네 모든 아들과 종들을 거느리고 그 땅에 농사를 지어 네 상전의 손자가 먹고 살기에 넉넉한 양식을 대어 주어라. 그리고 므비보셋은 언제나 내 식탁에서 식사할 것이다.\" 그런데 시바에게는 15명의 아들과 20명의 종이 있었다.","You and your sons and servants must till the land for him. You shall bring in the produce, which shall be food for your lord’s household to eat. But Meribbaal, your lord’s son, shall always eat at my table.” Now Ziba had fifteen sons and twenty servants.","Thou therefore, and thy sons, and thy servants, shall till the land for him, and thou shalt bring in the fruits, that thy master's son may have food to eat: but Mephibosheth thy master's son shall eat bread alway at my table. Now Ziba had fifteen sons and twenty servants.","You and your sons and your servants are to farm the land for him and bring in the crops, so that your master's grandson may be provided for. And Mephibosheth, grandson of your master, will always eat at my table.\" (Now Ziba had fifteen sons and twenty servants.)","Operare igitur ei terram, tu et filii tui et servi tui, et, quod inferes, sit cibus domui domini tui, quo alantur; Meribbaal autem filius domini tui comedet semper panem super mensam meam “. Erant autem Sibae quindecim filii et viginti servi.","ועבדת לו את האדמה אתה ובניך ועבדיך והבאת והיה לבן אדניך לחם ואכלו ומפיבשת בן אדניך יאכל תמיד לחם על שלחני ולציבא חמשה עשר בנים ועשרים עבדים׃"],["10","9","11","치바가 임금에게 말하였다. “당신 종은 저의 주군이신 임금님께서 이 종에게 분부하신 대로 다 하겠습니다.” 그리하여 므피보셋은 왕자들 가운데 하나처럼 다윗의 식탁에서 음식을 먹었다.","시바는 무엇이든지 왕께서 분부하신 대로 다 하겠다고 아뢰었다. 므비보셋은 왕자들 사이에 끼여 다윗 왕과 한 식탁에서 음식을 먹었다.","시바가 왕께 아뢰되 내 주 왕께서 모든 일을 종에게 명령하신 대로 종이 준행하겠나이다 하니라 므비보셋은 왕자 중 하나처럼 왕의 상에서 먹으니라","시바가 왕께 고하되 내 주 왕께서 온갖 일을 종에게 명하신대로 종이 준행하겠나이다 하니라 므비보셋은 왕자 중 하나처럼 왕의 상에서 먹으니라","시바가 대답하였다. \"나의 주 임금님께서 명령하신 그대로 이 종이 모두 실행하겠습니다.\" 이리하여 시바의 온 식구가 므비보셋의 종이 되었다. 므비보셋은 예루살렘으로 집을 옮겨 살며, 언제나 왕의 아들들과 함께 왕의 식탁에서 식사하였다. 므비보셋은 두 다리를 저는 데다가 항상 왕의 식탁에서 먹어야 하였으므로 늘 예루살렘에 머물러 살았다.","Ziba answered the king, “Whatever my lord the king commands his servant, so shall your servant do.” And so Meribbaal ate at David’s table like one of the king’s sons.","Then said Ziba unto the king, According to all that my lord the king hath commanded his servant, so shall thy servant do. As for Mephibosheth, said the king, he shall eat at my table, as one of the king's sons.","Then Ziba said to the king, \"Your servant will do whatever my lord the king commands his servant to do.\" So Mephibosheth ate at David's table like one of the king's sons.","Dixitque Siba ad regem:  “Sicut iussisti, domine mi rex, servo tuo, sic faciet servus tuus “. Meribbaal autem comedebat super mensam eius quasi unus de filiis regis.","ויאמר ציבא אל המלך ככל אשר יצוה אדני המלך את עבדו כן יעשה עבדך ומפיבשת אכל על שלחני כאחד מבני המלך׃"],["10","9","12","므피보셋에게는 미카라는 어린 아들이 있었다. 치바의 집에 사는 사람은 모두 므피보셋의 종이 되었다.","므비보셋에게는 미가라는 막내 아들이 있었다. 시바의 집에서 사는 자는 다 므비보셋의 종이 되었다.","므비보셋에게 어린 아들 하나가 있으니 이름은 미가더라 시바의 집에 사는 자마다 므비보셋의 종이 되니라","므비보셋에게 젊은 아들 하나가 있으니 이름은 미가더라 무릇 시바의 집에 거하는 자들은 므비보셋의 종이 되니라","(11절에 포함되어 있음)","Meribbaal had a young son whose name was Mica; and all the tenants of Ziba’s household worked for Meribbaal.","And Mephibosheth had a young son, whose name was Micha. And all that dwelt in the house of Ziba were servants unto Mephibosheth.","Mephibosheth had a young son named Mica, and all the members of Ziba's household were servants of Mephibosheth.","Habebat autem Meribbaal filium parvulum nomine Micha; omnes vero, qui habitabant in domo Sibae, serviebant Meribbaal.","ולמפיבשת בן קטן ושמו מיכא וכל מושב בית ציבא עבדים למפיבשת׃"],["10","9","13","므피보셋은 예루살렘에서 살며 늘 임금의 식탁에서 음식을 먹었다. 그는 두 다리를 절었다.","므비보셋은 늘 왕과 한 식탁에서 먹으며 예루살렘에서 살았다. 그는 두 다리를 다 절었다.","므비보셋이 항상 왕의 상에서 먹으므로 예루살렘에 사니라 그는 두 발을 다 절더라","므비보셋이 항상 왕의 상에서 먹으므로 예루살렘에 거하니라 그는 두 발이 다 절뚝이더라","(11절에 포함되어 있음)","But Meribbaal lived in Jerusalem, because he always ate at the king’s table. He was lame in both feet.","So Mephibosheth dwelt in Jerusalem: for he did eat continually at the king's table; and was lame on both his feet.","And Mephibosheth lived in Jerusalem, because he always ate at the king's table, and he was crippled in both feet.","Porro Meribbaal habitabat in Ierusalem, quia de mensa regis iugiter vescebatur; et erat claudus utroque pede.","ומפיבשת ישב בירושלם כי על שלחן המלך תמיד הוא אכל והוא פסח שתי רגליו׃"],["10","10","1","그 뒤에 암몬 자손들의 임금이 죽자, 그의 아들 하눈이 그 뒤를 이어 임금이 되었다.","1)그 뒤 암몬 왕이 죽고 그 아들 하눈이 왕위에 올랐다.10:1-19에 대해서는 1역대 19:1-19 참조.","그 후에 암몬 자손의 왕이 죽고 그의 아들 하눈이 대신하여 왕이 되니","그 후에 암몬 자손의 왕이 죽고 그 아들 하눈이 대신하여 왕이 되니","그 뒤 얼마 지나서 암몬 족속의 왕 나하스가 죽자, 그의 아들 하눈이 아버지의 왕위를 이어받아 새 왕이 되었다.","After this, the king of the Ammonites died, and Hanun his son succeeded him as king.","And it came to pass after this, that the king of the children of Ammon died, and Hanun his son reigned in his stead.","In the course of time, the king of the Ammonites died, and his son Hanun succeeded him as king.","Factum est autem post haec, ut moreretur rex filiorum Ammon, et regnaret Hanon filius eius pro eo.","ויהי אחרי כן וימת מלך בני עמון וימלך חנון בנו תחתיו׃"]]