[["6","10","21","온 백성은 마케다 진영에 있는 여호수아에게 무사히 돌아갔다. 그리하여 아무도 이스라엘 자손들에게 함부로 혀를 놀리지 못하였다.","그제야 온 백성은 막케다 진지에 있는 여호수아에게로 무사히 돌아갔다. 아무도 이스라엘 백성에게 함부로 혀를 놀리는 사람이 없게 되었다.","모든 백성이 평안히 막게다 진영으로 돌아와 여호수아에게 이르렀더니 혀를 놀려 이스라엘 자손을 대적하는 자가 없었더라","모든 백성이 평안히 막게다 진으로 돌아와 여호수아에게 이르렀으나 혀를 놀려 이스라엘 자손을 대적하는 자가 없었더라","이렇듯 싸움을 마치고서야 여호수아가 이끄는 이스라엘군은 막게다에 쳐놓았던 진영으로 무사히 되돌아갔다. 그 땅에 살고 있던 사람들 중에 어느 누구도 혀를 함부로 놀려 이스라엘 사람들을 비방하거나 우습게 여기는 사람이 없었다.","all the army returned to Joshua and the camp at Makkedah in victory; no one uttered a sound against the Israelites.","And all the people returned to the camp to Joshua at Makkedah in peace: none moved his tongue against any of the children of Israel.","The whole army then returned safely to Joshua in the camp at Makkedah, and no one uttered a word against the Israelites.","reversus est omnis exercitus ad Iosue in Maceda ad castra, sani et integri; nullusque contra filios Israel mutire ausus est.","וישבו כל העם אל המחנה אל יהושע מקדה בשלום לא חרץ לבני ישראל לאיש את לשנו׃"],["6","10","22","그때에 여호수아가 말하였다. “굴 어귀를 열고 저 다섯 임금을 굴에서 끌어내어 나에게 데려오너라.”","여호수아가 명령하였다. \"동굴 어귀를 열고 그 동굴 속에 있는 다섯 왕을 내 앞으로 끌어내어라.\"","그 때에 여호수아가 이르되 굴 어귀를 열고 그 굴에서 그 다섯 왕들을 내게로 끌어내라 하매","때에 여호수아가 가로되 굴 어귀를 열고 그 굴에서 그 다섯 왕을 내게로 끌어내라 하매","그때 여호수아가 말하였다 \"막아 놓았던 동굴 입구를 열고 그 동굴에 숨어 있는 다섯 왕을 끌어내어 내게로 끌고오너라.","Then Joshua said, “Open the mouth of the cave and bring me those five kings from the cave.”","Then said Joshua, Open the mouth of the cave, and bring out those five kings unto me out of the cave.","Joshua said, \"Open the mouth of the cave and bring those five kings out to me.\"","Praecepitque Iosue dicens:  “Aperite os speluncae et producite ad me quinque reges, qui in ea latitant “.","ויאמר יהושע פתחו את פי המערה והוציאו אלי את חמשת המלכים האלה מן המערה׃"],["6","10","23","사람들이 그대로 하였다. 예루살렘 임금, 헤브론 임금, 야르뭇 임금, 라키스 임금, 에글론 임금, 이렇게 다섯 임금을 그 굴에서 끌어내어 여호수아에게 데려갔다.","그들은 명령대로 예루살렘 왕, 헤브론 왕, 야르뭇 왕, 라기스 왕, 에글론 왕, 다섯 왕을 동굴에서 그의 앞으로 끌어냈다.","그들이 그대로 하여 그 다섯 왕들 곧 예루살렘 왕과 헤브론 왕과 야르뭇 왕과 라기스 왕과 에글론 왕을 굴에서 그에게로 끌어내니라","그들이 그대로 하여 그 다섯 왕 곧 예루살렘 왕과 헤브론 왕과 야르뭇 왕과 라기스 왕과 에글론 왕을 굴에서 그에게로 끌어내니라","사람들이 여호수아의 지시대로 하였다. 동굴에 숨어 있는 예루살렘 왕과 헤브론 왕과 야르뭇 왕과 라기스 왕과 에글론 왕 등 다섯 명의 왕들이 여호수아에게 끌려왔다.","They did so; they brought out to him from the cave the five kings, of Jerusalem, Hebron, Jarmuth, Lachish, and Eglon.","And they did so, and brought forth those five kings unto him out of the cave, the king of Jerusalem, the king of Hebron, the king of Jarmuth, the king of Lachish, and the king of Eglon.","So they brought the five kings out of the cave--the kings of Jerusalem, Hebron, Jarmuth, Lachish and Eglon.","Feceruntque sic et eduxerunt ad eum quinque reges de spelunca: regem Ierusalem, regem Hebron, regem Ierimoth, regem Lachis, regem Eglon.","ויעשו כן ויציאו אליו את חמשת המלכים האלה מן המערה את מלך ירושלם את מלך חברון את מלך ירמות את מלך לכיש את מלך עגלון׃"],["6","10","24","사람들이 그 임금들을 끌어내어 여호수아에게 데려가자, 여호수아는 이스라엘 사람들을 모두 불러 모은 다음, 자기와 함께 갔던 병사들을 지휘하는 군관들에게 지시하였다. “가까이 와서 발로 이 임금들의 목을 밟아라.” 그들이 가까이 가서 발로 임금들의 목을 밟자,","그 왕들을 여호수아 앞으로 끌어내자, 여호수아는 이스라엘의 모든 사람을 불러모으고 자기를 따라 싸우던 지휘관들에게 지시하였다. \"앞으로 나와서 이 왕들의 목을 발로 밟아라.\" 그들이 앞으로 나와 그들의 목을 발로 밟자,","그 왕들을 여호수아에게로 끌어내매 여호수아가 이스라엘 모든 사람을 부르고 자기와 함께 갔던 지휘관들에게 이르되 가까이 와서 이 왕들의 목을 발로 밟으라 하매 그들이 가까이 가서 그들의 목을 밟으매","그 왕들을 여호수아에게로 끌어내매 여호수아가 이스라엘 모든 사람을 부르고 자기와 함께 갔던 군장들에게 이르되 가까이 와서 이 왕들의 목을 발로 밟으라 가까이 와서 그들의 목을 밟으매","사람들이 그 왕들을 여호수아에게 끌어 오자 여호수아가 온 이스라엘 사람들을 불러모으고 자기를 늘 따라다니며 싸움에 출전하였던 지휘관들에게 말하였다. \"가까이 다가와 이 왕들의 목을 발로 밟아라\" 그들이 다가와 왕들의 목을 발로 밟자","When they brought the five kings out to Joshua, he summoned all the army of Israel and said to the commanders of the soldiers who had marched with him, “Come forward and put your feet on the necks of these kings.” They came forward and put their feet upon their necks.","And it came to pass, when they brought out those kings unto Joshua, that Joshua called for all the men of Israel, and said unto the captains of the men of war which went with him, Come near, put your feet upon the necks of these kings. And they came near, and put their feet upon the necks of them.","When they had brought these kings to Joshua, he summoned all the men of Israel and said to the army commanders who had come with him, \"Come here and put your feet on the necks of these kings.\" So they came forward and placed their feet on their necks.","Cumque educti essent ad eum, vocavit omnes viros Israel et ait ad principes exercitus, qui secum erant:  “Accedite et ponite pedes super colla regum istorum “. Qui cum accessissent et subiectorum colla pedibus calcarent,","ויהי כהוציאם את המלכים האלה אל יהושע ויקרא יהושע אל כל איש ישראל ויאמר אל קציני אנשי המלחמה ההלכוא אתו קרבו שימו את רגליכם על צוארי ㄷㅗㄹㄱㅗהמלכים האלה ויקרבו וישימו את רגליהם על צואריהם׃"],["6","10","25","여호수아가 또 그들에게 말하였다. “두려워하지도 말고 겁내지도 마라. 힘과 용기를 내어라. 너희가 맞서 싸우는 모든 원수에게 주님께서 이렇게 하실 것이다.”","여호수아가 외쳤다. \"두려워하지 마라, 놀라지 마라. 힘을 내어라, 용기를 가져라. 너희가 원수를 칠 때 야훼께서 그들을 모두 이렇게 해치우시리라.\"","여호수아가 그들에게 이르되 두려워하지 말며 놀라지 말고 강하고 담대하라 너희가 맞서서 싸우는 모든 대적에게 여호와께서 다 이와 같이 하시리라 하고","여호수아가 군장들에게 이르되 두려워말며 놀라지 말고 마음을 강하게 하고 담대히 하라 너희가 더불어 싸우는 모든 대적에게 여호와께서 다 이와 같이 하시리라 하고","여호수아가 그 지휘관들을 향해 다시 입을 떼었다. \"무서워하지 말아라. 두려워하지도 말아라. 놀라지도 말아라. 마음을 단단히 먹어라. 용기를 내어라. 너희가 원수들과 싸울 때 여호와께서 이같이 하시리라. 여호와께서 원수들을 이처럼 해치우실 것이라는 말이다.\"","Then Joshua said to them, “Do not be afraid or dismayed, be firm and steadfast. This is what the LORD will do to all the enemies against whom you fight.”","And Joshua said unto them, Fear not, nor be dismayed, be strong and of good courage: for thus shall the LORD do to all your enemies against whom ye fight.","Joshua said to them, \"Do not be afraid; do not be discouraged. Be strong and courageous. This is what the LORD will do to all the enemies you are going to fight.\"","rursum ait ad eos:  “Nolite timere nec paveatis; confortamini et estote robusti! Sic enim faciet Dominus cunctis hostibus vestris, adversum quos dimicatis “.","ויאמר אליהם יהושע אל תיראו ואל תחתו חזקו ואמצו כי ככה יעשה יהוה לכל איביכם אשר אתם נלחמים אותם׃"],["6","10","26","그런 다음에 여호수아는 그들을 쳐 죽여 다섯 나무에 매달아서, 저녁때까지 거기에 매달려 있게 하였다.","여호수아는 이렇게 말하고 그들을 쳐죽인 다음 나무 기둥 다섯에 하나씩 매달았다. 그들은 저녁때까지 나무에 매달려 있었다.","그 후에 여호수아가 그 왕들을 쳐죽여 다섯 나무에 매달고 저녁까지 나무에 달린 채로 두었다가","그 후에 여호수아가 그 왕들을 쳐 죽여 다섯 나무에 매어 달고 석양까지 나무에 달린대로 두었다가","여호수아는 이렇게 말을 하고는 아모리의 다섯 왕을 죽이고 각각 한 사람씩 다섯 나무에 매달았다. 해질 무렵까지 그렇게 나무 위에 그들의 시체를 그대로 매달아 두었다.","Thereupon Joshua struck and killed the kings, and hanged them on five trees, where they remained hanging until evening.","And afterward Joshua smote them, and slew them, and hanged them on five trees: and they were hanging upon the trees until the evening.","Then Joshua struck and killed the kings and hung them on five trees, and they were left hanging on the trees until evening.","Percussitque Iosue et interfecit eos atque suspendit super quinque ligna; fueruntque suspensi usque ad vesperum.","ויכם יהושע אחרי כן וימיתם ויתלם על חמשה עצים ויהיו תלוים על העצים עד הערב׃"],["6","10","27","해가 질 때에 여호수아가 명령하자, 사람들은 그들을 나무에서 내려 그들이 숨었던 동굴에 내던지고, 그 굴 어귀를 큰 돌들로 막아 놓았다. 그것이 바로 오늘날까지 남아 있다.","해 질 무렵에 여호수아의 명령을 받아 사람들은 그 시체를 나무에서 내려 그들이 숨었던 동굴에 넣고 큰 돌로 동굴 입구를 막았다. 그것이 오늘날까지 그대로 있다.","해 질 때에 여호수아가 명령하매 그들의 시체를 나무에서 내려 그들이 숨었던 굴 안에 던지고 굴 어귀를 큰 돌로 막았더니 오늘까지 그대로 있더라","해 질 때에 여호수아가 명하매 그 시체를 나무에서 내리어 그들의 숨었던 굴에 들여던지고 굴 어귀를 큰 돌로 막았더니 오늘날까지 있더라","해가 질 때에 여호수아가 사람들에게 명하여 그 왕들의 시체를 나무에서 끌어내리게 하였다. 그런 다음 그들이 숨어 왔던 동굴에 다시 그 시체들을 던져 넣었다. 그러고는 그 동굴 입구를 큰 돌로 막아 놓았다. 오늘날까지 그 동굴은 큰 돌을 막아 놓은 채로 그대로 있다.","At sunset Joshua commanded that they be taken down from the trees and be thrown into the cave where they had hidden; over the mouth of the cave large stones were placed, which remain until this very day.","And it came to pass at the time of the going down of the sun, that Joshua commanded, and they took them down off the trees, and cast them into the cave wherein they had been hid, and laid great stones in the cave's mouth, which remain until this very day.","At sunset Joshua gave the order and they took them down from the trees and threw them into the cave where they had been hiding. At the mouth of the cave they placed large rocks, which are there to this day.","Cumque occumberet sol, praecepit Iosue, ut deponerent eos de lignis; et depositos proiecerunt in speluncam, in qua latuerant, et posuerunt super os eius saxa ingentia, quae permanent usque in praesens.","ויהי לעת בוא השמש צוה יהושע וירידום מעל העצים וישלכם אל המערה אשר נחבאו שם וישמו אבנים גדלות על פי המערה עד עצם היום הזה׃"],["6","10","28","그날에 여호수아는 마케다를 점령하고 그 성읍의 주민들과 임금을 칼로 쳐 죽였다. 그들과 성읍에 있는 나머지 사람들을 모조리 완전 봉헌물로 바치고, 생존자를 하나도 남기지 않았다. 그는 예리코 임금에게 한 것처럼 마케다 임금에게도 그대로 하였다.","같은 날 여호수아는 막케다를 공략하고 그 성 주민과 왕을 칼로 쳐서 숨쉬는 것이면 하나도 살려두지 않고 모조리 죽였다. 여호수아는 막케다 왕을 예리고 왕처럼 해치웠다.","그 날에 여호수아가 막게다를 취하고 칼날로 그 성읍과 왕을 쳐서 그 성읍과 그 중에 있는 모든 사람을 진멸하여 바치고 한 사람도 남기지 아니하였으니 막게다 왕에게 행한 것이 여리고 왕에게 행한 것과 같았더라","그날에 여호수아가 막게다를 취하고 칼날로 그 성읍과 왕을 쳐서 그 성읍과 그 중에 있는 모든 사람을 진멸하여 한 사람도 남기지 아니하였으니 막게다 왕에게 행한 것이 여리고 왕에게 행한 것과 일반이었더라","그날 또 여호수아는 막게다라는 성읍을 쳐들어가 점령하였다. 그는 칼을 휘둘러 그 성의 왕을 쳐죽였다. 그리고 성읍에 살고 있는 사람들을 한 사람도 남기지 않고 모조리 쳐죽였다. 여호수아가 이끄는 이스라엘군이 여리고 왕을 내리쳤던 것처럼 이 막게다성의 왕도 고꾸라뜨렸던 것이다.","Makkedah, too, Joshua captured and put to the sword at that time. He put the city, its king, and every person in it under the ban, leaving no survivors. Thus he did to the king of Makkedah what he had done to the king of Jericho.","And that day Joshua took Makkedah, and smote it with the edge of the sword, and the king thereof he utterly destroyed, them, and all the souls that were therein; he let none remain: and he did to the king of Makkedah as he did unto the king of Jericho.","That day Joshua took Makkedah. He put the city and its king to the sword and totally destroyed everyone in it. He left no survivors. And he did to the king of Makkedah as he had done to the king of Jericho.","Eodem quoque die Macedam cepit Iosue et percussit eam in ore gladii regemque illius interfecit et omnes habitatores eius; non dimisit in ea ullas reliquias fecitque regi Maceda, sicut fecerat regi Iericho.","ואת מקדה לכד יהושע ביום ההוא ויכה לפי חרב ואת מלכה החרם אותם ואת כל הנפש אשר בה לא השאיר שריד ויעש למלך מקדה כאשר עשה למלך יריחו׃"],["6","10","29","그러고 나서 여호수아는 온 이스라엘과 함께 마케다에서 리브나로 나아가, 리브나와 싸웠다.","여호수아는 온 이스라엘을 거느리고 막케다에서 다시 리브나로 발길을 돌려 리브나를 쳤다.","여호수아가 온 이스라엘과 더불어 막게다에서 립나로 나아가서 립나와 싸우매","여호수아가 온 이스라엘로 더불어 막게다에서 립나로 나아가서 립나와 싸우매","막게다를 점령하고 난 뒤 여호수아가 이끄는 이스라엘군은 막게다를 떠나 립나로 향하였다. 립나 사람들과 이스라엘군은 일대 접전을 벌였다.","Joshua then passed on with all Israel from Makkedah to Libnah, and attacked it,","Then Joshua passed from Makkedah, and all Israel with him, unto Libnah, and fought against Libnah:","Then Joshua and all Israel with him moved on from Makkedah to Libnah and attacked it.","Transivit cum omni Israel de Maceda in Lobna et pugnabat contra eam.","ויעבר יהושע וכל ישראל עמו ממקדה לבנה וילחם עם לבנה׃"],["6","10","30","주님께서는 그 성읍도 임금과 함께 이스라엘의 손에 넘겨주셨다. 여호수아는 그 성읍과 그 안에 있는 사람들을 모조리 칼로 쳐서, 생존자를 하나도 남기지 않았다. 그는 예리코 임금에게 한 것처럼 그 성읍의 임금에게도 그대로 하였다.","야훼께서는 그 성과 왕도 이스라엘 손에 부치셨다. 이스라엘은 숨쉬는 것이면 하나도 살려두지 않고 모조리 칼로 쳐죽였고 그 왕도 예리고 왕을 해치운 것처럼 해치웠다.","여호와께서 또 그 성읍과 그 왕을 이스라엘의 손에 붙이신지라 칼날로 그 성읍과 그 중의 모든 사람을 쳐서 멸하여 한 사람도 남기지 아니하였으니 그 왕에게 행한 것이 여리고 왕에게 행한 것과 같았더라","여호와께서 또 그 성읍과 그 왕을 이스라엘의 손에 붙이신지라 칼날로 그 성읍과 그 중의 모든 사람을 쳐서 멸하여 한 사람도 남기지 아니하였으니 그 왕에게 행한 것이 여리고 왕에게 행한 것과 일반이었더라","이 싸움에서도 역시 여호와께서 이스라엘군이 승리를 거두게 하셨다. 립나 사람들을 이스라엘군의 손아귀에서 꼼짝못하게 하셨다. 이스라엘군은 그 성에 살고 있는 사람들을 한 사람도 남기지 않고 모조리 쳐죽였다. 여호수아가 이끄는 이스라엘군은 여리고성의 왕을 고꾸라뜨렸던 것처럼 립나성의 왕을 고꾸라뜨렸다.","and the LORD delivered it, with its king, into the power of Israel. He put it to the sword with every person there, leaving no survivors. Thus he did to its king what he had done to the king of Jericho.","And the LORD delivered it also, and the king thereof, into the hand of Israel; and he smote it with the edge of the sword, and all the souls that were therein; he let none remain in it; but did unto the king thereof as he did unto the king of Jericho.","The LORD also gave that city and its king into Israel's hand. The city and everyone in it Joshua put to the sword. He left no survivors there. And he did to its king as he had done to the king of Jericho.","Quam tradidit Dominus cum rege suo in manu Israel, percusseruntque urbem in ore gladii et omnes habitatores eius; non dimiserunt in ea ullas reliquias feceruntque regi Lobna, sicut fecerant regi Iericho.","ויתן יהוה גם אותה ביד ישראל ואת מלכה ויכה לפי חרב ואת כל הנפש אשר בה לא השאיר בה שריד ויעש למלכה כאשר עשה למלך יריחו׃"],["6","10","31","여호수아는 온 이스라엘과 함께 리브나에서 라키스로 나아가, 진을 치고 그곳을 공격하였다.","여호수아는 온 이스라엘을 거느리고 리브나에서 라기스로 발길을 돌려 진을 치고 라기스를 쳤다.","여호수아가 또 온 이스라엘과 더불어 립나에서 라기스로 나아가서 대진하고 싸우더니","여호수아가 또 온 이스라엘로 더불어 립나에서 라기스로 나아가서 대진하고 싸우더니","이렇게 싸움을 치른 뒤 여호수아가 이끄는 온 이스라엘군은 립나를 떠나 라기스를 향하여 떠났다. 라기스와 일대 접전을 벌이려고 진지를 구축하였다.","Joshua next passed on with all Israel from Libnah to Lachish, where they set up a camp during the attack.","And Joshua passed from Libnah, and all Israel with him, unto Lachish, and encamped against it, and fought against it:","Then Joshua and all Israel with him moved on from Libnah to Lachish; he took up positions against it and attacked it.","De Lobna transivit Iosue in Lachis cum omni Israel et, exercitu per gyrum disposito, oppugnabat eam.","ויעבר יהושע וכל ישראל עמו מלבנה לכישה ויחן עליה וילחם בה׃"],["6","10","32","주님께서는 라키스를 이스라엘의 손에 넘겨주셨다. 그래서 이스라엘은 이튿날에 그 성읍을 점령하고, 리브나에서 한 것과 똑같이 그 성읍과 그 안에 있는 사람들을 모조리 칼로 쳐 죽였다.","야훼께서 라기스도 이스라엘 손에 부치셨다. 이스라엘은 이틀 만에 그 성을 공략하고 숨쉬는 것이면 모조리 칼로 쳐서 리브나를 해치운 것처럼 해치웠다.","여호와께서 라기스를 이스라엘의 손에 넘겨 주신지라 이튿날에 그 성읍을 점령하고 칼날로 그것과 그 안의 모든 사람을 쳐서 멸하였으니 립나에 행한 것과 같았더라","여호와께서 라기스를 이스라엘의 손에 붙이신지라 이튿날에 그 성읍을 취하고 칼날로 그것과 그 중의 모든 사람을 쳐서 멸하였으니 립나에 행한 것과 일반이었더라","이번에도 여호와께서 여호수아가 이끄는 이스라엘군의 손아귀에서 라기스 사람들을 꼼짝 못하게 하셨다. 이스라엘군이 승리를 거두게 하셨던 것이다. 이튿날 라기스를 점령하여 그 성에 살고 있는 모든 사람들을 하나도 남김없이 칼날로 쓰러뜨렸다. 정말 살아 남은 사람이 하나도 없었다. 립나에서 이스라엘군이 싸웠던 것과 똑같이 파죽지세로 밀어붙었다.","The LORD delivered Lachish into the power of Israel, so that on the second day Joshua captured it and put it to the sword with every person in it, just as he had done to Libnah.","And the LORD delivered Lachish into the hand of Israel, which took it on the second day, and smote it with the edge of the sword, and all the souls that were therein, according to all that he had done to Libnah.","The LORD handed Lachish over to Israel, and Joshua took it on the second day. The city and everyone in it he put to the sword, just as he had done to Libnah.","Tradiditque Dominus Lachis in manu Israel, qui cepit eam die altero; atque percussit in ore gladii omnemque animam, quae fuerat in ea, sicut fecerat Lobna.","ויתן יהוה את לכיש ביד ישראל וילכדה ביום השני ויכה לפי חרב ואת כל הנפש אשר בה ככל אשר עשה ללבנה׃"],["6","10","33","그때에 게제르 임금 호람이 라키스를 도우러 올라왔지만, 여호수아는 그와 그의 백성도 쳐서 생존자를 하나도 남기지 않았다.","그 때에 게젤 왕 호람이 라기스를 도우려고 올라왔지만 여호수아는 그와 그의 백성을 하나도 살려두지 않고 모조리 무찔렀다.","그 때에 게셀 왕 호람이 라기스를 도우려고 올라오므로 여호수아가 그와 그의 백성을 쳐서 한 사람도 남기지 아니하였더라","때에 게셀 왕 호람이 라기스를 도우려고 올라오므로 여호수아가 그와 그 백성을 쳐서 한 사람도 남기지 아니하였더라","이때 게셀 왕 호람이 라기스성이 공격받고 있다는 말을 듣고 도우려고 달려왔다. 그러나 여호수아가 이끄는 이스라엘군은 달려드는 게셀과 그의 군대까지 모조리 쓸어 버렸다. 한사람도 생존자가 없었다.","At that time Horam, king of Gezer, came up to help Lachish, but Joshua defeated him and his people, leaving him no survivors.","Then Horam king of Gezer came up to help Lachish; and Joshua smote him and his people, until he had left him none remaining.","Meanwhile, Horam king of Gezer had come up to help Lachish, but Joshua defeated him and his army--until no survivors were left.","Eo tempore ascendit Horam rex Gazer, ut auxiliaretur Lachis; quem percussit Iosue cum omni populo eius usque ad internecionem.","אז עלה הרם מלך גזר לעזר את לכיש ויכהו יהושע ואת עמו עד בלתי השאיר לו שריד׃"],["6","10","34","여호수아는 온 이스라엘과 함께 라키스에서 에글론으로 나아가, 진을 치고 그곳을 공격하였다.","여호수아는 온 이스라엘을 거느리고 라기스에서 에글론으로 발길을 돌려 진을 치고 에글론을 쳤다.","여호수아가 온 이스라엘과 더불어 라기스에서 에글론으로 나아가서 대진하고 싸워","여호수아가 온 이스라엘로 더불어 라기스에서 에글론으로 나아가서 대진하고 싸워","여호수아가 이끄는 온 이스라엘군은 라기스를 지나 에글론으로 나아갔다. 에글론과 싸우려고 진지를 구축하였다. 드디어 에글론과 싸움이 붙었다.","From Lachish, Joshua passed on with all Israel to Eglon; encamping near it, they attacked it","And from Lachish Joshua passed unto Eglon, and all Israel with him; and they encamped against it, and fought against it:","Then Joshua and all Israel with him moved on from Lachish to Eglon; they took up positions against it and attacked it.","Transivitque de Lachis in Eglon cum omni Israel et circumdedit","ויעבר יהושע וכל ישראל עמו מלכיש עגלנה ויחנו עליה וילחמו עליה׃"],["6","10","35","그들은 그날로 그 성읍을 점령하고 사람들을 칼로 쳐 죽였다. 라키스에서 한 것과 똑같이, 그 안에 있는 사람들을 그날 모조리 완전 봉헌물로 바친 것이다.","그들은 그 날로 그 성을 공략하고 주민을 칼로 무찔러 숨쉬는 것이면 하나도 살려두지 않고 모조리 없애버렸다. 이렇게 라기스를 해치운 것처럼 해치웠다.","그 날에 그 성읍을 취하고 칼날로 그것을 쳐서 그 중에 있는 모든 사람을 당일에 진멸하여 바쳤으니 라기스에 행한 것과 같았더라","그 날에 그 성읍을 취하고 칼날로 그것을 쳐서 그 중에 있는 모든 사람을 당일에 진멸하였으니 라기스에 행한 것과 일반이었더라","그날로 이스라엘군은 그곳을 점령하였다. 성을 점령하여 성안에 살고 있는 사람들을 칼로 모조리 쳐죽였다. 바로 그날 칼날에 쓰러진 사람을 이루 다 헤아릴 수 없었다. 살아 남은 사람이 하나도 없었다. 라기스성을 쳤던 것과 똑같이 이스라엘군은 에글론을 내리쳤다.","and captured it the same day, putting it to the sword. On that day he put under the ban every person in it, just as he had done at Lachish.","And they took it on that day, and smote it with the edge of the sword, and all the souls that were therein he utterly destroyed that day, according to all that he had done to Lachish.","They captured it that same day and put it to the sword and totally destroyed everyone in it, just as they had done to Lachish.","atque expugnavit eam eadem die percussitque in ore gladii omnes animas, quae erant in ea, iuxta omnia, quae fecerat Lachis.","וילכדוה ביום ההוא ויכוה לפי חרב ואת כל הנפש אשר בה ביום ההוא החרים ככל אשר עשה ללכיש׃"],["6","10","36","여호수아는 온 이스라엘과 함께 에글론에서 헤브론으로 올라가 그곳을 공격하였다.","여호수아는 온 이스라엘을 거느리고 에글론에서 헤브론으로 쳐 올라가","여호수아가 또 온 이스라엘과 더불어 에글론에서 헤브론으로 올라가서 싸워","여호수아가 또 온 이스라엘로 더불어 에글론에서 헤브론으로 올라가서 싸워","그 다음 여호수아가 이끄는 이스라엘군은 에글론을 떠나 헤브론으로 올라갔다. 그들은 헤브론과 싸움을 벌여","From Eglon, Joshua went up with all Israel to Hebron, which they attacked","And Joshua went up from Eglon, and all Israel with him, unto Hebron; and they fought against it:","Then Joshua and all Israel with him went up from Eglon to Hebron and attacked it.","Ascendit quoque cum omni Israel de Eglon in Hebron et pugnavit contra eam.","ויעל יהושע וכל ישראל עמו מעגלונה חברונה וילחמו עליה׃"],["6","10","37","그들은 그 성읍을 점령하고, 에글론에서 한 것과 똑같이 임금과 그곳에 딸린 모든 성읍, 그리고 헤브론에 있는 사람들을 모조리 칼로 쳐서 생존자를 하나도 남기지 않았다. 그 성읍과 그 안에 있는 사람들을 모조리 완전 봉헌물로 바친 것이다.","그 성을 공략하고 왕과 모든 위성 마을의 주민을 칼날로 무찔러 모조리 없앴다. 에글론에서처럼 그는 그 성을 진멸하고 숨쉬는 것이면 하나도 살려두지 않고 죽여버렸다.","그 성읍을 점령하고 그것과 그 왕과 그 속한 성읍들과 그 중의 모든 사람을 칼날로 쳐서 하나도 남기지 아니하였으니 그 성읍들과 그 중의 모든 사람을 진멸하여 바친 것이 에글론에 행한 것과 같았더라","그 성읍을 취하고 그것과 그 왕과 그 속한 성읍들과 그 중의 모든 사람을 칼날로 쳐서 하나도 남기지 아니하였으니 그 성읍과 그 중의 모든 사람을 진멸한 것이 에글론에 행한 것과 일반이었더라","점령하고는 칼날로 헤브론의 왕뿐만 아니라 그에 딸려 있는 여러 성읍까지도 모조리 쓸어 버렸다. 그 성안에 살고 있는 사람들 중에 살아 남은 사람은 하나도 없었다. 이스라엘군이 에글론을 쓰러뜨리듯 헤브론을 점령하여 모조리 베어 버렸던 것이다.","and captured. They put it to the sword with its king, all its cities, and every person there, leaving no survivors, just as Joshua had done to Eglon. He put it under the ban and every person in it.","And they took it, and smote it with the edge of the sword, and the king thereof, and all the cities thereof, and all the souls that were therein; he left none remaining, according to all that he had done to Eglon; but destroyed it utterly, and all the souls that were therein.","They took the city and put it to the sword, together with its king, its villages and everyone in it. They left no survivors. Just as at Eglon, they totally destroyed it and everyone in it.","Cepitque eam et percussit in ore gladii, regem quoque eius et omnia oppida eius universasque animas, quae ibi fuerant commoratae; non reliquit ullas reliquias: sicut fecerat Eglon, sic fecit et Hebron, cuncta, quae in ea repperit, consumens gladio.","וילכדוה ויכוה לפי חרב ואת מלכה ואת כל עריה ואת כל הנפש אשר בה לא השאיר שריד ככל אשר עשה לעגלון ויחרם אותה ואת כל הנפש אשר בה׃"],["6","10","38","여호수아는 온 이스라엘과 함께 드비르로 돌아가서 그곳을 공격하였다.","여호수아는 온 이스라엘을 거느리고 돌아와서 드빌을 쳤다.","여호수아가 온 이스라엘과 더불어 돌아와서 드빌에 이르러 싸워","여호수아가 온 이스라엘로 더불어 돌아와서 드빌에 이르러 싸워","여호수아가 이끄는 온 이스라엘군은 방향을 바꾸어 드빌로 향하였다. 그들은 드빌과 그에 딸려 있는 여러 성읍을 공격하여","Then Joshua and all Israel turned back to Debir and attacked it,","And Joshua returned, and all Israel with him, to Debir; and fought against it:","Then Joshua and all Israel with him turned around and attacked Debir.","Inde reversus cum omni Israel in Dabir oppugnavit","וישב יהושע וכל ישראל עמו דברה וילחם עליה׃"],["6","10","39","그는 임금과 그 성읍과 그곳에 딸린 모든 성읍을 점령하고 사람들을 칼로 쳐 죽였다. 그 성읍에 있는 사람들을 모조리 완전 봉헌물로 바쳐, 생존자를 하나도 남기지 않았다. 그는 헤브론에서 한 것처럼, 그리고 리브나와 그 임금에게 한 것처럼 드비르와 그 임금에게도 그렇게 하였다.","여호수아는 그 성과 모든 위성 마을을 공략하여 왕을 사로잡고 사람들을 칼로 무찔렀다. 그리고 숨쉬는 것이면 하나도 살려두지 않고 모조리 죽여버렸다. 그는 드빌과 그 왕을 헤브론을 해치운 것처럼, 리브나와 그 왕을 해치운 것처럼 그렇게 해치웠다.","그 성읍과 그 왕과 그 속한 성읍들을 점령하고 칼날로 그 성읍을 쳐서 그 안의 모든 사람을 진멸하여 바치고 하나도 남기지 아니하였으니 드빌과 그 왕에게 행한 것이 헤브론에 행한 것과 같았으며 립나와 그 왕에게 행한 것과 같았더라","그 성읍과 그 왕과 그 속한 성읍들을 취하고 칼날로 그 성읍을 쳐서 그 중의 모든 사람을 진멸하고 하나도 남기지 아니하였으니 드빌과 그 왕에게 행한 것이 헤브론에 행한 것과 일반이요 립나와 그 왕에게 행한 것과 일반이었더라","점령하고 드빌의 왕뿐만 아니라 그 성안에 살고 있는 사람들까지 모조리 칼로 베어 버렸다. 이스라엘군의 칼날에 쓰러지지 않은 사람이 하나도 없었다. 헤브론을 쳐서 쓰러뜨렸던 것처럼, 또 립나와 그 왕을 칼로 쓰러뜨렸던 것처럼 이스라엘군은 드빌을 쳤다.","capturing it with its king and all its cities. They put them to the sword and put under the ban every person in it, leaving no survivors. Thus he did to Debir and its king what he had done to Hebron, as well as to Libnah and its king.","And he took it, and the king thereof, and all the cities thereof; and they smote them with the edge of the sword, and utterly destroyed all the souls that were therein; he left none remaining: as he had done to Hebron, so he did to Debir, and to the king thereof; as he had done also to Libnah, and to her king.","They took the city, its king and its villages, and put them to the sword. Everyone in it they totally destroyed. They left no survivors. They did to Debir and its king as they had done to Libnah and its king and to Hebron.","et cepit eam; regem quoque eius et omnia oppida eius percussit in ore gladii; non dimisit in ea ullas reliquias: sicut fecerat Hebron et Lobna et regibus earum, sic fecit Dabir et regi illius.","וילכדה ואת מלכה ואת כל עריה ויכום לפי חרב ויחרימו את כל נפש אשר בה לא השאיר שריד כאשר עשה לחברון כן עשה לדברה ולמלכה וכאשר עשה ללבנה ולמלכה׃"],["6","10","40","이렇게 여호수아는 온 땅, 곧 산악 지방, 네겝, 평원 지대, 비탈 지대, 그리고 그곳의 임금들을 모조리 쳐서 생존자를 하나도 남기지 않았다. 주 이스라엘의 하느님께서 명령하신 대로 숨쉬는 모든 것을 완전 봉헌물로 바쳤다.","이렇게 하여 여호수아는 그 온 지역을 정복하였다. 산악 지대와 네겝 지방과 야산 지대와 비탈진 지역과 거기에 사는 모든 왕들을 쳐서 한 사람도 살려두지 않았다. 이렇게 이스라엘의 하느님 야훼께서 분부하신 대로 숨쉬는 것이면 무엇이든지 모조리 죽여버렸다.","이와 같이 여호수아가 그 온 땅 곧 산지와 네겝과 평지와 경사지와 그 모든 왕을 쳐서 하나도 남기지 아니하고 호흡이 있는 모든 자는 다 진멸하여 바쳤으니 이스라엘의 하나님 여호와께서 명령하신 것과 같았더라","이와 같이 여호수아가 온 땅 곧 산지와 남방과 평지와 경사지와 그 모든 왕을 쳐서 하나도 남기지 아니하고 무릇 호흡이 있는 자는 진멸하였으니 이스라엘의 하나님 여호와의 명하신 것과 같았더라","이처럼 여호수아는 온 땅을 점령하였다. 북부 산악지대와 남부 사막지대와 서부 평원지대와 동부 비탈 지역을 점령하고 그곳을 다스리는 여러 왕들도 쓰러뜨렸다. 목숨이 붙어 있는 사람치고 살아남은 사람은 한 사람도 없었다. 이 모든 것은 이스라엘이 모시고 섬기는 하나님 여호와께서 명령하신 그대로였다.","Joshua conquered the entire land; the mountain regions, the Negeb, the Shephelah, and the mountain slopes, with all their kings. He left no survivors, but put under the ban every living being, just as the LORD, the God of Israel, had commanded.","So Joshua smote all the country of the hills, and of the south, and of the vale, and of the springs, and all their kings: he left none remaining, but utterly destroyed all that breathed, as the LORD God of Israel commanded.","So Joshua subdued the whole region, including the hill country, the Negev, the western foothills and the mountain slopes, together with all their kings. He left no survivors. He totally destroyed all who breathed, just as the LORD, the God of Israel, had commanded.","Percussit itaque Iosue omnem terram: montanam et Nageb atque Sephelam et declivia cum regibus suis; non dimisit in ea ullas reliquias, sed omne, quod spirare poterat, interfecit, sicut praeceperat Dominus, Deus Israel.","ויכה יהושע את כל הארץ ההר והנגב והשפלה והאשדות ואת כל מלכיהם לא השאיר שריד ואת כל הנשמה החרים כאשר צוה יהוה אלהי ישראל׃"],["6","10","41","여호수아는 또 카데스 바르네아에서 가자까지, 그리고 고센의 온 땅과 기브온까지 모조리 쳤다.","여호수아는 카데스바르네아에서 가자에 이르기까지 정복하고 또 기브온에 이르는 고센의 전지역을 정복하였다.","여호수아가 또 가데스 바네아에서 가사까지와 온 고센 땅을 기브온에 이르기까지 치매","여호수아가 또 가데스 바네아에서 가사까지와 온 고센 땅을 기브온에 이르기까지 치매","여호수아가 점령하였던 땅은 구체적으로 가데스바네아에서 가사까지 또 기브온까지 펼쳐져 있는 ㄱ) 고센의 전지역이다. 여호수아가 이끄는 이스라엘군은 이 지역을 모두 차지하였다. (ㄱ. 유다 산지의 남부에 있는 이 고센은 애굽의 고센과 다르다(창47:28))","Joshua conquered them from Kadesh-barnea to Gaza, and all the land of Goshen to Gibeon.","And Joshua smote them from Kadeshbarnea even unto Gaza, and all the country of Goshen, even unto Gibeon.","Joshua subdued them from Kadesh Barnea to Gaza and from the whole region of Goshen to Gibeon.","Et percussit eos a Cadesbarne usque Gazam, omnem terram Gosen usque Gabaon,","ויכם יהושע מקדש ברנע ועד עזה ואת כל ארץ גשן ועד גבעון׃"],["6","10","42","이렇게 여호수아는 이 모든 임금과 그들의 땅을 단 한 번에 점령하였다. 주 이스라엘의 하느님께서 이스라엘을 위하여 싸워 주셨기 때문이다.","이스라엘의 하느님 야훼께서 이스라엘 편에 서서 싸워주셨기 때문에 여호수아는 한번 출정하여 이 모든 왕들을 사로잡고 영토를 점령하였던 것이다.","이스라엘의 하나님 여호와께서 이스라엘을 위하여 싸우셨으므로 여호수아가 이 모든 왕들과 그들의 땅을 단번에 빼앗으니라","이스라엘의 하나님 여호와께서 이스라엘을 위하여 싸우신고로 여호수아가 이 모든 왕과 그 땅을 단번에 취하니라","이스라엘이 모시고 섬기는 하나님 여호와께서 이스라엘 편에 서서 도와주심으로 이스라엘군은 가는 곳마다 쉽게 점령할 수 있었다. 그 땅을 다스리던 왕들을 전부 쓰러뜨렸던 것은 두말할 필요도 없다.","All these kings and their lands Joshua captured all at once, for the LORD, the God of Israel, fought for Israel.","And all these kings and their land did Joshua take at one time, because the LORD God of Israel fought for Israel.","All these kings and their lands Joshua conquered in one campaign, because the LORD, the God of Israel, fought for Israel.","universosque reges et regiones eorum uno cepit impetu; Dominus enim, Deus Israel, pugnabat pro Israel.","ואת כל המלכים האלה ואת ארצם לכד יהושע פעם אחת כי יהוה אלהי ישראל נלחם לישראל׃"],["6","10","43","그런 다음에 여호수아와 온 이스라엘은 길갈 진영으로 돌아갔다.","그리고 나서 여호수아는 온 이스라엘을 거느리고 길갈 진지로 돌아왔다.","여호수아가 온 이스라엘과 더불어 길갈 진영으로 돌아왔더라","여호수아가 온 이스라엘로 더불어 길갈 진으로 돌아왔더라","이렇게 싸움을 마친 이스라엘군은 길갈에 있는 진영으로 되돌아왔다.","Thereupon Joshua with all Israel returned to the camp at Gilgal.","And Joshua returned, and all Israel with him, unto the camp to Gilgal.","Then Joshua returned with all Israel to the camp at Gilgal. JOS","Reversusque est Iosue cum omni Israel ad locum castrorum in Galgala.","וישב יהושע וכל ישראל עמו אל המחנה הגלגלה׃"],["6","11","1","하초르 임금 야빈은 이 소식을 듣고 마돈 임금 요밥, 시므론 임금, 악삽 임금에게,","이런 소문들을 듣고 하솔 왕 야빈은 마돈 왕 요밥, 시므론 왕, 악삽 왕,","하솔 왕 야빈이 이 소식을 듣고 마돈 왕 요밥과 시므론 왕과 악삽 왕과","하솔 왕 야빈이 이 소식을 듣고 마돈 왕 요밥과 시므론 왕과 악삽 왕과","하솔 왕 야빈은 이스라엘군이 혁혁한 전승을 계속 거두고 있다는 말을 듣고 아래와 같이 여러 왕에게 사람을 보냈다. 마돈 왕 요밥과 시므론 왕과 악삽 왕과","When Jabin, king of Hazor, learned of this, he sent a message to Jobab, king of Madon, to the king of Shimron, to the king of Achshaph,","And it came to pass, when Jabin king of Hazor had heard those things, that he sent to Jobab king of Madon, and to the king of Shimron, and to the king of Achshaph,","When Jabin king of Hazor heard of this, he sent word to Jobab king of Madon, to the kings of Shimron and Acshaph,","Quae cum audisset Iabin rex Asor, misit ad Iobab regem Madon et ad regern Semeron atque ad regem Achsaph,","ויהי כשמע יבין מלך חצור וישלח אל יובב מלך מדון ואל מלך שמרון ואל מלך אכשף׃"],["6","11","2","그리고 북부 산악 지방, 킨네렛 남쪽 아라바, 평원 지대, 서쪽의 도르 고지대에 있는 임금들에게,","북쪽 산악 지대에 있는 왕들, 긴네렛 남쪽 벌판에 있는 왕들, 야산 지대에 있는 왕들과 또 바다 쪽으로 도르 언덕에 있는 왕들에게 전갈을 보냈다.","및 북쪽 산지와 긴네롯 남쪽 아라바와 평지와 서쪽 돌의 높은 곳에 있는 왕들과","및 북방 산지와 긴네롯 남편 아라바와 평지와 서방 돌의 높은 곳에 있는 왕들과","북쪽 산악지대를 다스리고 있는 왕과 긴네롯 남쪽 아라바를 다스리고 있는 왕과 야산시대를 다스리고 있는 왕과 바다 쪽으로 언덕빼기가 죽 널려 있는 돌을 다스리는 왕에게 전갈을 보냈다.","and to the northern kings in the mountain regions and in the Arabah near Chinneroth, in the Shephelah, and in Naphath-dor to the west.","And to the kings that were on the north of the mountains, and of the plains south of Chinneroth, and in the valley, and in the borders of Dor on the west,","and to the northern kings who were in the mountains, in the Arabah south of Kinnereth, in the western foothills and in Naphoth Dor on the west;","ad reges quoque aquilonis, qui habitabant in montanis et in Araba contra meridiem Chenereth, in Sephela quoque et in regionibus Dor iuxta mare,","ואל המלכים אשר מצפון בהר ובערבה נגב כנרות ובשפלה ובנפות דור מים׃"],["6","11","3","또 동쪽과 서쪽의 가나안족, 산악 지방의 아모리족, 히타이트족, 프리즈족, 여부스족, 미츠파 땅 헤르몬 산 밑의 히위족에게 전갈을 보냈다.","동쪽과 서쪽에는 가나안족이 살았고 산악 지대에는 아모리족, 헷족, 브리즈족, 여부스족이 살았고 미스바 지방 헤르몬 산 밑에는 히위족이 살고 있었다.","동쪽과 서쪽의 가나안 족속과 아모리 족속과 헷 족속과 브리스 족속과 산지의 여부스 족속과 미스바 땅 헤르몬 산 아래 히위 족속에게 사람을 보내매","동서편 가나안 사람과 아모리 사람과 헷 사람과 브리스 사람과 산지의 여부스 사람과 미스바 땅 헤르몬산 아래 히위 사람들에게 사람을 보내매","또한 요단강 동서쪽에 살고 있는 가나안 사람과 아모리 사람과 헷 사람과 브리스 사람과 산악지대에 살고 있는 여부스 사람, 그리고 미스바 땅의 헤르몬산 기슭에 살고 있는 히위 사람에게도 사람을 보내었다.","These were Canaanites to the east and west, Amorites, Hittites, Perizzites, and Jebusites in the mountain regions, and Hivites at the foot of Hermon in the land of Mizpah.","And to the Canaanite on the east and on the west, and to the Amorite, and the Hittite, and the Perizzite, and the Jebusite in the mountains, and to the Hivite under Hermon in the land of Mizpeh.","to the Canaanites in the east and west; to the Amorites, Hittites, Perizzites and Jebusites in the hill country; and to the Hivites below Hermon in the region of Mizpah.","Chananaeum in oriente et occidente, et Amorraeum atque Hetthaeum ac Pherezaeum et Iebusaeum in montanis, Hevaeum quoque, qui habitabat ad radices Hermon in terra Maspha.","הכנעני ממזרח ומים והאמרי והחתי והפרזי והיבוסי בהר והחוי תחת חרמון בארץ המצפה׃"],["6","11","4","그들이 저희의 모든 군대를 거느리고 나오니, 병사들의 수가 바닷가의 모래처럼 많고 군마와 병거도 아주 많았다.","그들이 전군을 거느리고 출동하니, 그 군대는 바닷가 모래처럼 많았고 기마와 병거 또한 이루 셀 수 없이 많았다.","그들이 그 모든 군대를 거느리고 나왔으니 백성이 많아 해변의 수많은 모래 같고 말과 병거도 심히 많았으며","그들이 그 모든 군대를 거느리고 나왔으니 민중이 많아 해변의 수다한 모래 같고 말과 병거도 심히 많았으며","그들이 소식을 전해 받고 모두 자기 군대를 이끌고 모여들었다. 이렇게 모여든 사람들이 어찌나 많았던지 바닷가에 쌓여 있는 모래처럼 그 수를 이루 다 헤아릴 수 없었다. 또한 그들이 끌고 온 군마와 병거의 수도 어마어마하였다.","They came out with all their troops, an army numerous as the sands on the seashore, and with a multitude of horses and chariots.","And they went out, they and all their hosts with them, much people, even as the sand that is upon the sea shore in multitude, with horses and chariots very many.","They came out with all their troops and a large number of horses and chariots--a huge army, as numerous as the sand on the seashore.","Egressique sunt omnes cum turmis suis, populus multus nimis sicut arena, quae est in litore maris, equi quoque et currus immensae multitudinis;","ויצאו הם וכל מחניהם עמם עם רב כחול אשר על שפת הים לרב וסוס ורכב רב מאד׃"],["6","11","5","이 임금들이 모두 모여 이스라엘과 싸우려고 메롬 물가로 가서 함께 진을 쳤다.","그 왕들은 각기 출동하여 집결하기로 약속한 메롬 샘터에 와서 이스라엘과 싸우려고 진을 쳤다.","이 왕들이 모두 모여 나아와서 이스라엘과 싸우려고 메롬 물 가에 함께 진 쳤더라","이 왕들이 모여 나아와서 이스라엘과 싸우려고 메롬 물가에 함께 진 쳤더라","이 왕들이 모두 한자리에 모여 이스라엘군에 대항하여 싸우려고 메롬 시냇가에 진을 쳤다.","All these kings made a pact and together they marched to the waters of Merom, where they encamped to fight against Israel.","And when all these kings were met together, they came and pitched together at the waters of Merom, to fight against Israel.","All these kings joined forces and made camp together at the Waters of Merom, to fight against Israel.","conveneruntque omnes reges isti et castrametati sunt in unum ad aquas Merom, ut pugnarent contra Israel.","ויועדו כל המלכים האלה ויבאו ויחנו יחדו אל מי מרום להלחם עם ישראל׃"],["6","11","6","그때에 주님께서 여호수아에게 말씀하셨다. “저들을 두려워하지 마라. 내일 이맘때, 내가 이스라엘 앞에 그들을 모두 시체로 넘겨주겠다. 너는 그들의 군마 뒷다리 힘줄을 끊고 병거들을 불에 태워라.”","그 때 야훼께서 여호수아에게 이르셨다. \"그들을 두려워하지 마라. 내일 이맘때쯤 내가 그들을 모두 이스라엘 앞에서 박살내리니 네가 군마의 다리 힘줄을 끊고 병거를 태워버릴 것이다.\"","여호와께서 여호수아에게 이르시되 그들로 말미암아 두려워하지 말라 내일 이맘때에 내가 그들을 이스라엘 앞에 넘겨 주어 몰살시키리니 너는 그들의 말 뒷발의 힘줄을 끊고 그들의 병거를 불사르라 하시니라","여호와께서 여호수아에게 이르시되 그들을 인하여 두려워 말라 내일 이맘때에 내가 그들을 이스라엘 앞에 붙여 몰살시키리니 너는 그들의 말 뒷발의 힘줄을 끊고 불로 그 병거를 사르라","이때 여호와께서 여호수아에게 이르셨다. \"저들이 저렇게 몰려들었다고 해서 무서워할 필요는 하나도 없다. 내일 이맘때쯤에 내가 너희 이스라엘이 보고 있는 앞에서 저들 모두를 쳐부수고야 말리라. 그때에는 저들이 끌고 온 군마의 힘줄을 너희가 끊어 버릴 수 있으리라. 저들이 타고 온 병거를 불살라 버릴 수 있으리라\"","The LORD said to Joshua, “Do not fear them, for by this time tomorrow I will present them slain to Israel. You must hamstring their horses and burn their chariots.”","And the LORD said unto Joshua, Be not afraid because of them: for to morrow about this time will I deliver them up all slain before Israel: thou shalt hough their horses, and burn their chariots with fire.","The LORD said to Joshua, \"Do not be afraid of them, because by this time tomorrow I will hand all of them over to Israel, slain. You are to hamstring their horses and burn their chariots.\"","Dixitque Dominus ad Iosue:  “Ne timeas eos! Cras enim hac eadem hora ego tradam omnes istos occisos in conspectu Israel: equos eorum subnervabis et currus igne combures “.","ויאמר יהוה אל יהושע אל תירא מפניהם כי מחר כעת הזאת אנכי נתן את כלם חללים לפני ישראל את סוסיהם תעקר ואת מרכבתיהם תשרף באש׃"],["6","11","7","그리하여 여호수아는 모든 병사와 함께 메롬 물가에 있는 그들에게 갑자기 밀어닥쳐 그들을 덮쳤다.","여호수아는 전군을 이끌고 메롬 샘터로 가서 갑자기 들이덮쳤다.","이에 여호수아가 모든 군사와 함께 메롬 물 가로 가서 갑자기 습격할 때에","이에 여호수아가 모든 군사와 함께 메롬 물가로 가서 졸지에 습격할 때에","이 말에 용기를 얻은 이스라엘군은 여호수아의 지휘 아래 야빈의 주도하에 모여 있는 연합군이 진치고 있는 메롬 시냇가를 갑자기 공격하였다.","Joshua with his whole army came upon them suddenly at the waters of Merom and fell upon them.","So Joshua came, and all the people of war with him, against them by the waters of Merom suddenly; and they fell upon them.","So Joshua and his whole army came against them suddenly at the Waters of Merom and attacked them,","Venitque Iosue et omnis exercitus cum eo adversus illos ad aquas Merom subito, et irruerunt super eos.","ויבא יהושע וכל עם המלחמה עמו עליהם על מי מרום פתאם ויפלו בהם׃"],["6","11","8","주님께서 그들을 이스라엘의 손에 넘겨주셨으므로, 이스라엘 사람들은 그들을 쳐 죽이고 ‘큰 시돈’과 미스르폿 마임까지, 동쪽으로는 미츠파 골짜기까지 뒤쫓아 갔다. 그러면서 그들 가운데 생존자가 하나도 남지 않을 때까지 모두 쳐 죽였다.","야훼께서 그들을 이스라엘의 손에 부치셨으므로 이스라엘은 그들을 무찔러 대시돈과 미스르봇마임과 동쪽으로는 미스바 골짜기까지 따라가며 한 사람도 남기지 않고 쳐죽였다.","여호와께서 그들을 이스라엘의 손에 넘겨 주셨기 때문에 그들을 격파하고 큰 시돈과 미스르봇 마임까지 추격하고 동쪽으로는 미스바 골짜기까지 추격하여 한 사람도 남기지 아니하고 쳐죽이고","여호와께서 그들을 이스라엘의 손에 붙이신고로 그들을 격파하고 큰 시돈과 미스르봇 마임까지 쫓고 동편에서는 미스바 골짜기까지 쫓아가서 한 사람도 남기지 아니하고 쳐죽이고","여호와께서는 이미 야빈의 동맹군을 이스라엘군의 손에 넘겨 주셨으므로 이스라엘군은 그들을 격파하였다. 이스라엘군은 도망 치는 야빈의 동맹군을 북쪽으로는 큰 성읍 시돈과 미스르봇마임까지 동쪽으로는 미스바 골짜기까지 추격하여 쓸어 버렸다. 도망치는 동맹군 가운데서 살아 남은 사람이 하나도 없었다.","The LORD delivered them into the power of the Israelites, who defeated them and pursued them to Greater Sidon, to Misrephoth-maim, and eastward to the valley of Mizpeh. They struck them all down, leaving no survivors.","And the LORD delivered them into the hand of Israel, who smote them, and chased them unto great Zidon, and unto Misrephothmaim, and unto the valley of Mizpeh eastward; and they smote them, until they left them none remaining.","and the LORD gave them into the hand of Israel. They defeated them and pursued them all the way to Greater Sidon, to Misrephoth Maim, and to the Valley of Mizpah on the east, until no survivors were left.","Tradiditque illos Dominus in manu Israel; qui percusserunt eos et persecuti sunt usque ad Sidonem magnam et Maserephoth in occidente campumque Maspha in oriente. Ita percussit omnes, ut nullas dimitteret ex eis reliquias;","ויתנם יהוה ביד ישראל ויכום וירדפום עד צידון רבה ועד משרפות מים ועד בקעת מצפה מזרחה ויכם עד בלתי השאיר להם שריד׃"],["6","11","9","여호수아는 주님께서 자기에게 말씀하신 대로 하였다. 곧 그들의 군마 뒷다리 힘줄을 끊고 병거들을 불에 태워 버린 것이다.","여호수아는 야훼께 받은 명령대로 그들을 해치웠다. 군마의 다리 힘줄을 끊고 병거를 태워버렸다.","여호수아가 여호와께서 자기에게 명령하신 대로 행하여 그들의 말 뒷발의 힘줄을 끊고 그들의 병거를 불로 살랐더라","여호수아가 여호와께서 자기에게 명하신대로 행하여 그들의 말 뒷발의 힘줄을 끊고 불로 그 병거를 살랐더라","또 여호수아가 이끄는 이스라엘군은 여호와께서 말씀하신 대로 적들이 타고 온 군마의 힘줄을 끊고 병거를 불에 태워 버렸다.","Joshua did to them as the LORD had commanded: he hamstrung their horses and burned their chariots.","And Joshua did unto them as the LORD bade him: he houghed their horses, and burnt their chariots with fire.","Joshua did to them as the LORD had directed: He hamstrung their horses and burned their chariots.","fecit sicut praeceperat ei Dominus: equos eorum subnervavit currusque combussit.","ויעש להם יהושע כאשר אמר לו יהוה את סוסיהם עקר ואת מרכבתיהם שרף באש׃"],["6","11","10","그때 여호수아는 돌아오는 길에 하초르를 점령하고 그 임금을 칼로 쳐 죽였다. 하초르가 전에 이 모든 왕국의 우두머리였기 때문이다.","여호수아는 돌아오는 길에 하솔을 공략하고 그 왕을 칼로 쳐죽였다. 일찍이 하솔은 이 여러 왕국의 종주국이었다.","하솔은 본래 그 모든 나라의 머리였더니 그 때에 여호수아가 돌아와서 하솔을 취하고 그 왕을 칼날로 쳐죽이고","하솔은 본래 그 모든 나라의 머리였더니 그때에 여호수아가 돌아와서 하솔을 취하고 그 왕을 칼날로 쳐 죽이고","이 당시 하솔은 주변에 있던 여러 나라의 종주국이었는데, 여호수아가 이끄는 이스라엘군은 야빈의 동맹군을 무찌르고 돌아오는 길에 그 하솔성으로 쳐들어가 성을 점령하고 하솔의 왕을 죽였을뿐만 아니라","At that time Joshua, turning back, captured Hazor and struck down its king with the sword; for Hazor formerly was the chief of all those kingdoms.","And Joshua at that time turned back, and took Hazor, and smote the king thereof with the sword: for Hazor beforetime was the head of all those kingdoms.","At that time Joshua turned back and captured Hazor and put its king to the sword. (Hazor had been the head of all these kingdoms.)","Reversusque tempore illo cepit Asor et regem eius percussit gladio. Asor enim antiquitus inter omnia regna haec principatum tenebat.","וישב יהושע בעת ההיא וילכד את חצור ואת מלכה הכה בחרב כי חצור לפנים היא ראש כל הממלכות האלה׃"],["6","11","11","또한 그 성읍에 있는 사람들을 모조리 칼로 쳐 죽여 완전 봉헌물로 바쳤다. 이렇게 그는 숨쉬는 것을 하나도 남기지 않았다. 그리고 하초르는 불에 태워 버렸다.","숨쉬는 것이면 모조리 칼로 쳐죽였다. 코에 숨이 붙어 있는 것은 하나도 살려두지 않았다. 그리고 하솔에 불을 질러버렸다.","그 가운데 모든 사람을 칼날로 쳐서 진멸하여 호흡이 있는 자는 하나도 남기지 아니하였고 또 하솔을 불로 살랐고","그 가운데 모든 사람을 칼날로 쳐서 진멸하여 호흡이 있는 자는 하나도 남기지 아니하였고 또 불로 하솔을 살랐으며","성에 살고 있던 사람도 모조리 쳐죽였다. 목숨이 붙어 있는 사람은 모두 이스라엘군의 칼날에 쓰러졌다. 또한 이스라엘군은 하솔성에 불을 질러 버렸다.","He also struck down with the sword every person there, carrying out the ban, till none was left alive. Hazor itself he burned.","And they smote all the souls that were therein with the edge of the sword, utterly destroying them: there was not any left to breathe: and he burnt Hazor with fire.","Everyone in it they put to the sword. They totally destroyed them, not sparing anything that breathed, and he burned up Hazor itself.","Percussitque omnes animas, quae ibidem morabantur; non dimisit in ea ullas reliquias, sed usque ad internecionem universa vastavit ipsamque urbem peremit incendio.","ויכו את כל הנפש אשר בה לפי חרב החרם לא נותר כל נשמה ואת חצור שרף באש׃"],["6","11","12","여호수아는 이 모든 임금의 성읍들을 점령하고 그 임금들을 사로잡아, 주님의 종 모세가 명령한 대로 칼로 쳐 죽여 완전 봉헌물로 바쳤다.","여호수아는 이렇게 야훼의 종 모세에게 받은 명령대로 그 여러 왕의 성을 다 점령하고 왕들을 사로잡아 칼로 쳐죽였다.","여호수아가 그 왕들의 모든 성읍과 그 모든 왕을 붙잡아 칼날로 쳐서 진멸하여 바쳤으니 여호와의 종 모세가 명령한 것과 같이 하였으되","여호수아가 그 왕들의 모든 성읍과 그 모든 왕을 취하여 칼날로 쳐서 진멸하여 여호와의 종 모세의 명한 것과 같이 하였으되","이렇게 여호수아가 이끄는 이스라엘군은 앞서 말한 왕들이 다스리던 모든 성읍으로 쳐들어가 점령하고 그 왕들도 쓰러뜨렸다. 여호와의 종 모세가 명령하였던 대로 이스라엘군은 칼로 그들을 모두 쳐죽였다.","All the cities of those kings, and the kings themselves, Joshua captured and put to the sword, carrying out the ban on them, as Moses, the servant of the LORD, had commanded.","And all the cities of those kings, and all the kings of them, did Joshua take, and smote them with the edge of the sword, and he utterly destroyed them, as Moses the servant of the LORD commanded.","Joshua took all these royal cities and their kings and put them to the sword. He totally destroyed them, as Moses the servant of the LORD had commanded.","Et omnes per circuitum civitates regesque earum cepit, percussit atque delevit, sicut praeceperat Moyses famulus Domini.","ואת כל ערי המלכים האלה ואת כל מלכיהם לכד יהושע ויכם לפי חרב החרים אותם כאשר צוה משה עבד יהוה׃"],["6","11","13","그러나 이스라엘은 여호수아가 불태워 버린 하초르를 제외하고는 언덕 위에 서 있는 성읍들을 하나도 불태우지 않았다.","이스라엘은 언덕에 서 있는 성은 하나도 불을 지르지 않았다. 그러나 하솔만은 여호수아가 불을 질렀던 것이다.","여호수아가 하솔만 불살랐고 산 위에 세운 성읍들은 이스라엘이 불사르지 아니하였으며","여호수아가 하솔만 불살랐고 산 위에 건축된 성읍들은 이스라엘이 불사르지 아니하였으며","여호수아가 이끄는 이스라엘군은 유독 여러 도시 국가들의 종주국이었던 하솔성에만 불을 질렀다. 언덕빼기 위에 서 있던 여러 성을 공략하였을 때에는 불을 지르지 않았다.","However, Israel did not destroy by fire any of the cities built on their mounds, except Hazor, which Joshua burned.","But as for the cities that stood still in their strength, Israel burned none of them, save Hazor only; that did Joshua burn.","Yet Israel did not burn any of the cities built on their mounds--except Hazor, which Joshua burned.","Urbes tantum, quae erant in tumulis earum sitae, non succendit Israel; unam Asor solam Iosue flamma consumpsit.","רק כל הערים העמדות על תלם לא שרפם ישראל זולתי את חצור לבדה שרף יהושע׃"],["6","11","14","이스라엘 자손들은 이 성읍들에서 나온 모든 전리품과 가축을 차지하고, 사람들은 모조리 칼로 쳐 죽여 없애 버렸다. 이렇게 숨쉬는 것은 하나도 남겨 두지 않았다.","이스라엘 백성은 이 성들에서 취한 전리품과 가축을 마음대로 가졌지만 사람이란 사람은 모조리 칼로 쳐 쓸어버렸다. 이렇게 코에 숨이 붙어 있는 것은 하나도 살려두지 않았다.","이 성읍들의 모든 재물과 가축은 이스라엘 자손들이 탈취하고 모든 사람은 칼날로 쳐서 멸하여 호흡이 있는 자는 하나도 남기지 아니하였으니","이 성읍들의 모든 재물과 가축은 이스라엘 자손들이 탈취하고 모든 사람은 칼날로 쳐서 진멸하여 호흡이 있는 자는 하나도 남기지 아니하였으니","하지만 이스라엘군은 위의 여러 성읍들을 점령하고서 가축뿐만 아니라 쓸만한 것이면 모두 다 가지고 나왔다. 그리고 살아 있는 사람은 하나도 남김없이 모조리 칼로 쳐죽였다. 목숨 붙어 있던 사람치고 살아 남은 사람은 한 사람도 없었다. 이스라엘군은 이렇게 철저하게 여러 성읍들을 공략하였던 것이다.","All the spoil and livestock of these cities the Israelites took as plunder; but the people they put to the sword, until they had destroyed the last of them, leaving none alive.","And all the spoil of these cities, and the cattle, the children of Israel took for a prey unto themselves; but every man they smote with the edge of the sword, until they had destroyed them, neither left they any to breathe.","The Israelites carried off for themselves all the plunder and livestock of these cities, but all the people they put to the sword until they completely destroyed them, not sparing anyone that breathed.","Omnemque praedam istarum urbium ac iumenta diviserunt sibi filii Israel, cunctis hominibus interfectis; nullum vivum reliquerunt.","וכל שלל הערים האלה והבהמה בזזו להם בני ישראל רק את כל האדם הכו לפי חרב עד השמדם אותם לא השאירו כל נשמה׃"],["6","11","15","주님께서 당신의 종 모세에게 명령하신 대로 모세가 여호수아에게 명령하였고, 여호수아는 또 그대로 실행하였다. 여호수아는 주님께서 모세에게 명령하신 것 가운데에서 하나도 빠뜨리지 않았다.","야훼께서 당신의 종 모세에게 명령하신 것을 모세는 다시 여호수아에게 명령하였고 여호수아는 그대로 수행하여 야훼께서 모세에게 명령하신 것이 어김없이 다 이루어졌다.","여호와께서 그의 종 모세에게 명령하신 것을 모세는 여호수아에게 명령하였고 여호수아는 그대로 행하여 여호와께서 모세에게 명하신 모든 것을 하나도 행하지 아니한 것이 없었더라","여호와께서 그종 모세에게 명하신 것을 모세는 여호수아에게 명하였고 여호수아는 그대로 행하여 여호와께서 무릇 모세에게 명하신 것을 하나도 행치 아니한 것이 없었더라","여호와께서 이미 당신의 종 모세에게 그렇게 하라고 명령하셨기 때문이다. 모세는 하나님께 받은 명령을 여호수아에게 그대로 전해주었고 여호수아는 이스라엘군을 이끌고 여러 성읍으로 쳐들어가 모세가 분부한 대로 여호와의 말씀에 순종하여 전쟁을 수행하였던 것이다.","As the LORD had commanded his servant Moses, so Moses commanded Joshua, and Joshua acted accordingly. He left nothing undone that the LORD had commanded Moses should be done.","As the LORD commanded Moses his servant, so did Moses command Joshua, and so did Joshua; he left nothing undone of all that the LORD commanded Moses.","As the LORD commanded his servant Moses, so Moses commanded Joshua, and Joshua did it; he left nothing undone of all that the LORD commanded Moses.","Sicut praeceperat Dominus Moysi servo suo, ita praecepit Moyses Iosue, et ille universa complevit; non praeteriit de universis mandatis ne unum quidem verbum, quod iusserat Dominus Moysi.","כאשר צוה יהוה את משה עבדו כן צוה משה את יהושע וכן עשה יהושע לא הסיר דבר מכל אשר צוה יהוה את משה׃"],["6","11","16","이렇게 여호수아는 이 모든 땅, 곧 산악 지방, 온 네겝 땅, 온 고센 땅, 평원 지대, 아라바, 이스라엘 산악 지방과 그 평원 지대를 정복하였다.","이렇게 하여 여호수아는 산악 지대와 네겝 온 지역과 고센 지방 전부와 야산 지대와 아라바와 이스라엘 산악 지대와 야산 지대를 점령하였다.","여호수아가 이같이 그 온 땅 곧 산지와 온 네겝과 고센 온 땅과 평지와 아라바와 이스라엘 산지와 평지를 점령하였으니","여호수아가 이같이 그 온 땅 곧 산지와 온 남방과 고센 온 땅과 평지와 아라바와 이스라엘의 산지와 그 평지를 취하였으니","이렇게 여호수아가 이끄는 이스라엘군은 다음과 같은 지역을 점령하였다. 북쪽으로는 산악지대와 남쪽으로는 야산지대, 고센 전지역과 저지대와 아라바와 이스라엘 산지와 저지대까지를 이스라엘군이 점령하였다.","So Joshua took all this land: the mountain regions, the entire Negeb, all the land of Goshen, the Shephelah, the Arabah, as well as the mountain regions and Shephelah of Israel,","So Joshua took all that land, the hills, and all the south country, and all the land of Goshen, and the valley, and the plain, and the mountain of Israel, and the valley of the same;","So Joshua took this entire land: the hill country, all the Negev, the whole region of Goshen, the western foothills, the Arabah and the mountains of Israel with their foothills,","Cepit itaque Iosue omnem terram hanc, montanam et Nageb terramque Gosen et Sephelam et Arabam montemque Israel et campestria eius,","ויקח יהושע את כל הארץ הזאת ההר ואת כל הנגב ואת כל ארץ הגשן ואת השפלה ואת הערבה ואת הר ישראל ושפלתה׃"],["6","11","17","그리고 세이르 쪽으로 솟은 할락 산에서 헤르몬 산 아래 레바논 골짜기에 있는 바알 가드까지, 모든 임금을 사로잡아 쳐 죽였다.","세일을 향하여 우뚝 선 할락 산으로부터 헤르몬 산 아래 레바논 골짜기에 있는 바알가드에 이르기까지 여호수아는 거기에 사는 모든 왕들을 사로잡아 쳐죽였다.","곧 세일로 올라가는 할락 산에서부터 헤르몬 산 아래 레바논 골짜기의 바알갓까지라 그들의 왕들을 모두 잡아 쳐죽였으며","곧 세일로 올라가는 할락산에서부터 헤르몬산 아래 레바논 골짜기의 바알갓까지라 그 모든 왕을 잡아 쳐죽였으며","곧 세일로 올라가는 할락산에서 헤르몬산 아래 레바논 골짜기에 있는 바알갓까지 전지역을 이스라엘군이 점령하고 그 지역을 다스리던 여러 왕들을 잡아죽였다.","from Mount Halak that rises toward Seir as far as Baal-gad in the Lebanon valley at the foot of Mount Hermon. All their kings he captured and put to death.","Even from the mount Halak, that goeth up to Seir, even unto Baalgad in the valley of Lebanon under mount Hermon: and all their kings he took, and smote them, and slew them.","from Mount Halak, which rises toward Seir, to Baal Gad in the Valley of Lebanon below Mount Hermon. He captured all their kings and struck them down, putting them to death.","a monte Calvo, qui ascendit Seir, usque Baalgad in planitie Libani subter montem Hermon; omnes reges eorum cepit, percussit et occidit.","מן ההר החלק העולה שעיר ועד בעל גד בבקעת הלבנון תחת הר חרמון ואת כל מלכיהם לכד ויכם וימיתם׃"],["6","11","18","여호수아는 이 모든 임금과 오랫동안 싸웠다.","오랫동안 여호수아는 이 왕들과 싸워야 했다.","여호수아가 그 모든 왕들과 싸운 지가 오랫동안이라","여호수아가 그 모든 왕과 싸운지는 여러 날이라","여호수아가 이끄는 이스라엘군이 이 지역을 다스리는 왕들과 싸우기 시작한지도 꽤 오랜 세월이 흘렀다.","Joshua waged war against all these kings for a long time.","Joshua made war a long time with all those kings.","Joshua waged war against all these kings for a long time.","Multo tempore pugnavit Iosue contra reges istos.","ימים רבים עשה יהושע את כל המלכים האלה מלחמה׃"],["6","11","19","기브온의 주민 히위족을 제외하고, 이스라엘 자손들과 평화를 이룬 성읍은 하나도 없었다. 나머지 성읍들은 모두 이스라엘 자손들이 싸워서 정복한 것이다.","기브온에 사는 히위족밖에는 이스라엘 백성과 우호 관계를 맺은 도시가 하나도 없었다. 그 밖의 도시들은 모두 싸워서 빼앗았던 것이다.","기브온 주민 히위 족속 외에는 이스라엘 자손과 화친한 성읍이 하나도 없고 이스라엘 자손이 싸워서 다 점령하였으니","기브온 거민 히위 사람 외에는 이스라엘 자손과 화친한 성읍이 하나도 없고 다 이스라엘 자손에게 쳐서 취한바 되었으니","앞서도 이야기하였듯이 기브온에 사는 히위 사람들 이외는 이 지역에 살고 있던 사람들치고 이스라엘군의 공격을 받고 쓰러지지 않은 성읍이 하나도 없었다. 모두 다 이스라엘군과 싸웠으나 한 성읍도 그들을 쓰러뜨린 성읍이 없었다. 오로지 기브온 사람들만이 이스라엘군과 평화조약을 맺어 무사할 수 있었을 뿐이다.","With the exception of the Hivites who lived in Gibeon, no city made peace with the Israelites; all were taken in battle.","There was not a city that made peace with the children of Israel, save the Hivites the inhabitants of Gibeon: all other they took in battle.","Except for the Hivites living in Gibeon, not one city made a treaty of peace with the Israelites, who took them all in battle.","Non fuit civitas, quae foedus iniret cum filiis Israel, praeter Hevaeum, qui habitabat in Gabaon: omnes bellando cepit.","לא היתה עיר אשר השלימה אל בני ישראל בלתי החוי ישבי גבעון את הכל לקחו במלחמה׃"],["6","11","20","이스라엘이 사정을 보지 않고 그 원주민들을 완전 봉헌물로 바치게 하시려고, 주님께서는 그들의 마음을 완고하게 하시어 이스라엘을 맞아 싸우게 하신 것이다. 이렇게 하여 여호수아는 주님께서 모세에게 명령하신 대로 그들을 전멸시켰다.","그들을 가차없이 전멸시키시려고 야훼께서는 그들로 하여금 고집을 세워 이스라엘과 싸우도록 하셨던 것이다. 이렇게 야훼께서는 모세에게 명령하신 대로 그들을 쓸어버리게 하셨던 것이다.","그들의 마음이 완악하여 이스라엘을 대적하여 싸우러 온 것은 여호와께서 그리하게 하신 것이라 그들을 진멸하여 바치게 하여 은혜를 입지 못하게 하시고 여호와께서 모세에게 명령하신 대로 그들을 멸하려 하심이었더라","그들의 마음이 강퍅하여 이스라엘을 대적하여 싸우러 온 것은 여호와께서 그리하게 하신 것이라 그들로 1)저주 받은 자 되게 하여 은혜를 입지 못하게 하시고 여호와께서 모세에게 명하신대로 진멸하려 하심이었더라 히, 바친 자","이 성읍들이 이스라엘군을 맞아 싸움을 하러 나왔던 것은 여호와께서 그들의 마음을 굳게 하신 까닭이었다. 곧 여러 성읍 사람들은 이스라엘군이 쳐들어온다는 풍문을 듣고 이스라엘군과 평화조약을 맺으려는 마음보다는 전쟁을 벌이려는 급한 마음만 먹었다. 그랬기 때문에 이스라엘군은 여호와께서 모세에게 명령하셨던 것처럼 인정사정 볼 것 없이 철저하게 그들을 쓸어 버렸다.","For it was the LORD’s doing to make their hearts obstinate to meet Israel in battle, that they might be put under the ban without mercy, and be destroyed as the LORD had commanded Moses.","For it was of the LORD to harden their hearts, that they should come against Israel in battle, that he might destroy them utterly, and that they might have no favour, but that he might destroy them, as the LORD commanded Moses.","For it was the LORD himself who hardened their hearts to wage war against Israel, so that he might destroy them totally, exterminating them without mercy, as the LORD had commanded Moses.","Domini enim sententia fuerat, ut indurarentur corda eorum, et pugnarent contra Israel et caderent et non mererentur ullam clementiam ac perirent, sicut praeceperat Dominus Moysi.","כי מאת יהוה היתה לחזק את לבם לקראת המלחמה את ישראל למען החרימם לבלתי היות להם תחנה כי למען השמידם כאשר צוה יהוה את משה׃"],["6","11","21","그때에 여호수아가 가서 산악 지방, 헤브론, 드비르, 아납, 유다의 모든 산악 지방, 이스라엘의 모든 산악 지방에서 아낙인들을 제거하였다. 그들이 살던 성읍들과 그들을 완전 봉헌물로 바쳤다.","그 때에 여호수아가 출동하여 산악 지대에서 아나킴이라고 하는 거인족들을 전멸시켰다. 유다 전 산악 지대에 있는 헤브론, 드빌, 아납 그리고 이스라엘 전 산악 지대에서 그들을 전멸시켰던 것이다. 여호수아는 그들을 성읍째 없애버렸다.","그 때에 여호수아가 가서 산지와 헤브론과 드빌과 아납과 유다 온 산지와 이스라엘의 온 산지에서 아낙 사람들을 멸절하고 그가 또 그들의 성읍들을 진멸하여 바쳤으므로","그 때에 여호수아가 가서 산지와 헤브론과 드빌과 아납과 유다 온 산지와 이스라엘의 온 산지에서 아낙 사람을 멸절하고 그가 또 그 성읍들을 2)진멸하였으므로 히, 바쳤으므로","여호수아가 이끄는 이스라엘군은 또한 아낙 사람이라고 부르는 거인족이 사는 지역으로 쳐들어가 공략하였다. 아낙 사람들은 산악지대와 헤브론과 드빌과 아납, 그리고 유다와 이스라엘의 전 산악지대에 살고 있었다. 이스라엘군은 이곳으로 쳐들어가 그들을 쓸어 버렸다. 그들이 살고 있던 성읍을 폐허가 되다시피 만들어 버렸다.","At that time Joshua penetrated the mountain regions and exterminated the Anakim in Hebron, Debir, Anab, the entire mountain region of Judah, and the entire mountain region of Israel. Joshua put them and their cities under the ban,","And at that time came Joshua, and cut off the Anakims from the mountains, from Hebron, from Debir, from Anab, and from all the mountains of Judah, and from all the mountains of Israel: Joshua destroyed them utterly with their cities.","At that time Joshua went and destroyed the Anakites from the hill country: from Hebron, Debir and Anab, from all the hill country of Judah, and from all the hill country of Israel. Joshua totally destroyed them and their towns.","In tempore illo venit Iosue et interfecit Enacim de montanis Hebron et Dabir et Anab et de omni monte Iudae et Israel urbesque eorum delevit.","ויבא יהושע בעת ההיא ויכרת את הענקים מן ההר מן חברון מן דבר מן ענב ומכל הר יהודה ומכל הר ישראל עם עריהם החרימם יהושע׃"],["6","11","22","그래서 이스라엘 자손들의 땅에는 아낙인들이 하나도 남지 않고, 가자와 갓과 아스돗에만 남아 있다.","그리하여 아나킴은 가자와 갓과 아스돗에 약간 남아 있을 뿐 이스라엘 백성이 사는 땅에는 한 사람도 없게 되었다.","이스라엘 자손의 땅에는 아낙 사람들이 하나도 남지 아니하였고 가사와 가드와 아스돗에만 남았더라","이스라엘 자손의 땅 안에는 아낙 사람이 하나도 남음이 없고 가사와 가드와 아스돗에만 약간 남았었더라","그래서 가사와 가드와 아스돗에 남아있던 아낙 사람들 몇을 빼놓고는 이스라엘 사람들이 사는 땅에서 아낙 사람들은 전혀 찾아볼 수가 없었다.","so that no Anakim were left in the land of the Israelites. However, some survived in Gaza, in Gath, and in Ashdod.","There was none of the Anakims left in the land of the children of Israel: only in Gaza, in Gath, and in Ashdod, there remained.","No Anakites were left in Israelite territory; only in Gaza, Gath and Ashdod did any survive.","Non reliquit ullum de stirpe Enacim in terra filiorum Israel, absque civitatibus Gaza et Geth et Azoto, in quibus solis relicti sunt.","לא נותר ענקים בארץ בני ישראל רק בעזה בגת ובאשדוד נשארו׃"],["6","11","23","이렇게 여호수아는 주님께서 모세에게 이르신 그대로 모든 땅을 정복하였다. 그러고 나서 지파별 구분에 따라 이스라엘 사람들에게 그 땅을 상속 재산으로 나누어 주었다. 이로써 전쟁은 끝나고 이 땅은 평온해졌다.","여호수아는 야훼께서 모세에게 약속해 주신 대로 전지역을 정복하고는 그 땅을 이스라엘에게 나누어주었다. 그리하여 지파마다 제 몫을 받게 되었다. 이로써 전국에서 전란이 멎었다.","이와 같이 여호수아가 여호와께서 모세에게 말씀하신 대로 그 온 땅을 점령하여 이스라엘 지파의 구분에 따라 기업으로 주매 그 땅에 전쟁이 그쳤더라","이와 같이 여호수아가 여호와께서 모세에게 이르신 말씀대로 그 온 땅을 취하여 이스라엘 지파의 구별을 따라 기업으로 주었더라 그 땅에 전쟁이 그쳤더라","여호와께서 모세에게 말씀하신 대로 여호수아는 이스라엘군을 이끌고 앞서 말한 전지역을 돌아다니며 점령하였다. 점령한 땅은 이스라엘의 지파 수대로 또 지파별로 땅을 나누어 각각 자기들의 몫으로 차지하게 하였다. 그런 뒤에야 그 땅에서 전쟁이 사라졌다.","Thus Joshua took the whole land, just as the LORD had said to Moses. Joshua gave it to Israel as their heritage, apportioning it among the tribes. And the land had rest from war.","So Joshua took the whole land, according to all that the LORD said unto Moses; and Joshua gave it for an inheritance unto Israel according to their divisions by their tribes. And the land rested from war.","So Joshua took the entire land, just as the LORD had directed Moses, and he gave it as an inheritance to Israel according to their tribal divisions. Then the land had rest from war.","Cepit ergo Iosue omnem terram, sicut locutus est Dominus ad Moysen, et tradidit eam in possessionem filiis Israel secundum partes et tribus suas; quievitque terra a proeliis.","ויקח יהושע את כל הארץ ככל אשר דבר יהוה אל משה ויתנה יהושע לנחלה לישראל כמחלקתם לשבטיהם והארץ שקטה ממלחמה׃"],["6","12","1","이스라엘 자손들이 요르단 건너편 해 뜨는 쪽 아르논 강에서 헤르몬 산과 동쪽의 온 아라바에 이르기까지 임금들을 쳐 죽여 땅을 차지하였는데, 그 임금들은 이러하다.","이스라엘 백성이 요르단 강 건너편 해 돋는 쪽 아르논 계곡에서 헤르몬 산악 지대에 이르기까지 온 아라바를 정복하며 쳐죽인 왕들은 아래와 같다.","이스라엘 자손이 요단 저편 해 돋는 쪽 곧 아르논 골짜기에서 헤르몬 산까지의 동쪽 온 아라바를 차지하고 그 땅에서 쳐죽인 왕들은 이러하니라","이스라엘 자손이 요단 저편 해 돋는 편 곧 아르논 골짜기에서 헤르몬산까지의 동방 온 아라바를 점령하고 그 땅에서 쳐 죽인 왕들은 이러하니라","이스라엘 사람들은 해가 떠오르는 요단강 동쪽을 이미 공략하여 점령하였다. 곧 아르논 계곡에서 헤르몬산까지 동쪽 아라바 전지역을 이미 점령하였다. 이 지역을 점령할 때 쓰러뜨린 왕들과 그들이 다스리던 지역은 다음과 같다.","These are the kings of the land whom the Israelites conquered and whose lands they occupied, east of the Jordan, from the River Arnon to Mount Hermon, including all the eastern section of the Arabah:","Now these are the kings of the land, which the children of Israel smote, and possessed their land on the other side Jordan toward the rising of the sun, from the river Arnon unto mount Hermon, and all the plain on the east:","These are the kings of the land whom the Israelites had defeated and whose territory they took over east of the Jordan, from the Arnon Gorge to Mount Hermon, including all the eastern side of the Arabah:","Hi sunt reges, quos percusserunt filii Israel et possederunt terram eorum trans Iordanem ad solis ortum, a torrente Arnon usque ad montem Hermon et omnem orientalem plagam Arabae.","ואלה מלכי הארץ אשר הכו בני ישראל וירשו את ארצם בעבר הירדן מזרחה השמש מנחל ארנון עד הר חרמון וכל הערבה מזרחה׃"],["6","12","2","헤스본에 살던 아모리족의 임금 시혼은 아르논 강 가에 있는 아로에르에서 시작하여, 그 강 중간에서부터 암몬 자손들의 경계인 야뽁 강까지 길앗의 절반을 다스렸다.","헤스본에 살던 아모리 왕 시혼이 다스리던 지역은 길르앗 절반으로서 아르논 계곡 중간 지점 언덕 위에 있는 아로엘에서 암몬 백성과 접경한 야뽁 개울에 이르렀고,","시혼은 헤스본에 거주하던 아모리 족속의 왕이라 그가 다스리던 땅은 아르논 골짜기 가에 있는 아로엘에서부터 골짜기 가운데 성읍과 길르앗 절반 곧 암몬 자손의 경계 얍복 강까지이며","헤스본에 거하던 아모리 사람의 왕 시혼이라 그 다스리던 땅은 아르논 골짜기 가에 있는 아로엘에서부터 골짜기 가운데 성읍과 길르앗 절반 곧 암몬 자손의 지경 얍복강까지며","아모리 사람의 왕으로는 헤스본에 살고 있던 시혼이 있다. 그가 다스리던 지역은 아르논 계곡 가장자리에 있는 아로엘에서부터 그 계곡 중간 지역과 길르앗 절반을 포함하여 암몬 사람들이 살고 있는 지역과 경계를 이루는 얍복강까지이다.","First, Sihon, king of the Amorites, who lived in Heshbon. His domain extended from Aroer, which is on the bank of the Wadi Arnon, to include the wadi itself, and the land northward through half of Gilead to the Wadi Jabbok at the border with the Ammonites,","Sihon king of the Amorites, who dwelt in Heshbon, and ruled from Aroer, which is upon the bank of the river Arnon, and from the middle of the river, and from half Gilead, even unto the river Jabbok, which is the border of the children of Ammon;","Sihon king of the Amorites, who reigned in Heshbon. He ruled from Aroer on the rim of the Arnon Gorge--from the middle of the gorge--to the Jabbok River, which is the border of the Ammonites. This included half of Gilead.","Sehon rex Amorraeorum, qui habitavit in Hesebon, dominatus est ab Aroer, quae sita est super ripam torrentis Arnon, et a media parte vallis et in dimidia parte Galaad usque ad torrentem Iaboc, qui est terminus filiorum Ammon;","סיחון מלך האמרי היושב בחשבון משל מערוער אשר על שפת נחל ארנון ותוך הנחל וחצי הגלעד ועד יבק הנחל גבול בני עמון׃"],["6","12","3","그는 또 동쪽으로 킨네렛 바다까지 이르는 아라바와, 다시 동쪽의 벳 여시못 쪽으로 아라바 바다, 곧 ‘소금 바다’까지, 그리고 남쪽으로 피스가 기슭과 부근 지역까지 다스렸다.","거기에서 해 뜨는 쪽 아라바 긴네렛 호수에 이르고 한편 짠물호수라고도 이르는 아라바 호수에 이르렀는데, 벳여시못 쪽 비스가 산 기슭이 그 남단이었다.","또 동방 아라바 긴네롯 바다까지이며 또 동방 아라바의 바다 곧 염해의 벧여시못으로 통한 길까지와 남쪽으로 비스가 산기슭까지이며","또 동방 아라바 긴네롯 바다까지며 또 동방 아라바의 바다 곧 염해의 벧여시못으로 통한 길까지와 남편으로 비스가 산록까지며","이 지역 안에는 긴네렛 호수라고도 부르는 긴네롯 바다까지 이르는 메마른 초원지대와 벧여시못 방향으로 사해까지, 그리고 비스가산 기슭까지 이르는 요단 계곡을 모두 다 포함한다.","as well as the Arabah from the eastern side of the Sea of Chinnereth, as far south as the eastern side of the Salt Sea of the Arabah in the direction of Beth-jeshimoth, southward under the slopes of Pisgah.","And from the plain to the sea of Chinneroth on the east, and unto the sea of the plain, even the salt sea on the east, the way to Bethjeshimoth; and from the south, under Ashdothpisgah:","He also ruled over the eastern Arabah from the Sea of Kinnereth to the Sea of the Arabah (the Salt Sea), to Beth Jeshimoth, and then southward below the slopes of Pisgah.","et in Araba usque ad mare Chenereth in oriente et usque ad mare Arabae, quod est mare Salsissimum, ad orientalem plagam in via, quae ducit Bethiesimoth, et in australi parte, quae iacet ad radices Phasga.","והערבה עד ים כנרות מזרחה ועד ים הערבה ים המלח מזרחה דרך בית הישמות ומתימן תחת אשדות הפסגה׃"],["6","12","4","라파인들 가운데 마지막으로 남은 사람인 바산 임금 옥은 아스타롯과 에드레이에서 살았다.","아스다롯과 에드레이에 살던 마지막 거인족 바산 왕 옥은","옥은 르바의 남은 족속으로서 아스다롯과 에드레이에 거주하던 바산의 왕이라","또 르바의 남은 족속으로서 아스다롯과 에드레이에 거하던 바산 왕 옥이라","또 아스나롯과 에드레이에서 자기 영토를 다스리던 거인족인 르바족의 마지막 왕으로 바산 왕 옥이 있다 이스라엘군은 요단강 동쪽에서 이 왕도 쓰러뜨리고 그가 다스리던 지역도 점령하였다.","Secondly, the border of Og, king of Bashan, a survivor of the Rephaim, who lived at Ashtaroth and Edrei.","And the coast of Og king of Bashan, which was of the remnant of the giants, that dwelt at Ashtaroth and at Edrei,","And the territory of Og king of Bashan, one of the last of the Rephaites, who reigned in Ashtaroth and Edrei.","Terminus Og regis Basan de reliquiis Raphaim, qui habitavit in Astharoth et in Edrai,","וגבול עוג מלך הבשן מיתר הרפאים היושב בעשתרות ובאדרעי׃"],["6","12","5","그는 헤르몬 산, 살카, 그수르족과 마아카족의 경계까지 이르는 온 바산, 헤스본 임금 시혼의 경계까지 이르는 길앗의 절반을 다스렸다.","헤르몬 산과 살가, 그술 사람과 마아가 사람과 접경한 바산 전지역과 헤스본 왕 시혼의 영토와 접경한 길르앗 절반을 다스렸다.","그가 다스리던 땅은 헤르몬 산과 살르가와 온 바산과 및 그술 사람과 마아가 사람의 경계까지의 길르앗 절반이니 헤스본 왕 시혼의 경계에 접한 곳이라","그 치리하던 땅은 헤르몬산과 살르가와 온 바산과 및 그술 사람과 마아가 사람의 지경까지의 길르앗 절반이니 헤스본 왕 시혼의 지경에 접한 것이라","바산왕 옥이 다스리던 지역은 헤르몬산과 살르가라는 곳과 그술 사람과 마아가 사람들이 사는 지역과 접해있는 바산 전지역과 헤스본왕 시혼이 다스리던 지역과 맞닿아 있는 길르앗 절반 지역이다.","He ruled over Mount Hermon, Salecah, and all Bashan as far as the boundary of the Geshurites and Maacathites, and over half of Gilead as far as the territory of Sihon, king of Heshbon.","And reigned in mount Hermon, and in Salcah, and in all Bashan, unto the border of the Geshurites and the Maachathites, and half Gilead, the border of Sihon king of Heshbon.","He ruled over Mount Hermon, Salecah, all of Bashan to the border of the people of Geshur and Maacah, and half of Gilead to the border of Sihon king of Heshbon.","et dominatus est in monte Hermon et in Salcha atque in universa Basan usque ad terminos Gesuri et Maachathi et in dimidia parte Galaad usque ad terminos Sehon regis Hesebon.","ומשל בהר חרמון ובסלכה ובכל הבשן עד גבול הגשורי והמעכתי וחצי הגלעד גבול סיחון מלך חשבון׃"],["6","12","6","이들을 주님의 종 모세와 이스라엘 자손들이 쳐 죽였다. 그런 다음에 주님의 종 모세는 그 땅을 르우벤인들과 가드인들, 그리고 므나쎄 반쪽 지파에게 소유로 나누어 주었다.","야훼의 종 모세가 이스라엘 사람을 거느리고 이 왕들을 쳐죽인 후 그 땅을 르우벤 지파와 가드 지파와 므나쎄 지파 절반에게 주어 차지하게 했던 것이다.","여호와의 종 모세와 이스라엘 자손이 그들을 치고 여호와의 종 모세가 그 땅을 르우벤 사람과 갓 사람과 므낫세 반 지파에게 기업으로 주었더라","여호와의 종 모세와 이스라엘 자손이 그들을 치고 여호와의 종 모세가 그 땅을 르우벤 사람과 갓 사람과 므낫세 반 지파에게 기업으로 주었더라","일찍이 여호와의 종 모세는 이스라엘 사람들과 함께 힘을 합하여 이 왕들을 쳐죽이고 그들이 다스리던 지역을 점령하였다. 여호와의 종 모세는 이 지역을 르우벤 지파 사람과 갓 지파 사람과 므낫세 반 지파 사람들에게 그들이 차지할 몫으로 나누어 주었다.","It was Moses, the servant of the LORD, and the Israelites who conquered them; Moses, the servant of the LORD, gave possession of their land to the Reubenites, the Gadites, and the half-tribe of Manasseh.","Them did Moses the servant of the LORD and the children of Israel smite: and Moses the servant of the LORD gave it for a possession unto the Reubenites, and the Gadites, and the half tribe of Manasseh.","Moses, the servant of the LORD, and the Israelites conquered them. And Moses the servant of the LORD gave their land to the Reubenites, the Gadites and the half-tribe of Manasseh to be their possession.","Moyses famulus Domini et filii Israel percusserunt eos; tradiditque terram eorum Moyses in possessionem Rubenitis et Gaditis et dimidiae tribui Manasse.","משה עבד יהוה ובני ישראל הכום ויתנה משה עבד יהוה ירשה לראובני ולגדי ולחצי שבט המנשה׃"],["6","12","7","여호수아와 이스라엘 자손들이 요르단 건너편 서쪽, 레바논 골짜기에 있는 바알 가드에서 세이르 쪽으로 솟은 할락 산에 이르기까지 그 땅의 임금들을 쳐 죽였는데, 그 임금들은 이러하다. 여호수아가 지파별 구분에 따라 그 땅을 이스라엘 지파들에게 소유지로 나누어 주었는데,","여호수아가 이스라엘 백성을 거느리고 요르단 강 서편에서 쳐죽인 이 땅의 왕들은 아래와 같다. 그들은 레바논 골짜기에 있는 바알갓으로부터 세일을 향해 우뚝 서 있는 할락 산에 이르는 지역의 왕들이었다. 여호수아는 그 땅을 이스라엘 각 지파에 나누어주었다. 그래서 그들이 각기 제 몫으로 차지한 땅은","여호수아와 이스라엘 자손이 요단 이편 곧 서쪽 레바논 골짜기의 바알갓에서부터 세일로 올라가는 곳 할락 산까지 쳐서 멸한 그 땅의 왕들은 이러하니라 (그 땅을 여호수아가 이스라엘의 지파들에게 구분에 따라 소유로 주었으니","여호수아와 이스라엘 자손이 요단 이편 곧 서편 레바논 골짜기의 바알갓에서부터 세일로 올라가는 곳 할락산까지에서 쳐서 멸한 왕들은 이러하니 (그 땅을 여호수아가 이스라엘의 구별을 따라 그 지파에게 기업으로 주었으니","여호수아가 이스라엘군과 힘을 합하여 쳐부수고 점령한 땅의 왕들은 다음과 같다. 이스라엘군은 요단강 서쪽 지역을 쳐부수고 점령하였는데, 레바논 계곡에 있는 바알갓이라는 곳에서 세일 쪽으로 올라가는 길에 있는 할락산까지의 지역이 바로 그곳이었다. 그 지역을 점령하고 이스라엘군은 그곳의 왕들도 쳐죽였다. 여호수아는 이 지역을 이스라엘의 각 지파별로 그들의 형편에 따라 나누어 주었다. 곧 그들이 영원히 차지할 몫으로 분배해 준 것이다.","This is a list of the kings of the land whom Joshua and the Israelites conquered west of the Jordan, from Baal-gad in the Lebanon valley to Mount Halak which rises toward Seir; Joshua apportioned their land and gave possession of it to the tribes of Israel;","And these are the kings of the country which Joshua and the children of Israel smote on this side Jordan on the west, from Baalgad in the valley of Lebanon even unto the mount Halak, that goeth up to Seir; which Joshua gave unto the tribes of Israel for a possession according to their divisions;","These are the kings of the land that Joshua and the Israelites conquered on the west side of the Jordan, from Baal Gad in the Valley of Lebanon to Mount Halak, which rises toward Seir (their lands Joshua gave as an inheritance to the tribes of Israel according to their tribal divisions--","Hi sunt reges terrae, quos percussit Iosue et filii Israel trans Iordanem ad occidentalem plagam, a Baalgad in campo Libani usque ad montem Calvum, qui ascendit in Seir; tradiditque eam Iosue in possessionem tribubus Israel, singulis partes suas,","ואלה מלכי הארץ אשר הכה יהושע ובני ישראל בעבר הירדן ימה מבעל גד בבקעת הלבנון ועד ההר החלק העלה שעירה ויתנה יהושע לשבטי ישראל ירשה כמחלקתם׃"],["6","12","8","산악 지방, 평원 지대, 아라바, 비탈 지대, 광야, 네겝으로서, 히타이트족, 아모리족, 가나안족, 프리즈족, 히위족, 여부스족의 땅이다.","그 산악 지대와 야산 지대와 아라바와 언덕 지대와 광야와 네겝 지방이었다. 거기에는 헷족, 아모리족, 가나안족, 브리즈족, 히위족, 여부스족이 살고 있었다.","곧 산지와 평지와 아라바와 경사지와 광야와 네겝 곧 헷 족속과 아모리 족속과 가나안 족속과 브리스 족속과 히위 족속과 여부스 족속의 땅이라)","곧 산지와 평지와 아라바와 경사지와 광야와 남방 곧 헷 사람과 아모리 사람과 가나안 사람과 브리스 사람과 히위 사람과 여부스 사람의 땅이라)","이 지역을 좀더 자세하게 설명하면 이렇다. 산악지대와 저지대와 사막의 초원지대와 언덕지대와 거친 들과 남방 지역으로 이 땅에는 헷 사람과 아모리 사람과 가나안 사람과 브리스 사람과 히위 사람과 여부스 사람이 살고 있었다.","it included the mountain regions and Shephelah, the Arabah, the slopes, the wilderness, and the Negeb, belonging to the Hittites, Amorites, Canaanites, Perizzites, Hivites, and Jebusites:","In the mountains, and in the valleys, and in the plains, and in the springs, and in the wilderness, and in the south country; the Hittites, the Amorites, and the Canaanites, the Perizzites, the Hivites, and the Jebusites:","the hill country, the western foothills, the Arabah, the mountain slopes, the desert and the Negev--the lands of the Hittites, Amorites, Canaanites, Perizzites, Hivites and Jebusites):","tam in montanis quam in Sephela, in Araba et in declivibus et in solitudine ac in Nageb; Hetthaeus fuit et Amorraeus, Chananaeus et Pherezaeus, Hevaeus et Iebusaeus:","בהר ובשפלה ובערבה ובאשדות ובמדבר ובנגב החתי האמרי והכנעני הפרזי החוי והיבוסי׃"],["6","12","9","그 임금들은 예리코 임금 하나, 베텔 근처 아이 임금 하나","예리고 왕 하나, 베델 가까이 있던 아이 왕 하나,","하나는 여리고 왕이요 하나는 벧엘 곁의 아이 왕이요","하나는 여리고 왕이요 하나는 벧엘 곁의 아이 왕이요","이들 지역을 통치한 왕들은 다음과 같다. 여리고 왕, 벧엘 부근에 있는 아이 왕,","The king of Jericho, one; the king of Ai, which is near Bethel, one;","The king of Jericho, one; the king of Ai, which is beside Bethel, one;","the king of Jericho one the king of Ai (near Bethel) one","rex Iericho unus, rex Hai, quae est ex latere Bethel, unus,","מלך יריחו אחד מלך העי אשר מצד בית אל אחד׃"],["6","12","10","예루살렘 임금 하나, 헤브론 임금 하나","예루살렘 왕 하나, 헤브론 왕 하나,","하나는 예루살렘 왕이요 하나는 헤브론 왕이요 하나는 야르뭇 왕이요","하나는 예루살렘 왕이요 하나는 헤브론 왕이요 하나는 야르뭇 왕이요","예루살렘 왕, 헤브론 왕, 야르뭇 왕,","the king of Jerusalem, one; the king of Hebron, one;","The king of Jerusalem, one; the king of Hebron, one;","the king of Jerusalem one the king of Hebron one","rex Ierusalem unus, rex Hebron unus,","מלך ירושלם אחד מלך חברון אחד׃"],["6","12","11","야르뭇 임금 하나, 라키스 임금 하나","야르뭇 왕 하나, 라기스 왕 하나,","하나는 라기스 왕이요","하나는 라기스 왕이요","라기스 왕,","the king of Jarmuth, one; the king of Lachish, one;","The king of Jarmuth, one; the king of Lachish, one;","the king of Jarmuth one the king of Lachish one","rex Ierimoth unus, rex Lachis unus,","מלך ירמות אחד מלך לכיש אחד׃"],["6","12","12","에글론 임금 하나, 게제르 임금 하나","에글론 왕 하나, 게젤 왕 하나,","하나는 에글론 왕이요 하나는 게셀 왕이요","하나는 에글론 왕이요 하나는 게셀 왕이요","에글론 왕, 게셀 왕,","the king of Eglon, one; the king of Gezer, one;","The king of Eglon, one; the king of Gezer, one;","the king of Eglon one the king of Gezer one","rex Eglon unus, rex Gazer unus,","מלך עגלון אחד מלך גזר אחד׃"],["6","12","13","드비르 임금 하나, 게데르 임금 하나","드빌 왕 하나, 게델 왕 하나,","하나는 드빌 왕이요 하나는 게델 왕이요","하나는 드빌 왕이요 하나는 게델 왕이요","드빌 왕, 게델 왕,","the king of Debir, one; the king of Geder, one;","The king of Debir, one; the king of Geder, one;","the king of Debir one the king of Geder one","rex Dabir unus, rex Gader unus,","מלך דבר אחד מלך גדר אחד׃"],["6","12","14","호르마 임금 하나, 아랏 임금 하나","호르마 왕 하나, 아랏 왕 하나,","하나는 호르마 왕이요 하나는 아랏 왕이요","하나는 호르마 왕이요 하나는 아랏 왕이요","호르마 왕, 아랏 왕,","the king of Hormah, one; the king of Arad, one;","The king of Hormah, one; the king of Arad, one;","the king of Hormah one the king of Arad one","rex Horma unus, rex Arad unus,","מלך חרמה אחד מלך ערד אחד׃"],["6","12","15","리브나 임금 하나, 아둘람 임금 하나","리브나 왕 하나, 아둘람 왕 하나,","하나는 립나 왕이요 하나는 아둘람 왕이요","하나는 립나 왕이요 하나는 아둘람 왕이요","립나 왕, 아둘람 왕,","the king of Libnah, one; the king of Adullam, one;","The king of Libnah, one; the king of Adullam, one;","the king of Libnah one the king of Adullam one","rex Lobna unus, rex Odollam unus,","מלך לבנה אחד מלך עדלם אחד׃"],["6","12","16","마케다 임금 하나, 베텔 임금 하나","막케다 왕 하나, 베델 왕 하나,","하나는 막게다 왕이요 하나는 벧엘 왕이요","하나는 막게다 왕이요 하나는 벧엘 왕이요","막게다 왕, 벧엘 왕,","the king of Makkedah, one; the king of Bethel, one;","The king of Makkedah, one; the king of Bethel, one;","the king of Makkedah one the king of Bethel one","rex Maceda unus, rex Bethel unus,","מלך מקדה אחד מלך בית אל אחד׃"],["6","12","17","타푸아 임금 하나, 헤페르 임금 하나","다부아 왕 하나, 헤벨 왕 하나,","하나는 답부아 왕이요 하나는 헤벨 왕이요","하나는 답부아 왕이요 하나는 헤벨 왕이요","답부아 왕, 헤벨 왕,","the king of Tappuah, one; the king of Hepher, one;","The king of Tappuah, one; the king of Hepher, one;","the king of Tappuah one the king of Hepher one","rex Thapphua unus, rex Opher unus,","מלך תפוח אחד מלך חפר אחד׃"],["6","12","18","아펙 임금 하나, 사론 임금 하나","아벡 왕 하나, 사론 왕 하나,","하나는 아벡 왕이요 하나는 랏사론 왕이요","하나는 아벡 왕이요 하나는 랏사론 왕이요","아벡 왕, 랏사론 왕,","the king of Aphek, one; the king of Lasharon, one;","The king of Aphek, one; the king of Lasharon, one;","the king of Aphek one the king of Lasharon one","rex Aphec unus, rex Saron unus,","מלך אפק אחד מלך לשרון אחד׃"],["6","12","19","마돈 임금 하나, 하초르 임금 하나","마돈 왕 하나, 하솔 왕 하나,","하나는 마돈 왕이요 하나는 하솔 왕이요","하나는 마돈 왕이요 하나는 하솔 왕이요","마돈 왕, 하솔 왕,","the king of Madon, one; the king of Hazor, one;","The king of Madon, one; the king of Hazor, one;","the king of Madon one the king of Hazor one","rex Madon unus, rex Asor unus,","מלך מדון אחד מלך חצור אחד׃"],["6","12","20","시므론 므론 임금 하나, 악삽 임금 하나","시므론므론 왕 하나, 악삽 왕 하나,","하나는 시므론 므론 왕이요 하나는 악삽 왕이요","하나는 시므론 므론 왕이요 하나는 악삽 왕이요","시므론 왕, 악삽 왕,","the king of Shimron, one; the king of Achshaph, one;","The king of Shimronmeron, one; the king of Achshaph, one;","the king of Shimron Meron one the king of Acshaph one","rex Semeron unus, rex Achsaph unus,","מלך שמרון מראון אחד מלך אכשף אחד׃"],["6","12","21","타아낙 임금 하나, 므기또 임금 하나","다아낙 왕 하나, 므기또 왕 하나,","하나는 다아낙 왕이요 하나는 므깃도 왕이요","하나는 다아낙 왕이요 하나는 므깃도 왕이요","다아낙 왕, 므깃도 왕,","the king of Taanach, one; the king of Megiddo, one;","The king of Taanach, one; the king of Megiddo, one;","the king of Taanach one the king of Megiddo one","rex Thanach unus, rex Mageddo unus,","מלך תענך אחד מלך מגדו אחד׃"],["6","12","22","케데스 임금 하나, 카르멜의 요크느암 임금 하나","케데스 왕 하나, 가르멜에 있는 욕느암 왕 하나,","하나는 게데스 왕이요 하나는 갈멜의 욕느암 왕이요","하나는 게데스 왕이요 하나는 갈멜의 욕느암 왕이요","게데스 왕, 갈멜에 있는 욕느암 왕,","the king of Kedesh, one; the king of Jokneam, at Carmel, one;","The king of Kedesh, one; the king of Jokneam of Carmel, one;","the king of Kedesh one the king of Jokneam in Carmel one","rex Cedes unus, rex Iecnaam Carmeli unus,","מלך קדש אחד מלך יקנעם לכרמל אחד׃"],["6","12","23","도르 고지대의 도르 임금 하나, 길갈의 고임 임금 하나","도르 언덕에 있는 도르 왕 하나, 길갈에 있는 고임 왕 하나,","하나는 돌의 높은 곳의 돌 왕이요 하나는 길갈의 고임 왕이요","하나는 돌의 높은 곳의 돌 왕이요 하나는 길갈의 고임 왕이요","돌 언덕에 있는 돌 왕, 길갈에 있는 고임 왕,","the king of Dor, in Naphath-dor, one; the king of Goyim at Gilgal, one;","The king of Dor in the coast of Dor, one; the king of the nations of Gilgal, one;","the king of Dor (in Naphoth Dor) one the king of Goyim in Gilgal one","rex Dor et provinciae Dor unus, rex gentium Galgal unus,","מלך דור לנפת דור אחד מלך גוים לגלגל אחד׃"],["6","12","24","티르차 임금 하나이다. 이렇게 해서 임금들은 모두 서른한 명이다.","디르사 왕 하나, 이렇게 하여 왕의 총수는 삼십일 명이었다.","하나는 디르사 왕이라 모두 서른한 왕이었더라","하나는 디르사 왕이라 도합 삼십 일 왕이었더라","디르사 왕, 모두 다 합하여 31명의 왕이다. 이스라엘군은 이들 왕을 하나씩 쳐죽였다.","and the king of Tirzah, one—thirty-one kings in all.","The king of Tirzah, one: all the kings thirty and one.","the king of Tirzah one thirty-one kings in all.","rex Thersa unus: omnes reges triginta unus.","מלך תרצה אחד כל מלכים שלשים ואחד׃"],["6","13","1","여호수아가 늙고 나이가 많이 들자 주님께서 그에게 말씀하셨다. “너는 늙고 나이가 많이 들었는데, 아직도 차지해야 할 땅은 아주 많이 남아 있다.","여호수아가 나이 많아 늙자 야훼께서 그에게 말씀하셨다. \"너는 이제 나이 많아 늙었는데 정복할 땅은 아직도 많이 남아 있다.","여호수아가 나이가 많아 늙으매 여호와께서 그에게 이르시되 너는 나이가 많아 늙었고 얻을 땅이 매우 많이 남아 있도다","여호수아가 나이 많아 늙으매 여호와께서 그에게 이르시되 너는 나이 많아 늙었고 얻을 땅의 남은 것은 매우 많도다","여호수아가 나이가 많아 늙자 여호와께서 그에게 말씀하셨다. \"여호수아야! 네가 이제 나이가 많이 먹었구나. 이제 너도 어쩔 수 없이 늙었구나. 그런데도 아직도 점령하지 못한 땅이 무척 많이 남아 있구나.","When Joshua was old and advanced in years, the LORD said to him: Though now you are old and advanced in years, a very large part of the land still remains to be possessed.","Now Joshua was old and stricken in years; and the LORD said unto him, Thou art old and stricken in years, and there remaineth yet very much land to be possessed.","When Joshua was old and well advanced in years, the LORD said to him, \"You are very old, and there are still very large areas of land to be taken over.","Iosue senex provectaeque aetatis erat, et dixit Dominus ad eum:  “Senuisti et longaevus es; terraque latissima adhuc superest, quae necdum occupata est.","ויהושע זקן בא בימים ויאמר יהוה אליו אתה זקנתה באת בימים והארץ נשארה הרבה מאד לרשתה׃"],["6","13","2","남아 있는 땅은 이러하다. 필리스티아인들의 온 지역, 그수르족의 온 땅,","남아 있는 땅으로는 불레셋 사람들의 전지역과 그술 사람들의 전지역이 있다.","이 남은 땅은 이러하니 블레셋 사람의 모든 지역과 그술 족속의 모든 지역","이 남은 땅은 이러하니 블레셋 사람의 온 지방과 그술 사람의 전경","점령하지 못하고 아직 남아 있는 땅은 블레셋 사람들이 살고 있는 전지역과 그술 사람들이 살고 있는 전지역 아니냐?","This is the remaining land: all Geshur and all the districts of the Philistines","This is the land that yet remaineth: all the borders of the Philistines, and all Geshuri,","\"This is the land that remains: all the regions of the Philistines and Geshurites:","Omnis videlicet Galilaea, regio Philisthim et universa Gesuri,","זאת הארץ הנשארת כל גלילות הפלשתים וכל הגשורי׃"],["6","13","3","이집트 동쪽의 시호르에서 북쪽으로 에크론 경계까지, ― 가나안족의 소유로 여겨지는 이 땅에는 가자, 아스돗, 아스클론, 갓, 에크론 제후, 이렇게 필리스티아인들의 다섯 제후가 있다. ― 그리고 남쪽에 있는 아와인들의 땅,","이집트 동편 시홀로부터 북쪽으로 에크론 경계에 이르는 땅은 가나안 사람들의 것으로 친다. 이 불레셋 사람들의 다섯 추장은 가자, 아스돗, 아스클론, 갓, 에크론의 추장들이다. 아위 사람들은","곧 애굽 앞 시홀 시내에서부터 가나안 사람에게 속한 북쪽 에그론 경계까지와 블레셋 사람의 다섯 통치자들의 땅 곧 가사 족속과 아스돗 족속과 아스글론 족속과 가드 족속과 에그론 족속과 또 남쪽 아위 족속의 땅과","곧 애굽 앞 시홀 시내에서부터 가나안 사람에게 속한 북방 에그론 지경까지와 블레셋 사람의 다섯 방백의 땅 곧 가사 사람과 아스돗 사람과 아스글론 사람과 가드 사람과 에그론 사람과 또 남방 아위 사람의 땅과","뿐만 아니라 애굽 땅에 맞닿아 있는 시홀 시내에서 북쪽으로는 에그론 경계에 이르는 땅, 역시 가나안 사람들이 사는 곳으로 아직 정복하지 못한 땅이 아니냐? 또한 가사 사람과 아스돗 사람과 아스글론 사람과 가드 사람과 에그론 사람이 모여 사는 땅에는 아직도 블레셋의 다섯 왕이 버젓이 살아서 그 지역을 다스리고 있지 않느냐? 또 아위 사람의 땅도","(from the stream adjoining Egypt to the boundary of Ekron in the north is reckoned Canaanite territory, though held by the five lords of the Philistines in Gaza, Ashdod, Ashkelon, Gath, and Ekron);","From Sihor, which is before Egypt, even unto the borders of Ekron northward, which is counted to the Canaanite: five lords of the Philistines; the Gazathites, and the Ashdothites, the Eshkalonites, the Gittites, and the Ekronites; also the Avites:","from the Shihor River on the east of Egypt to the territory of Ekron on the north, all of it counted as Canaanite (the territory of the five Philistine rulers in Gaza, Ashdod, Ashkelon, Gath and Ekron--that of the Avvites);","a fluvio Sihor, qui est ad orientem Aegypti, usque ad terminos Accaron contra aquilonem, terra Chananaea, quae in quinque principes Philisthim dividitur, Gazaeos et Azotios, Ascalonitas, Getthaeos et Accaronitas ac Hevaei","מן השיחור אשר על פני מצרים ועד גבול עקרון צפונה לכנעני תחשב חמשת סרני פלשתים העזתי והאשדודי האשקלוני הגתי והעקרוני והעוים׃"],["6","13","4","가나안족의 온 땅, 시돈인들에게 속한 아라에서 아펙까지, 곧 아모리족의 경계까지,","그 남쪽에 있다. 시돈 사람들이 차지하고 있는 아라에서 아모리인과 접경한 아베카에 이르는 가나안 사람들의 전지역,","또 가나안 족속의 모든 땅과 시돈 사람에게 속한 므아라와 아모리 족속의 경계 아벡까지와","또 가나안 사람의 온 땅과 시돈 사람에게 속한 므아라와 아모리 사람의 지경 아벡까지와","여전히 정복하지 못한 남쪽 땅이 아니냐? 뿐만 아니라 가나안 땅 전지역도 마찬가지이다. 시돈 사람들의 소유인 므아라에서 아모리 사람의 땅과 맞닿아 있는 아벡까지","also where the Avvim are in the south; all the land of the Canaanites from Mearah of the Sidonians to Aphek, and the boundaries of the Amorites;","From the south, all the land of the Canaanites, and Mearah that is beside the Sidonians unto Aphek, to the borders of the Amorites:","from the south, all the land of the Canaanites, from Arah of the Sidonians as far as Aphek, the region of the Amorites,","meridie; et omnis terra Chanaan de Ara Sidoniorum usque Apheca et terminos Amorraei;","מתימן כל ארץ הכנעני ומערה אשר לצידנים עד אפקה עד גבול האמרי׃"],["6","13","5","또 그발족의 땅, 헤르몬 산 아래 바알 가드에서 하맛 어귀까지 이르는 해 뜨는 쪽의 온 레바논이다.","또 그발 사람의 땅과 거기에서 해 뜨는 쪽으로 헤르몬 산 아래 바알갓에서 하맛에 이르는 온 레바논 땅이 남아 있다.","또 그발 족속의 땅과 해 뜨는 곳의 온 레바논 곧 헤르몬 산 아래 바알갓에서부터 하맛에 들어가는 곳까지와","또 그발 사람의 땅과 동편 온 레바논 곧 헤르몬산 아래 바알갓에서부터 하맛에 들어가는 곳까지와","그리고 그발 사람들이 사는 땅과 해가 떠오르는 동쪽 레바논 전지역과 다시 말해서 헤르몬산 남쪽에 있는 바알갓에서 하맛 입구까지의 땅이 아직 더 남아 있지 않느냐?","and the Gebalite territory; and all the Lebanon on the east, from Baal-gad at the foot of Mount Hermon to Lebo-hamath.","And the land of the Giblites, and all Lebanon, toward the sunrising, from Baalgad under mount Hermon unto the entering into Hamath.","the area of the Gebalites; and all Lebanon to the east, from Baal Gad below Mount Hermon to Lebo Hamath.","et terra Gibliorum et omnis Libanus in oriente a Baalgad sub monte Hermon usque ad introitum Emath,","והארץ הגבלי וכל הלבנון מזרח השמש מבעל גד תחת הר חרמון עד לבוא חמת׃"],["6","13","6","그리고 레바논에서 미스르폿 마임까지 이르는 산악 지방의 모든 주민, 곧 시돈인들을 내가 이스라엘 자손들 앞에서 모조리 쫓아내겠다. 그러니 너는 내가 명령한 대로 이 땅을 이스라엘 사람들에게 분배해 주기만 하여라.","레바논에서 미스르봇마임에 이르는 산악 지대에 사는 모든 시돈 사람들을 내가 이스라엘 사람들 앞에서 친히 몰아내리라. 그러니 내가 너에게 명한 대로 그 땅을 이스라엘 백성에게 나누어주기만 하여라.","또 레바논에서부터 미스르봇마임까지 산지의 모든 주민 곧 모든 시돈 사람의 땅이라 내가 그들을 이스라엘 자손 앞에서 쫓아내리니 너는 내가 명령한 대로 그 땅을 이스라엘에게 분배하여 기업이 되게 하되","또 레바논에서부터 미스르봇마임까지의 산지 모든 거민 곧 모든 시돈 사람의 땅이라 내가 그들을 이스라엘 자손 앞에서 쫓아 내리니 너는 나의 명한대로 그 땅을 이스라엘에게 분배하여 기업이 되게 하되","또한 레바논에서 미스르봇마임까지 전산악지대에 살고 있는 모든 주민들이 바로 시돈 사람이 아니냐? 그 땅에서 그들은 아직까지 살고 있다. 하지만 내가 그들 모두를 그 땅에서 몰아내겠다. 너희 이스라엘 군인들이 쳐들어갈 때 저들이 무서워서 쓰러지게 하리라. 그러니 너는 내가 명한 대로 그 땅을 이스라엘 사람들에게 적절히 나누어 주어라. 이스라엘이 그 처지대로 그들의 몫으로 차지할 수 있도록 분배해 주어라.","All the inhabitants of the mountain regions between Lebanon and Misrephoth-maim, all Sidonians, I will drive out before the Israelites; at least include these areas in the division of the Israelite heritage, just as I have commanded you.","All the inhabitants of the hill country from Lebanon unto Misrephothmaim, and all the Sidonians, them will I drive out from before the children of Israel: only divide thou it by lot unto the Israelites for an inheritance, as I have commanded thee.","\"As for all the inhabitants of the mountain regions from Lebanon to Misrephoth Maim, that is, all the Sidonians, I myself will drive them out before the Israelites. Be sure to allocate this land to Israel for an inheritance, as I have instructed you,","omnes, qui habitant in monte a Libano usque ad Maserephoth in occidente, universi Sidonii. Ego sum qui delebo eos a facie filiorum Israel. Sorte tantum distribue terram Israel in hereditatem, sicut praecepi tibi.","כל ישבי ההר מן הלבנון עד משרפת מים כל צידנים אנכי אורישם מפני בני ישראל רק הפלה לישראל בנחלה כאשר צויתיך׃"],["6","13","7","이제 이 땅을 아홉 지파와 므나쎄 반쪽 지파에게 나누어 주어라.”","이제 너는 이 땅을 아홉 지파와 므나쎄 지파의 절반에게 나누어주어라.\"","너는 이 땅을 아홉 지파와 므낫세 반 지파에게 나누어 기업이 되게 하라 하셨더라","너는 이 땅을 아홉 지파와 므낫세 반 지파에게 나누어 기업이 되게 하라 하셨더라","지금까지 내가 열거하였던 땅을 점령하고 나서 이스라엘 아홉 지파와 므낫세 반 지파 사람들에게 골고루 나누어 주도록 하여라. 그들이 분배받은 그 땅을 그들의 영원한 몫으로 차지하게 하여라\"","Now, therefore, apportion among the nine tribes and the half-tribe of Manasseh the land which is to be their heritage.","Now therefore divide this land for an inheritance unto the nine tribes, and the half tribe of Manasseh,","and divide it as an inheritance among the nine tribes and half of the tribe of Manasseh.\"","Et nunc divide terram hanc in possessionem novem tribubus et dimidiae tribui Manasse “.","ועתה חלק את הארץ הזאת בנחלה לתשעת השבטים וחצי השבט המנשה׃"],["6","13","8","므나쎄 반쪽 지파와 함께 르우벤인들과 가드인들은, 모세가 요르단 건너편 동쪽에서 준 상속 재산을 이미 받았다. 주님의 종 모세가 그들에게 준 땅은 이러하다.","므나쎄 지파 나머지와 함께 르우벤 지파와 가드 지파는 이미 요르단 강 동편 땅을 모세에게서 유산으로 받았다. 야훼의 종 모세에게서 그들이 받은 땅은 아래와 같다.","므낫세 반 지파와 함께 르우벤 족속과 갓 족속은 요단 저편 동쪽에서 그들의 기업을 모세에게 받았는데 여호와의 종 모세가 그들에게 준 것은 이러하니","므낫세 반 지파와 함께 르우벤 사람과 갓 사람은 요단 동편에서 그 기업을 모세에게 받았는데 여호와의 종 모세가 그들에게 준 것은 이러하니","르우벤 지파 사람들과 갓 지파 사람들, 그리고 므낫세 반 지파 사람들은 이미 요단강 동쪽 지역을 그들의 영원한 몫으로 분배받았다. 여호와의 종 모세가 이미 여호와의 명령에 따라 그들에게 그 땅을 각각 나누어 주었던 것이다.","Now the other half of the tribe of Manasseh, as well as the Reubenites and Gadites, had taken as their heritage what Moses, the servant of the LORD, had given them east of the Jordan:","With whom the Reubenites and the Gadites have received their inheritance, which Moses gave them, beyond Jordan eastward, even as Moses the servant of the LORD gave them;","The other half of Manasseh, the Reubenites and the Gadites had received the inheritance that Moses had given them east of the Jordan, as he, the servant of the LORD, had assigned it to them.","Cum qua Ruben et Gad possederunt terram, quam tradidit eis Moyses famulus Domini trans fluenta Iordanis ad orientalem plagam:","עמו הראובני והגדי לקחו נחלתם אשר נתן להם משה בעבר הירדן מזרחה כאשר נתן להם משה עבד יהוה׃"],["6","13","9","아르논 강 가에 있는 아로에르에서 시작하여, 그 강 중간에 있는 성읍, 메드바에서 디본까지 이르는 고원 지대 전체,","아르논 개울 언덕 위에 있는 아로엘과 개울 가에 있는 성과 메드바에서 디본에 이르는 고원 지대 전역,","곧 아르논 골짜기 가에 있는 아로엘에서부터 골짜기 가운데에 있는 성읍과 디본까지 이르는 메드바 온 평지와","곧 아르논 골짜기 가에 있는 아로엘에서부터 골짜기 가운데 있는 성읍과 디본까지 이르는 메드바 온 평지와","이 두 지파와 므낫세 반 지파 사람들이 분배받은 땅은 아르논 계곡 가장자리에 있는 아로엘까지 펼쳐져 있는 지역과 아르논 계곡 가운데에 있는 성읍 그리고 메드바에서 디본까지 펼쳐져 있는 평원지대,","from Aroer on the bank of the Wadi Arnon and the city in the wadi itself, through the tableland of Medeba and Dibon,","From Aroer, that is upon the bank of the river Arnon, and the city that is in the midst of the river, and all the plain of Medeba unto Dibon;","It extended from Aroer on the rim of the Arnon Gorge, and from the town in the middle of the gorge, and included the whole plateau of Medeba as far as Dibon,","ab Aroer, quae sita est in ripa torrentis Arnon, et civitate in vallis medio, universaque campestria Medaba usque Dibon;","מערוער אשר על שפת נחל ארנון והעיר אשר בתוך הנחל וכל המישר מידבא עד דיבון׃"],["6","13","10","헤스본에서 다스리던 아모리족의 임금 시혼의 모든 성읍, 곧 암몬 자손들의 경계까지 이르는 지역,","아모리 왕 시혼이 암몬 백성과 접경하고 헤스본을 수도로 하여 다스리던 모든 성,","헤스본에서 다스리던 아모리 족속의 왕 시혼의 모든 성읍 곧 암몬 자손의 경계까지와","헤스본에 도읍하였던 아모리 사람의 왕 시혼의 모든 성읍 곧 암몬 자손의 지경까지와","또한 암몬 사람들이 살던 지역 곧 아모리 사람의 왕 시혼이 수도를 헤스론으로 정하고 다스리던 모든 성읍과","with the rest of the cities of Sihon, king of the Amorites, who reigned in Heshbon, to the boundary of the Ammonites;","And all the cities of Sihon king of the Amorites, which reigned in Heshbon, unto the border of the children of Ammon;","and all the towns of Sihon king of the Amorites, who ruled in Heshbon, out to the border of the Ammonites.","et cunctas civitates Sehon regis Amorraei, qui regnavit in Hesebon, usque ad terminos filiorum Ammon;","וכל ערי סיחון מלך האמרי אשר מלך בחשבון עד גבול בני עמון׃"],["6","13","11","길앗, 그수르족과 마아카족의 영토, 헤르몬 산 전체, 살카까지 이르는 바산 전체,","길르앗과 그술 사람과 마아갓 사람의 영토, 헤르몬의 전 산악 지대, 살가에 이르는 바산 전지역,","길르앗과 및 그술 족속과 마아갓 족속의 지역과 온 헤르몬 산과 살르가까지 온 바산","길르앗과 및 그술 사람과 마아갓 사람의 지경과 온 헤르몬산과 살르가까지 이른 온 바산","길르앗, 그리고 그술 사람과 마아갓 사람이 사는 지역과 헤르몬산을 둘러싸고 있는 전지역과 살르가까지 이르는 바산 전지역이다.","also Gilead and the territory of the Geshurites and Maacathites, all Mount Hermon, and all Bashan as far as Salecah,","And Gilead, and the border of the Geshurites and Maachathites, and all mount Hermon, and all Bashan unto Salcah;","It also included Gilead, the territory of the people of Geshur and Maacah, all of Mount Hermon and all Bashan as far as Salecah--","et Galaad ac terminos Gesuri et Maachathi omnemque montem Hermon et universam Basan usque Salcha,","והגלעד וגבול הגשורי והמעכתי וכל הר חרמון וכל הבשן עד סלכה׃"],["6","13","12","그리고 라파인 가운데 마지막 남은 자로, 아스타롯과 에드레이에서 다스리던 바산 임금 옥의 왕국 전체이다. 모세가 이미 그들을 쳐서 그 땅을 차지하였던 것이다.","아스다롯과 에드레이를 수도로 하고 다스리던 마지막 거인족 옥의 나라 바산이 그것이다. 모세가 그들을 쳐서 그 땅을 점령했던 것이다.","곧 르바의 남은 족속으로서 아스다롯과 에드레이에서 다스리던 바산 왕 옥의 온 나라라 모세가 이 땅의 사람들을 쳐서 쫓아냈어도","곧 르바의 남은 족속으로서 아스다롯과 에드레이에 도읍하였던 바산 왕 옥의 온 나라라 모세가 이 땅의 사람들을 쳐서 쫓아내었어도","아스다롯과 에드레이를 수도로 정하고 다스리던 바산 왕 옥의 영토까지이다. 이 바산 왕 옥은 거인족으로 알려져 있는 르바족의 마지막 남은 왕이었다. 모세가 이스라엘군을 이끌고 이 지역으로 쳐들어가 그들을 몰아내었다.","the entire kingdom in Bashan of Og, who was king at Ashtaroth and Edrei (he was a holdover from the remnant of the Rephaim). These Moses defeated and dispossessed.","All the kingdom of Og in Bashan, which reigned in Ashtaroth and in Edrei, who remained of the remnant of the giants: for these did Moses smite, and cast them out.","that is, the whole kingdom of Og in Bashan, who had reigned in Ashtaroth and Edrei and had survived as one of the last of the Rephaites. Moses had defeated them and taken over their land.","omne regnum Og in Basan, qui regnavit in Astharoth et Edrai - ipse fuit de reliquiis Raphaim C; percussitque eos Moyses atque delevit.","כל ממלכות עוג בבשן אשר מלך בעשתרות ובאדרעי הוא נשאר מיתר הרפאים ויכם משה וירשם׃"],["6","13","13","그러나 이스라엘 자손들이 그수르족과 마아카족을 쫓아내지 않았기 때문에, 그수르와 마아카 사람들이 오늘날까지 이스라엘 사람들 가운데에서 살고 있다.","그런데 이스라엘 백성은 그술족과 마아갓족만은 쫓아내지 못하였으므로 그술과 마아갓은 이날까지 이스라엘 가운데 끼여 살고 있다.","그술 족속과 마아갓 족속은 이스라엘 자손이 쫓아내지 아니하였으므로 그술과 마아갓이 오늘까지 이스라엘 가운데에서 거주하니라","그술 사람과 마아갓 사람은 이스라엘 자손이 쫓아 내지 아니하였으므로 그술과 마아갓이 오늘날까지 이스라엘 가운데 거하더라","그렇지만 이스라엘 사람들은 그술 사람과 마아갓 사람은 내쫓지 못하였다. 그런 까닭에 그술 사람과 마아갓 사람은 여전히 이스라엘 사람과 섞여 살고 있었다.","But the Israelites did not dispossess the Geshurites and Maacathites, so that Geshur and Maacath dwell in the midst of Israel to this day.","Nevertheless the children of Israel expelled not the Geshurites, nor the Maachathites: but the Geshurites and the Maachathites dwell among the Israelites until this day.","But the Israelites did not drive out the people of Geshur and Maacah, so they continue to live among the Israelites to this day.","Non autem disperdiderunt filii Israel Gesuri et Maachathi, et habitaverunt in medio Israel usque in praesentem diem.","ולא הורישו בני ישראל את הגשורי ואת המעכתי וישב גשור ומעכת בקרב ישראל עד היום הזה׃"],["6","13","14","레위 지파에게만은 상속 재산을 주지 않았다. 주님께서 그들에게 이르신 대로, 주 이스라엘의 하느님께 바치는 화제물이 바로 그들의 상속 재산이기 때문이다.","레위 지파만은 유산을 받지 않았다. 이스라엘의 하느님 1)야훼께서 약속대로 그들의 유산이 되어주셨기 때문이다.칠십인역을 따랐다. 히브리어 본문: \"야훼께 바치는 번제물이.\"","오직 레위 지파에게는 여호수아가 기업으로 준 것이 없었으니 이는 그에게 말씀하신 것과 같이 이스라엘의 하나님 여호와께 드리는 화제물이 그들의 기업이 되었음이더라","오직 레위 지파에게는 여호수아가 기업으로 준 것이 없었으니 이는 이스라엘 하나님 여호와께 드리는 화제물이 그 기업이 됨이 그에게 이르신 말씀과 같음이었더라","지금까지 이야기한 대로 이스라엘 각 지파에게는 그들이 각자 몫으로 차지하고 살아갈 땅을 나누어 주었지만 레위 지파에게만은 땅을 나누어 주지 않았다. 그 까닭은 여호와께서 모세에게 말씀하신 대로 이스라엘 사람들이 하나님 여호와께 드리는 제물, 곧 불에 살라바치는 번제물을 그들 몫으로 삼게 한 까닭이다.","However, Moses assigned no heritage to the tribe of Levi; the LORD, the God of Israel, is their heritage, as the LORD had promised them.","Only unto the tribes of Levi he gave none inheritance; the sacrifices of the LORD God of Israel made by fire are their inheritance, as he said unto them.","But to the tribe of Levi he gave no inheritance, since the offerings made by fire to the LORD, the God of Israel, are their inheritance, as he promised them.","Tribui tantum Levi non dedit possessionem, sed sacrificia Domini, Dei Israel: ipsa est eius hereditas, sicut locutus est illi.","רק לשבט הלוי לא נתן נחלה אשי יהוה אלהי ישראל הוא נחלתו כאשר דבר לו׃"],["6","13","15","모세가 르우벤 자손들의 지파에게 씨족에 따라 상속 재산을 주었는데,","르우벤 자손의 지파가 갈래를 따라 모세에게서 받은","모세가 르우벤 자손의 지파에게 그들의 가족을 따라서 기업을 주었으니","모세가 르우벤 자손의 지파에게 그 가족을 따라서 주었으니","모세가 르우벤 지파 사람들에게 그 씨족별로 나누어 준 땅은 다음과 같다.","This is what Moses gave to the tribe of the Reubenites by their clans:","And Moses gave unto the tribe of the children of Reuben inheritance according to their families.","This is what Moses had given to the tribe of Reuben, clan by clan:","Dedit ergo Moyses possessionem tribui filiorum Ruben iuxta cognationes suas.","ויתן משה למטה בני ראובן למשפחתם׃"],["6","13","16","그들의 영토는 아르논 강 가에 있는 아로에르에서 시작하여, 그 강 중간에 있는 성읍, 메드바 곁의 고원 지대 전체,","지역은 아르논 개울 중류 언덕 위에 있는 성 아로엘에서 메드바에 이르는 고원 지대 전역,","그들의 지역은 아르논 골짜기 가에 있는 아로엘에서부터 골짜기 가운데 있는 성읍과 메드바 곁에 있는 온 평지와","그 지경은 아르논 골짜기 가에 있는 아로엘에서부터 골짜기 가운데 있는 성읍과 메드바 곁에 있는 온 평지와","아르논 계곡 가장자리에 있는 아로엘에서부터 그 계곡 안에 자리잡고 있는 성읍, 그리고 메드바 옆에 있는 평원지대,","Their territory reached from Aroer, on the bank of the Wadi Arnon, and the city in the wadi itself, through the tableland about Medeba,","And their coast was from Aroer, that is on the bank of the river Arnon, and the city that is in the midst of the river, and all the plain by Medeba;","The territory from Aroer on the rim of the Arnon Gorge, and from the town in the middle of the gorge, and the whole plateau past Medeba","Fuitque terminus eorum ab Aroer, quae sita est in ripa torrentis Arnon, et a civitate in valle eiusdem torrentis media, et universa planities usque Medaba,","ויהי להם הגבול מערוער אשר על שפת נחל ארנון והעיר אשר בתוך הנחל וכל המישר על מידבא׃"],["6","13","17","헤스본, 그 고원 지대에 있는 모든 성읍, 곧 디본, 바못 바알, 벳 바알 므온,","그 고원 지대에 있는 헤스본과 그 모든 위성 도시, 곧 디본, 바뭇바알, 벳바알므온,","헤스본과 그 평지에 있는 모든 성읍 곧 디본과 바못 바알과 벧 바알 므온과","헤스본과 그 평지에 있는 모든 성읍 곧 디본과 바못 바알과 벧 바알 므온과","헤스본과 헤스본에 딸려 있는 평원지대의 여러 성읍, 곧 디본과 바못 바알과 벧바알므온과","to include Heshbon and all its towns on the tableland, Dibon, Bamoth-baal, Beth-baal-meon,","Heshbon, and all her cities that are in the plain; Dibon, and Bamothbaal, and Bethbaalmeon,","to Heshbon and all its towns on the plateau, including Dibon, Bamoth Baal, Beth Baal Meon,","Hesebon cunctaque oppida eius, quae sunt in campestribus: Dibon et Bamothbaal et Bethbaalmeon","חשבון וכל עריה אשר במישר דיבון ובמות בעל ובית בעל מעון׃"],["6","13","18","야하츠, 크데못, 메파앗,","야하스, 크데못, 메바앗,","야하스와 그데못과 메바앗과","야하스와 그데못과 메바앗과","야하스와 그데못과 메바앗과","Jahaz, Kedemoth, Mephaath,","And Jahaza, and Kedemoth, and Mephaath,","Jahaz, Kedemoth, Mephaath,","et Iasa et Cademoth et Mephaath,","ויהצה וקדמת ומפעת׃"],["6","13","19","키르야타임, 시브마, 골짜기의 언덕에 있는 체렛 사하르,","키랴다임, 시브마, 계곡의 언덕에 사는 세렛사할,","기랴다임과 십마와 골짜기의 언덕에 있는 세렛 사할과","기랴다임과 십마와 골짜기 가운데 산에 있는 세렛 사할과","기랴다임과 십마와 계곡의 언덕빼기에 있는 세렛 사할과","Kiriathaim, Sibmah, Zereth-shahar on the knoll within the valley,","And Kirjathaim, and Sibmah, and Zarethshahar in the mount of the valley,","Kiriathaim, Sibmah, Zereth Shahar on the hill in the valley,","Cariathaim et Sabama et Serethsahar in monte convallis,","וקריתים ושבמה וצרת השחר בהר העמק׃"],["6","13","20","벳 프오르, 피스가 기슭, 벳 여시못,","벳브올과 비스가 비탈 지역과 벳여시못,","벳브올과 비스가 산기슭과 벧여시못과","벧브올과 비스가 산록과 벧여시못과","벧브올과 비스가 산등성이 지역과 벧여시못과","Beth-peor, the slopes of Pisgah, Beth-jeshimoth,","And Bethpeor, and Ashdothpisgah, and Bethjeshimoth,","Beth Peor, the slopes of Pisgah, and Beth Jeshimoth","Bethphegor et declivia Phasga et Bethiesimoth","ובית פעור ואשדות הפסגה ובית הישמות׃"],["6","13","21","그리고 고원 지대의 모든 성읍, 헤스본에서 다스리던 아모리족 임금 시혼의 왕국 전체이다. 모세가 이 시혼을, 또 그 땅에 살면서 시혼의 봉신으로 있던 미디안족의 제후 에위, 레켐, 추르, 후르, 레바를 쳐 죽였다. 이들은 그 땅에 살던 시혼의 제후였다.","이렇게 고원 지대에 있는 모든 성이었다. 이것은 헤스본을 수도로 하고 다스리던 아모리 왕 시혼의 나라였다. 그는 모세에게 패하였다. 그 땅에 살던 시혼의 장군들 에위와 레켐과 수르와 후르와 레바도 그와 함께 패하였는데, 그들은 미디안 대표들이었다.","평지 모든 성읍과 헤스본에서 다스리던 아모리 족속의 왕 시혼의 온 나라라 모세가 시혼을 그 땅에 거주하는 시혼의 군주들 곧 미디안의 귀족 에위와 레겜과 술과 훌과 레바와 함께 죽였으며","평지 모든 성읍과 헤스본에 도읍한 아모리 사람 시혼의 온 나라라 모세가 시혼을 그 땅에 거하는 시혼의 방백 곧 미디안의 귀족 에위와 레겜과 술과 훌과 레바와 함께 죽였으며","평원지대에 자리잡고 있는 여러 성읍, 그리고 헤스본을 수도로 정하고 아모리 왕 시혼이 다스리던 전지역을 르우벤 지파 사람들이 차지하였다. 예전에 모세는 이스라엘군을 이끌고 이 지역으로 쳐들어가 시혼을 죽이고 그를 섬기며 미디안을 다스리던 에위와 레겜과 술과 훌과 레바도 함께 죽였다.","and the other cities of the tableland and of the whole kingdom of Sihon. This Amorite king, who reigned in Heshbon, Moses had defeated, with the princes of Midian, vassals of Sihon who were settled in the land: Evi, Rekem, Zur, Hur, and Reba;","And all the cities of the plain, and all the kingdom of Sihon king of the Amorites, which reigned in Heshbon, whom Moses smote with the princes of Midian, Evi, and Rekem, and Zur, and Hur, and Reba, which were dukes of Sihon, dwelling in the country.","--all the towns on the plateau and the entire realm of Sihon king of the Amorites, who ruled at Heshbon. Moses had defeated him and the Midianite chiefs, Evi, Rekem, Zur, Hur and Reba--princes allied with Sihon--who lived in that country.","et omnes urbes campestres universumque regnum Sehon regis Amorraei, qui regnavit in Hesebon, quem percussit Moyses, ipsum et principes Madian, Evi et Recem et Sur et Hur et Rebe, duces Sehon habitatores terrae.","וכל ערי המישר וכל ממלכות סיחון מלך האמרי אשר מלך בחשבון אשר הכה משה אתו ואת נשיאי מדין את אוי ואת רקם ואת צור ואת חור ואת רבע נסיכי סיחון ישבי הארץ׃"],["6","13","22","그때에 죽은 자들 가운데에는 이스라엘 자손들이 칼로 쳐 죽인 점쟁이, 브오르의 아들 발라암도 들어 있다.","브올의 아들 점쟁이 발람도 이스라엘 백성에게 살육당한 사람들과 함께 칼에 맞아 죽었다.","이스라엘 자손이 그들을 살륙하는 중에 브올의 아들 점술가 발람도 칼날로 죽였더라","이스라엘 자손이 그들을 도륙하는 중에 브올의 아들 술사 발람도 칼날로 죽였었더라","이스라엘 사람들이 이 지역으로 쳐들어가 칠 때에 이들뿐만 아니라 브올의 아들이며 점쟁이 발람도 함께 칼로 쳐 쓰러뜨렸다.","Balaam, son of Beor, the diviner, the Israelites killed with the sword, together with those they struck down.","Balaam also the son of Beor, the soothsayer, did the children of Israel slay with the sword among them that were slain by them.","In addition to those slain in battle, the Israelites had put to the sword Balaam son of Beor, who practiced divination.","Et Balaam filium Beor hariolum occiderunt filii Israel gladio cum ceteris interfectis.","ואת בלעם בן בעור הקוסם הרגו בני ישראל בחרב אל חלליהם׃"],["6","13","23","이렇게 르우벤 자손들의 경계는 요르단과 그 연안이다. 이것이 르우벤의 자손들이 씨족에 따라 상속 재산으로 받은 성읍들과 거기에 딸린 촌락들이다.","이와 같이 르우벤 자손의 지역은 요르단 강까지 뻗쳤다. 이렇게 르우벤 자손은 갈래를 따라 위와 같은 여러 성과 그 주변 지역을 유산으로 차지하였다.","르우벤 자손의 서쪽 경계는 요단과 그 강 가라 이상은 르우벤 자손의 기업으로 그 가족대로 받은 성읍들과 주변 마을들이니라","르우벤 자손의 서편 경계는 요단과 그 강 가라 이상은 르우벤 자손의 기업으로 그 가족대로 받은 성읍과 촌락이니라","르우벤 지파 사람들이 차지한 지역의 서쪽 경계는 요단강이다. 르우벤 지파 사람들은 앞에서 말한 지역내에 있는 여러 성읍과 마을을 그 씨족에 따라 영원한 그들의 몫으로 분배받았다.","The boundary of the Reubenites was the Jordan. These cities and their villages were the heritage of the Reubenites by their clans.","And the border of the children of Reuben was Jordan, and the border thereof. This was the inheritance of the children of Reuben after their families, the cities and the villages thereof.","The boundary of the Reubenites was the bank of the Jordan. These towns and their villages were the inheritance of the Reubenites, clan by clan.","Factusque est terminus filiorum Ruben Iordanis fluvius. Haec est possessio Rubenitarum per cognationes suas, urbes et viculi earum.","ויהי גבול בני ראובן הירדן וגבול זאת נחלת בני ראובן למשפחתם הערים וחצריהן׃"],["6","13","24","모세가 가드 지파, 곧 가드의 자손들에게 씨족에 따라 상속 재산을 주었는데,","가드 자손의 지파가 갈래를 따라 모세에게서 받은","모세가 갓 지파 곧 갓 자손에게도 그들의 가족을 따라서 기업을 주었으니","모세가 갓 지파 곧 갓 자손에게도 그 가족을 따라서 주었으니","모세는 갓 지파 사람들에게도 그 씨족에 따라 그들이 차지할 몫으로 땅을 나누어 주었다.","This is what Moses gave to the tribe of the Gadites by their clans:","And Moses gave inheritance unto the tribe of Gad, even unto the children of Gad according to their families.","This is what Moses had given to the tribe of Gad, clan by clan:","Deditque Moyses tribui Gad, filiis Gad, per cognationes suas possessionem, cuius hic est","ויתן משה למטה גד לבני גד למשפחתם׃"],["6","13","25","그들의 영토는 야제르, 길앗의 모든 성읍, 라빠 동쪽 아로에르까지 이르는 암몬 자손들의 땅 절반,","지역은 야셀, 길르앗의 모든 성, 라빠 앞쪽에 있는 아로엘에 이르는 암몬 백성의 땅 절반,","그들의 지역은 야셀과 길르앗 모든 성읍과 암몬 자손의 땅 절반 곧 랍바 앞의 아로엘까지와","그 지경은 야셀과 길르앗 모든 성읍과 암몬 자손의 땅 절반 곧 랍바 앞의 아로엘까지와","갓 지파가 차지한 지역은 야셀과 길르앗 지방 안에 있는 모든 성읍, 그리고 랍바 동쪽에 있는 아로엘까지 펼쳐져 있는 암몬 사람들의 땅 절반과","Their territory included Jazer, all the cities of Gilead, and half the land of the Ammonites as far as Aroer, toward Rabbah","And their coast was Jazer, and all the cities of Gilead, and half the land of the children of Ammon, unto Aroer that is before Rabbah;","The territory of Jazer, all the towns of Gilead and half the Ammonite country as far as Aroer, near Rabbah;","terminus: Iazer et omnes civitates Galaad dimidiaque pars terrae filiorum Ammon usque ad Aroer, quae est contra Rabba;","ויהי להם הגבול יעזר וכל ערי הגלעד וחצי ארץ בני עמון עד ערוער אשר על פני רבה׃"],["6","13","26","헤스본에서 라맛 미츠페와 브토님까지, 마하나임에서 로 드바르 경계까지,","또 헤스본에서 라맛미즈베와 브도님까지, 마하나임에서 로드발 지경까지,","헤스본에서 라맛 미스베와 브도님까지와 마하나임에서 드빌 지역까지와","헤스본에서 라맛 미스베와 브도님까지와 마하나임에서 드빌 지경까지와","헤스본에서 라맛 미스베와 브도님까지, 그리고 마하나임과 드빌 경계까지 펼쳐져 있는 땅과","(that is, from Heshbon to Ramath-mizpeh and Betonim, and from Mahanaim to the boundary of Lo-debar);","And from Heshbon unto Ramathmizpeh, and Betonim; and from Mahanaim unto the border of Debir;","and from Heshbon to Ramath Mizpah and Betonim, and from Mahanaim to the territory of Debir;","et ab Hesebon usque Ramothmaspha et Betonim et a Mahanaim usque ad terminos Lodabar,","ומחשבון עד רמת המצפה ובטנים וממחנים עד גבול לדבר׃"],["6","13","27","계곡에 있는 벳 하람, 벳 니므라, 수콧, 차폰, 헤스본 임금 시혼 왕국의 나머지, 요르단 건너편 동쪽 킨네렛 바다 끝까지 이르는 요르단과 그 연안이다.","그리고 벳하람, 벳니므라, 수꼿, 사본 등 헤스본 왕 시혼의 나머지 영토인 요르단 계곡인데, 그 경계는 요르단 강 건너 해 뜨는 쪽 계곡으로서 긴네렛 호수 한 끝에 이른다.","골짜기에 있는 벧 하람과 벧니므라와 숙곳과 사본 곧 헤스본 왕 시혼의 나라의 남은 땅 요단과 그 강 가에서부터 요단 동쪽 긴네렛 바다의 끝까지라","골짜기에 있는 벧 하람과 벧니므라와 숙곳과 사본 곧 헤스본 왕 시혼의 나라의 남은 땅 요단과 그 강 가에서부터 요단 동편 긴네렛 바다의 끝까지라","요단 계곡에 자리 잡고 있는 성읍 벧하람과 벧니므라와 숙곳과 사본이다. 이 가운데 사본은 헤스본 왕 시혼이 다스리던 땅 가운데 앞에서 포함되지 않았던 땅이다. 갓 지파 사람들이 그들 몫으로 차지하였던 땅의 서쪽 경계는 요단강이고 북쪽은 갈릴리 바다라고도 부르는 긴네렛 바다이다.","and in the Jordan valley: Beth-haram, Beth-nimrah, Succoth, Zaphon, the other part of the kingdom of Sihon, king of Heshbon, with the bank of the Jordan to the southeastern tip of the Sea of Chinnereth.","And in the valley, Betharam, and Bethnimrah, and Succoth, and Zaphon, the rest of the kingdom of Sihon king of Heshbon, Jordan and his border, even unto the edge of the sea of Chinnereth on the other side Jordan eastward.","and in the valley, Beth Haram, Beth Nimrah, Succoth and Zaphon with the rest of the realm of Sihon king of Heshbon (the east side of the Jordan, the territory up to the end of the Sea of Kinnereth).","in valle quoque Betharan et Bethnemra et Succoth et Saphon, reliqua pars regni Sehon regis Hesebon; Iordanis et terminus usque ad extremam partem maris Chenereth trans Iordanem ad orientalem plagam.","ובעמק בית הרם ובית נמרה וסכות וצפון יתר ממלכות סיחון מלך חשבון הירדן וגבל עד קצה ים כנרת עבר הירדן מזרחה׃"],["6","13","28","이것이 가드의 자손들이 씨족에 따라 상속 재산으로 받은 성읍들과 거기에 딸린 촌락들이다.","이렇게 가드 후손은 갈래를 따라 위와 같은 여러 성과 그 주변 지역을 유산으로 차지하였다.","이는 갓 자손의 기업으로 그들의 가족대로 받은 성읍들과 주변 마을들이니라","이는 갓 자손의 기업으로 그 가족대로 받은 성읍과 촌락이니라","이상이 각 씨족에 따라 갓 지파 사람들 몫으로 분배받은 성읍과 마을들이다.","These cities and their villages were the heritage of the clans of the Gadites.","This is the inheritance of the children of Gad after their families, the cities, and their villages.","These towns and their villages were the inheritance of the Gadites, clan by clan.","Haec est possessio filiorum Gad per familias suas, civitates et villae earum.","זאת נחלת בני גד למשפחתם הערים וחצריהם׃"],["6","13","29","모세가 므나쎄 반쪽 지파에게 상속 재산을 주었다. 그래서 그것이 씨족에 따라 므나쎄 자손들의 반쪽 지파에 속하게 되었는데,","므나쎄 자손의 지파 절반이 갈래를 따라 모세에게서 받은","모세가 므낫세 반 지파에게 기업을 주었으되 므낫세 자손의 반 지파에게 그들의 가족대로 주었으니","모세가 므낫세 반 지파에게 주었으되 므낫세 자손의 반 지파에게 그 가족대로 주었으니","모세는 므낫세 반 지파 사람들에게도 그 씨족에 따라 그들이 차지할 몫으로 땅을 나누어 주었다.","This is what Moses gave to the half-tribe of Manasseh; the half-tribe of the Manassites, by their clans, had","And Moses gave inheritance unto the half tribe of Manasseh: and this was the possession of the half tribe of the children of Manasseh by their families.","This is what Moses had given to the half-tribe of Manasseh, that is, to half the family of the descendants of Manasseh, clan by clan:","Dedit Moyses et dimidiae tribui filiorum Manasse, iuxta cognationes suas possessionem:","ויתן משה לחצי שבט מנשה ויהי לחצי מטה בני מנשה למשפחותם׃"],["6","13","30","그들의 영토는 마하나임에서 시작하여 바산 전체, 곧 바산 임금 옥의 왕국 전체, 바산에 있는 ‘야이르의 부락들’ 예순 개 성읍이다.","지역은 마하나임에서 시작되는 바산 전지역, 바산 왕 옥의 영토였던 바산에 있는 야이르의 천막촌 육십 개이다.","그 지역은 마하나임에서부터 온 바산 곧 바산 왕 옥의 온 나라와 바산에 있는 야일의 모든 고을 육십 성읍과","그 지경은 마하나임에서부터 온 바산 곧 바산 왕 옥의 전국과 바산 경내 야일의 모든 고을 육십 성읍과","므낫세 반 지파가 차지한 지역은 다음과 같다. 마하나임까지 온 바산을 포함한 지역, 다시 말해 바산 왕 옥이 다스리는 모든 나라, 특히 바산 안에 있는 야일의 모든 마을 육십 성읍이다.","territory including Mahanaim, all of Bashan, the entire kingdom of Og, king of Bashan, and all the villages of Jair, which are sixty cities in Bashan.","And their coast was from Mahanaim, all Bashan, all the kingdom of Og king of Bashan, and all the towns of Jair, which are in Bashan, threescore cities:","The territory extending from Mahanaim and including all of Bashan, the entire realm of Og king of Bashan--all the settlements of Jair in Bashan, sixty towns,","Manasse, a Mahanaim universam Basan, cunctum regnum Og regis Basan omnesque vicos Iair, qui sunt in Basan, sexaginta oppida;","ויהי גבולם ממחנים כל הבשן כל ממלכות עוג מלך הבשן וכל חות יאיר אשר בבשן ששים עיר׃"],["6","13","31","길앗 절반, 바산에 있던 옥의 왕도인 아스타롯과 에드레이는 므나쎄의 아들 마키르의 자손들, 곧 마키르 자손들의 절반이 씨족에 따라 받았다.","길르앗 절반과 바산에 있는 옥의 두 수도 아스다롯과 에드레이는 므나쎄의 아들 마길이 받았지만 실상은 마길 후손의 절반이 받은 것이다.","길르앗 절반과 바산 왕 옥의 나라 성읍 아스다롯과 에드레이라 이는 므낫세의 아들 마길의 자손에게 돌린 것이니 곧 마길 자손의 절반이 그들의 가족대로 받으니라","길르앗 절반과 바산 왕 옥의 나라 성읍 아스다롯과 에드레이라 이는 므낫세의 아들 마길의 자손에게 돌린 것이니 곧 마길 자손의 절반이 그 가족대로 받으니라","길르앗 지역 절반과 바산 왕 옥이 다스리던 성읍 가운데에서 아스다롯과 에드레이는 바산의 주요 성읍이었는데, 이 성읍들은 므낫세의 아들 마길의 후손들 특히 그 절반이 각 씨족에 따라 나누어 물려받은 곳이다.","Half of Gilead, with Ashtaroth and Edrei, royal cities of Og in Bashan, fell to the descendants of Machir, son of Manasseh, to half the Machirites, by their clans.","And half Gilead, and Ashtaroth, and Edrei, cities of the kingdom of Og in Bashan, were pertaining unto the children of Machir the son of Manasseh, even to the one half of the children of Machir by their families.","half of Gilead, and Ashtaroth and Edrei (the royal cities of Og in Bashan). This was for the descendants of Makir son of Manasseh--for half of the sons of Makir, clan by clan.","et dimidiam partem Galaad et Astharoth et Edrai, urbes regni Og in Basan, filiis Machir filii Manasse, dimidiae parti filiorum Machir, iuxta cognationes suas.","וחצי הגלעד ועשתרות ואדרעי ערי ממלכות עוג בבשן לבני מכיר בן מנשה לחצי בני מכיר למשפחותם׃"],["6","13","32","이것이 모세가 예리코 동쪽, 요르단 건너편 모압 벌판에서 상속 재산으로 나누어 준 땅이다.","이상은 모세가 요르단 강 건너편, 예리고 동쪽 모압 평지에서 나누어준 땅이다.","요단 동쪽 여리고 맞은편 모압 평지에서 모세가 분배한 기업이 이러하여도","요단 동편 여리고 맞은편 모압 평지에서 모세가 분배한 기업이 이러하여도","모세는 이렇게 요단강 건너편에 있는 모압 땅을 분배하였다. 모압 땅은 여리고 동쪽에 있는 땅이기도 하다.","These are the heritages which Moses gave when he was in the plains of Moab, beyond the Jordan east of Jericho.","These are the countries which Moses did distribute for inheritance in the plains of Moab, on the other side Jordan, by Jericho, eastward.","This is the inheritance Moses had given when he was in the plains of Moab across the Jordan east of Jericho.","Hanc possessionem divisit Moyses in campestribus Moab trans Iordanem contra Iericho ad orientalem plagam.","אלה אשר נחל משה בערבות מואב מעבר לירדן יריחו מזרחה׃"],["6","13","33","그러나 레위 지파에게는 모세가 상속 재산을 주지 않았다. 이는 주님께서 그들에게 이르신 대로, 주 이스라엘의 하느님께서 바로 그들의 상속 재산이시기 때문이다.","모세는 레위 지파에게는 아무런 유산도 주지 않았다. 이스라엘의 하느님 야훼께서 약속대로 친히 그들의 유산이 되어주시기 때문이었다.","오직 레위 지파에게는 모세가 기업을 주지 아니하였으니 이는 그들에게 말씀하신 것과 같이 이스라엘의 하나님 여호와께서 그들의 기업이 되심이었더라","오직 레위 지파에게는 모세가 기업을 주지 아니하였으니 이는 그들에게 말씀하심 같이 이스라엘 하나님 여호와께서 그 기업이 되심이었더라","그러나 모세는 레위 지파에게만은 땅을 분배해 주지 않았다. 여호와께서 레위 지파에게 이르신 대로 이스라엘의 하나님 여호와께서 몸소 레위 지파의 유산이 되어 주셨기 때문이다.","But Moses gave no heritage to the tribe of Levi: the LORD, the God of Israel, is their heritage, as he had promised them.","But unto the tribe of Levi Moses gave not any inheritance: the LORD God of Israel was their inheritance, as he said unto them.","But to the tribe of Levi, Moses had given no inheritance; the LORD, the God of Israel, is their inheritance, as he promised them.","Tribui autem Levi non dedit possessionem, quoniam Dominus, Deus Israel, ipse est possessio eius, ut locutus est illi.","ולשבט הלוי לא נתן משה נחלה יהוה אלהי ישראל הוא נחלתם כאשר דבר להם׃"],["6","14","1","이스라엘 자손들이 가나안 땅에서 상속 재산으로 나누어 받은 땅, 곧 엘아자르 사제와 눈의 아들 여호수아와 이스라엘 자손 지파들의 가문 우두머리들이 그들에게 상속 재산으로 나누어 준 땅은 이러하다.","백성이 유산으로 받은 땅, 즉 사제 엘르아잘과 눈의 아들 여호수아와 이스라엘 지파의 각 가문 어른들이 이스라엘 백성에게 가나안에서 나누어준 땅은 아래와 같다.","이것은 이스라엘 자손이 가나안 땅에서 받은 기업 곧 제사장 엘르아살과 눈의 아들 여호수아와 이스라엘 자손 지파의 족장들이 분배한 것이니라","이스라엘 자손이 가나안 땅에서 취한 기업 곧 제사장 엘르아살과 눈의 아들 여호수아와 이스라엘 자손 지파의 족장들이 분배한 것이 이 아래와 같으니라","이스라엘 사람들이 가나안 땅에서 각각 그 차지할 몫으로 분배받은 지역은 다음과 같다. 엘르아살 제사장과 눈의 아들 여호수아와 이스라엘 지파에 딸려 있는 각 집안의 어른들이 모여 이스라엘 사람들에게 요단강 서쪽 땅을 분배하였다.","These are the portions which the Israelites received as heritage in the land of Canaan. Eleazar the priest, Joshua, son of Nun, and the heads of families in the tribes of the Israelites determined","And these are the countries which the children of Israel inherited in the land of Canaan, which Eleazar the priest, and Joshua the son of Nun, and the heads of the fathers of the tribes of the children of Israel, distributed for inheritance to them.","Now these are the areas the Israelites received as an inheritance in the land of Canaan, which Eleazar the priest, Joshua son of Nun and the heads of the tribal clans of Israel allotted to them.","Hoc est, quod hereditave runt filii Israel in terra Cha naan, quod dederunt eis Eleazar sacerdos et Iosue filius Nun et principes familiarum tribuum Israel,","ואלה אשר נחלו בני ישראל בארץ כנען אשר נחלו אותם אלעזר הכהן ויהושע בן נון וראשי אבות המטות לבני ישראל׃"],["6","14","2","이 상속 재산은 주님께서 모세를 통하여 명령하신 대로, 아홉 지파와 한 지파의 절반에게 제비를 뽑아 나누어 준 것이다.","그들은 야훼께서 모세를 시켜 명하신 대로 제비를 뽑아 아홉 지파 반에게 나누어주었다.","여호와께서 모세에게 명령하신 대로 그들의 기업을 제비 뽑아 아홉 지파와 반 지파에게 주었으니","여호와께서 모세에게 명하신 대로 그들의 기업을 제비 뽑아 아홉 지파와 반 지파에게 주었으니","여호와께서 모세를 통하여 명령하신 대로 그들은 제비를 뽑아 아홉 지파와 반 지파 사람들에게 대대로 물려받을 몫으로 땅을 분배하였다.","their heritage by lot, as the LORD had commanded through Moses concerning the remaining nine and a half tribes.","By lot was their inheritance, as the LORD commanded by the hand of Moses, for the nine tribes, and for the half tribe.","Their inheritances were assigned by lot to the nine-and-a-half tribes, as the LORD had commanded through Moses.","sorte omnia dividentes, sicut praeceperat Dominus in manu Moysi, novem tribubus et dimidiae tribui.","בגורל נחלתם כאשר צוה יהוה ביד משה לתשעת המטות וחצי המטה׃"],["6","14","3","두 지파와 한 지파의 절반에게는 모세가 이미 요르단 건너편에서 상속 재산을 주었고, 레위인들에게는 상속 재산을 주지 않았다.","모세는 두 지파 반에게 요르단 강 건너편 땅을 이미 유산으로 주었던 것이다. 그러나 레위인들이 남이 받는 유산을 한몫 받지 못한 것은","이는 두 지파와 반 지파의 기업은 모세가 요단 저쪽에서 주었음이요 레위 자손에게는 그들 가운데에서 기업을 주지 아니하였으니","두 지파와 반 지파의 기업은 모세가 요단 저편에서 주었음이요 레위 자손에게는 그들 가운데서 기업을 주지 아니하였으니","앞서도 말하였다시피 모세가 이미 두 지파와 반 지파 사람들에게 요단강 건너 동편 지역을 그들이 대대로 물려받을 몫으로 나누어 준 적이 있었다. 물론 이때 레위 지파 사람들에게는 땅을 그들이 대대로 물려줄 몫으로 나누어 주지는 않았다.","To two and a half tribes Moses had already given a heritage beyond the Jordan; to the Levites he had given no heritage among them:","For Moses had given the inheritance of two tribes and an half tribe on the other side Jordan: but unto the Levites he gave none inheritance among them.","Moses had granted the two-and-a-half tribes their inheritance east of the Jordan but had not granted the Levites an inheritance among the rest,","Duabus enim tribubus et dimidiae dederat Moyses trans Iordanem possessionem, absque Levitis, quibus nihil dedit inter fratres suos;","כי נתן משה נחלת שני המטות וחצי המטה מעבר לירדן וללוים לא נתן נחלה בתוכם׃"],["6","14","4","요셉의 자손들은 므나쎄와 에프라임 두 지파가 되었다. 레위인들에게는 거주할 성읍들, 그리고 소 떼와 양 떼를 기를 목초지 외에는 이 땅에서 어떤 몫도 주지 않았다.","요셉의 후손이 므나쎄와 에브라임 두 지파가 되었기 때문이다. 레위인들은 들어가서 살 성과 그들의 재산인 가축을 기를 목장을 받았을 뿐 땅은 분배받지 않았다.","이는 요셉의 자손이 므낫세와 에브라임의 두 지파가 되었음이라 이 땅에서 레위 사람에게 아무 분깃도 주지 아니하고 다만 거주할 성읍들과 가축과 재산을 위한 목초지만 주었으니","요셉 자손은 므낫세와 에브라임의 두 지파가 되었음이라 이 땅에서 레위 사람에게 아무 분깃도 주지 아니하고 오직 거할 성읍들과 가축과 재물을 둘 들만 줄 뿐으로","모세가 땅을 나누어 준 두 지파는 요셉에게서 갈라져 나간 므낫세 지파와 에브라임 지파였다. 레위 지파 사람들에게는 그들이 대대로 차지할 땅을 몫으로 나누어 주지 않은 대신 그들이 살아갈 성읍들과 여러 가축 떼를 칠 목초지는 나누어 주었다.","the descendants of Joseph formed two tribes, Manasseh and Ephraim. But the Levites were given no share of the land except cities to live in, with their pasture lands for the herds and flocks.","For the children of Joseph were two tribes, Manasseh and Ephraim: therefore they gave no part unto the Levites in the land, save cities to dwell in, with their suburbs for their cattle and for their substance.","for the sons of Joseph had become two tribes--Manasseh and Ephraim. The Levites received no share of the land but only towns to live in, with pasturelands for their flocks and herds.","sed sunt filii Ioseph in duas divisi tribus, Manasse et Ephraim, nec acceperunt Levitae aliam in terra partem, nisi urbes ad habitandum et suburbana earum ad alenda iumenta et pecora sua.","כי היו בני יוסף שני מטות מנשה ואפרים ולא נתנו חלק ללוים בארץ כי אם ערים לשבת ומגרשיהם למקניהם ולקנינם׃"],["6","14","5","이스라엘 자손들은 주님께서 모세에게 명령하신 그대로 이 땅을 나누었다.","이렇게 이스라엘 백성은 야훼께서 모세에게 명령하신 대로 토지를 나누어받았다.","이스라엘 자손이 여호와께서 모세에게 명령하신 것과 같이 행하여 그 땅을 나누었더라","이스라엘 자손이 여호와께서 모세에게 명하신 것과 같이 행하여 그 땅을 나누었더라","여호와께서 모세에게 명령하신 대로 이스라엘 사람들은 각각 그들이 대대로 물려 가며 차지할 몫으로 땅을 나누었다.","As the LORD had commanded Moses, so the Israelites did: they apportioned the land.","As the LORD commanded Moses, so the children of Israel did, and they divided the land.","So the Israelites divided the land, just as the LORD had commanded Moses.","Sicut praeceperat Dominus Moysi, ita fecerunt filii Israel et diviserunt terram.","כאשר צוה יהוה את משה כן עשו בני ישראל ויחלקו את הארץ׃"],["6","14","6","유다의 자손들이 길갈에 있는 여호수아를 찾아갔을 때, 크나즈인 여푼네의 아들 칼렙이 그에게 말하였다. “주님께서 카데스 바르네아에서 하느님의 사람 모세께 저와 나리의 일을 두고 이르신 말씀을 나리께서는 알고 계십니다.","크니즈 사람 여분네의 아들 갈렙이 유다 후손과 함께 길갈로 여호수아를 찾아와 말하였다. \"당신은 아십니다. 카데스바르네아에서 있은 일입니다. 야훼께서 나와 당신의 일을 두고 하느님의 사람 모세에게 무엇이라고 말씀하셨는지 아실 줄 믿습니다.","그 때에 유다 자손이 길갈에 있는 여호수아에게 나아오고 그니스 사람 여분네의 아들 갈렙이 여호수아에게 말하되 여호와께서 가데스 바네아에서 나와 당신에게 대하여 하나님의 사람 모세에게 이르신 일을 당신이 아시는 바라","때에 유다 자손이 길갈에 있는 여호수아에게 나아오고 그니스 사람 여분네의 아들 갈렙이 여호수아에게 말하되 여호와께서 가데스 바네아에서 나와 당신에게 대하여 하나님의 사람 모세에게 이르신 일을 당신이 아시는 바라","하루는 그니스 사람 여분네의 아들 갈렙이 유다 사람들과 함께 길갈로 여호수아를 찾아와서는 이렇게 말하였다. \"어르신께서도 잘 아시지 않습니까? 여호와께서 하나님의 사람 모세에게 가데스바네아에서 어르신과 저에 대한 일로 말씀하신 적이 있으시지요. 그때 여호와께서 하신 말씀 말입니다.","When the Judahites approached Joshua in Gilgal, the Kenizzite Caleb, son of Jephunneh, said to him: “You know the word the LORD spoke to Moses, the man of God, concerning you and concerning me in Kadesh-barnea.","Then the children of Judah came unto Joshua in Gilgal: and Caleb the son of Jephunneh the Kenezite said unto him, Thou knowest the thing that the LORD said unto Moses the man of God concerning me and thee in Kadeshbarnea.","Now the men of Judah approached Joshua at Gilgal, and Caleb son of Jephunneh the Kenizzite said to him, \"You know what the LORD said to Moses the man of God at Kadesh Barnea about you and me.","Accesserunt itaque filii Iudae ad Iosue in Galgala, locutusque est ad eum Chaleb filius Iephonne Cenezaeus:  “Nosti quid locutus sit Dominus ad Moysen hominem Dei de me et te in Cadesbarne.","ויגשו בני יהודה אל יהושע בגלגל ויאמר אליו כלב בן יפנה הקנזי אתה ידעת את הדבר אשר דבר יהוה אל משה איש האלהים על אדותי ועל אדותיך בקדש ברנע׃"],["6","14","7","제가 마흔 살이었을 때, 주님의 종 모세께서 이 땅을 정탐하라고 저를 카데스 바르네아에서 보내셨습니다. 저는 돌아가서 제 마음에 있는 그대로 그분께 보고하였습니다.","내가 마흔 살 되던 때였습니다. 야훼의 종 모세가 이 땅을 정탐하라고 나를 카데스바르네아에서 파견하였습니다. 나는 마음에 믿어지는 바를 그에게 보고하였습니다.","내 나이 사십 세에 여호와의 종 모세가 가데스 바네아에서 나를 보내어 이 땅을 정탐하게 하였으므로 내가 성실한 마음으로 그에게 보고하였고","내 나이 사십세에 여호와의 종 모세가 가데스 바네아에서 나를 보내어 이 땅을 정탐케 하므로 내 마음에 성실한대로 그에게 보고하였고","여호와의 종 모세가 저를 정탐꾼으로 가데스바네아에서 보내실 때 저는 마흔살이었습니다. 저는 탐지하라고 보낸 그 땅을 자세히 살펴보고 돌아와서는 그곳의 사정이 어떠한지 사실대로 모세에게 말씀드렸습니다.","I was forty years old when Moses, the servant of the LORD, sent me from Kadesh-barnea to reconnoiter the land; and I brought back to him a frank report.","Forty years old was I when Moses the servant of the LORD sent me from Kadeshbarnea to espy out the land; and I brought him word again as it was in mine heart.","I was forty years old when Moses the servant of the LORD sent me from Kadesh Barnea to explore the land. And I brought him back a report according to my convictions,","Quadraginta annorum eram, quando me misit Moyses famulus Domini de Cadesbarne, ut considerarem terram; nuntiavique ei quod mihi verum videbatur.","בן ארבעים שנה אנכי בשלח משה עבד יהוה אתי מקדש ברנע לרגל את הארץ ואשב אתו דבר כאשר עם לבבי׃"],["6","14","8","저와 함께 올라갔던 형제들은 백성의 마음을 녹여 약하게 하였습니다만, 저는 주 저의 하느님을 온전히 따랐습니다.","나와 함께 올라갔던 형제들은 백성의 용기를 꺾어주었지만, 나는 야훼 나의 하느님께 충성을 다 바쳤습니다.","나와 함께 올라갔던 내 형제들은 백성의 간담을 녹게 하였으나 나는 내 하나님 여호와께 충성하였으므로","나와 함께 올라갔던 내 형제들은 백성의 간담을 녹게 하였으나 나는 나의 하나님 여호와를 온전히 좇았으므로","하지만 그때 저와 함께 땅을 살펴보러 올라갔던 형제들은 돌아와서 오히려 우리 오히려 용기를 꺽는 소리만 하지 않았습니까? 그래도 저는 우리 하나님 여호와의 뜻을 충실히 따랐습니다.","My fellow scouts who went up with me made the people’s confidence melt away, but I was completely loyal to the LORD, my God.","Nevertheless my brethren that went up with me made the heart of the people melt: but I wholly followed the LORD my God.","but my brothers who went up with me made the hearts of the people melt with fear. I, however, followed the LORD my God wholeheartedly.","Fratres autem mei, qui ascenderant mecum, dissolverunt cor populi, et nihilominus ego adimplevi, ut sequerer Dominum Deum meum.","ואחי אשר עלו עמי המסיו את לב העם ואנכי מלאתי אחרי יהוה אלהי׃"],["6","14","9","그래서 그날 모세께서는, ‘네가 주 나의 하느님을 온전히 따랐으니, 네 발로 밟은 땅은 영원히 너와 네 자손들의 상속 재산이 될 것이다.’ 하고 맹세하셨습니다.","그 날 모세는 이렇게 맹세하였습니다. '네가 나의 하느님 야훼께 충성을 다했으니 네 발이 닿는 땅은 영원히 너와 네 자손의 유산이 되리라.'","그 날에 모세가 맹세하여 이르되 네가 내 하나님 여호와께 충성하였은즉 네 발로 밟는 땅은 영원히 너와 네 자손의 기업이 되리라 하였나이다","그 날에 모세가 맹세하여 가로되 네가 나의 하나님 여호와를 온전히 좇았은즉 네 발로 밟는 땅은 영영히 너와 네 자손의 기업이 되리라 하였나이다","그래도 그때 제가 여호와의 뜻에 따라 말씀드렸기에 모세가 저에게 이렇게 맹세하였습니다. \"내가 분명히 말한다만 네가 밟는 곳은 어느 곳이든지 네가 영원히 차지할 몫으로 주겠다. 그 땅을 대대로 네 자손들에게 물려주어 유산으로 삼도록 해주마. 네가 우리 하나님 여호와의 뜻에 온전히 따랐기 때문이다.\"","On that occasion Moses swore this oath, ‘The land where you have set foot shall become your heritage and that of your descendants forever, because you have been completely loyal to the LORD, my God.’","And Moses sware on that day, saying, Surely the land whereon thy feet have trodden shall be thine inheritance, and thy children's for ever, because thou hast wholly followed the LORD my God.","So on that day Moses swore to me, 'The land on which your feet have walked will be your inheritance and that of your children forever, because you have followed the LORD my God wholeheartedly.'","Iuravitque Moyses in die illo dicens:  “Terra, quam calcavit pes tuus, erit possessio tua et filiorum tuorum in aeternum, quia adimplevisti, ut sequereris Dominum Deum meum “.","וישבע משה ביום ההוא לאמר אם לא הארץ אשר דרכה רגלך בה לך תהיה לנחלה ולבניך עד עולם כי מלאת אחרי יהוה אלהי׃"],["6","14","10","이제 보십시오, 주님께서는 친히 이르신 대로 저를 살아남게 하셨습니다. 이스라엘이 광야를 걸을 때에 주님께서 모세께 이 말씀을 이르신 때부터 마흔다섯 해 동안 저를 살아남게 하신 것입니다. 보십시오, 이제 저는 여든다섯 살이 되었습니다.","이 말씀은 이스라엘이 사막 지대를 지날 때 야훼께서 모세에게 하신 말씀입니다. 그 때로부터 사십오 년이 지난 지금까지 야훼께서는 약속대로 나를 이렇게 살아 있게 하셨습니다. 지금 내 나이 여든다섯인데","이제 보소서 여호와께서 이 말씀을 모세에게 이르신 때로부터 이스라엘이 광야에서 방황한 이 사십오 년 동안을 여호와께서 말씀하신 대로 나를 생존하게 하셨나이다 오늘 내가 팔십오 세로되","이제 보소서 여호와께서 이 말씀을 모세에게 이르신 때로부터 이스라엘이 광야에 행한 이 사십 오년 동안을 여호와께서 말씀하신대로 나를 생존케 하셨나이다 오늘날 내가 팔십 오세로되","그런데 하나님께서 이렇게 말씀하신 지 어느덧 45년이란 세월이 흘렀습니다. 우리 겨레 이스라엘이 광야를 떠돌아다닌 지 벌써 많은 세월이 흘렀지요. 여호와께서 모세에게 그런 말씀을 하신 지가 벌써 그렇게 되었습니다. 그런데도 여호와께서는 저를 지금껏 살려 주시어 올해로 저의 나이가 여든다섯이나 되었습니다. 여호와께서 저에게 하신 약속을 저버리시지 않고 그것을 지키시려고 여지껏 이것의 목숨을 거두어 가지 않으셨지요.","Now, as he promised, the LORD has preserved me these forty-five years since the LORD spoke thus to Moses while Israel journeyed in the wilderness; and now I am eighty-five years old,","And now, behold, the LORD hath kept me alive, as he said, these forty and five years, even since the LORD spake this word unto Moses, while the children of Israel wandered in the wilderness: and now, lo, I am this day fourscore and five years old.","\"Now then, just as the LORD promised, he has kept me alive for forty-five years since the time he said this to Moses, while Israel moved about in the desert. So here I am today, eighty-five years old!","Concessit ergo Dominus vitam mihi, sicut pollicitus est, usque in praesentem diem. Quadraginta et quinque anni sunt ex quo locutus est Dominus verbum istud ad Moysen, quando ambulabat Israel per solitudinem; hodie octoginta quinque annorum sum,","ועתה הנה החיה יהוה אותי כאשר דבר זה ארבעים וחמש שנה מאז דבר יהוה את הדבר הזה אל משה אשר הלך ישראל במדבר ועתה הנה אנכי היום בן חמש ושמונים שנה׃"],["6","14","11","모세께서 저를 보내시던 그날처럼 오늘도 저는 여전히 건강합니다. 전쟁하는 데에든 드나드는 데에든, 제 힘은 그때나 지금이나 마찬가지입니다.","모세가 나를 파견하던 그 시절처럼 나는 여전히 이렇게 건강합니다. 나는 지금도 그 때와 다름없이 힘이 있어 싸우러 나갈 수 있습니다.","모세가 나를 보내던 날과 같이 오늘도 내가 여전히 강건하니 내 힘이 그 때나 지금이나 같아서 싸움에나 출입에 감당할 수 있으니","모세가 나를 보내던 날과 같이 오늘날 오히려 강건하니 나의 힘이 그때나 이제나 일반이라 싸움에나 출입에 감당할 수 있사온즉","이것 나이가 어느덧 이렇게 되었어도 모세가 이것을 정탐꾼으로 보낼 때와 똑같이 기력이 왕성합니다. 그뿐인가요? 싸움터에 나가서 싸우라고 하신다면 나가서 싸울 수도 있습니다. 또 다른 일을 하라고 분부하신다 해도 해낼 자신이 있습니다. 나이는 먹었어도 여전히 힘은 젊었을 때와 다름없습니다.","but I am still as strong today as I was the day Moses sent me forth, with no less vigor whether it be for war or for any other tasks.","As yet I am as strong this day as I was in the day that Moses sent me: as my strength was then, even so is my strength now, for war, both to go out, and to come in.","I am still as strong today as the day Moses sent me out; I'm just as vigorous to go out to battle now as I was then.","sic valens ut eo valebam tempore, quando ad explorandum missus sum; illius in me temporis fortitudo usque hodie perseverat tam ad bellandum quam ad gradiendum.","עודני היום חזק כאשר ביום שלח אותי משה ככחי אז וככחי עתה למלחמה ולצאת ולבוא׃"],["6","14","12","그러니 이제 주님께서 그날 이르신 저 산악 지방을 저에게 주십시오. 그때 들으신 대로 아낙인들이 저곳에 살고 있고, 성읍들은 클뿐더러 요새로 되어 있습니다. 그러나 주님께서 저와 함께 계셔만 주신다면, 주님께서 이르신 대로 제가 그들을 쫓아낼 수 있을 것입니다.”","야훼께서 그 때 약속해 주신 이 산악 지대를 이제 나에게 주십시오. 그 때는 당신이 들으신 대로 아나킴이 거기에 큰 성들을 튼튼히 쌓고 살고 있었습니다. 그러나 야훼께서 내 편에 서주시면 야훼의 약속대로 나는 그들을 몰아낼 것입니다.\"","그 날에 여호와께서 말씀하신 이 산지를 지금 내게 주소서 당신도 그 날에 들으셨거니와 그 곳에는 아낙 사람이 있고 그 성읍들은 크고 견고할지라도 여호와께서 나와 함께 하시면 내가 여호와께서 말씀하신 대로 그들을 쫓아내리이다 하니","그 날에 여호와께서 말씀하신 이 산지를 내게 주소서 당신도 그 날에 들으셨거니와 그곳에는 아낙 사람이 있고 그 성읍들은 크고 견고할찌라도 여호와께서 혹시 나와 함께 하시면 내가 필경 여호와의 말씀하신대로 그들을 쫓아내리이다","그러니 이 산악지방을 제가 물려받을 땅으로 주십시오. 제 형제들과 함께 정탐을 마치고 돌아오던 날 여호와께서 저에게 말씀하신 대로 말입니다. 그날 어르신께서도 그 자리에서 우리가 보고 드린 말씀을 분명 기억하실 겁니다. 그 땅에는 아낙 사람이라고 하는 거인족이 살고 있고 또 그들이 사는 성은 어찌나 견고하고 크던지 이루 다 말로 표현할 수 없었다고 하는 얘기 말입니다. 그곳의 상황이 그렇다 하여도 여호와께서 우리와 함께 하신다면 무슨 걱정이 있겠습니까? 여호와께서 말씀하신 대로 어째서 그들을 몰아낼 수가 없겠습니까?\"","Now give me this mountain region which the LORD promised me that day, as you yourself heard. True, the Anakim are there, with large fortified cities, but if the LORD is with me I shall be able to dispossess them, as the LORD promised.”","Now therefore give me this mountain, whereof the LORD spake in that day; for thou heardest in that day how the Anakims were there, and that the cities were great and fenced: if so be the LORD will be with me, then I shall be able to drive them out, as the LORD said.","Now give me this hill country that the LORD promised me that day. You yourself heard then that the Anakites were there and their cities were large and fortified, but, the LORD helping me, I will drive them out just as he said.\"","Da ergo mihi montem istum, quem pollicitus est Dominus die illo, te quoque audiente quod Enacim ibi sunt et urbes magnae atque munitae; si forte sit Dominus mecum, et potuero delere eos, sicut promisit mihi “.","ועתה תנה לי את ההר הזה אשר דבר יהוה ביום ההוא כי אתה שמעת ביום ההוא כי ענקים שם וערים גדלות בצרות אולי יהוה אותי והורשתים כאשר דבר יהוה׃"],["6","14","13","그러자 여호수아가 여푼네의 아들 칼렙에게 축복하고 헤브론을 상속 재산으로 주었다.","여호수아는 여분네의 아들 갈렙에게 복을 빌어주고 헤브론을 유산으로 주었다.","여호수아가 여분네의 아들 갈렙을 위하여 축복하고 헤브론을 그에게 주어 기업을 삼게 하매","여호수아가 여분네의 아들 갈렙을 위하여 축복하고 헤브론을 그에게 주어 기업을 삼게 하매","여호수아가 여분네의 아들 갈렙에게 축복하고 헤브론을 그가 차지할 몫으로 주었다.","Joshua blessed Caleb, son of Jephunneh, and gave him Hebron as his heritage.","And Joshua blessed him, and gave unto Caleb the son of Jephunneh Hebron for an inheritance.","Then Joshua blessed Caleb son of Jephunneh and gave him Hebron as his inheritance.","Benedixitque ei Iosue et tradidit Hebron in possessionem;","ויברכהו יהושע ויתן את חברון לכלב בן יפנה לנחלה׃"],["6","14","14","그리하여 헤브론이 크나즈인 여푼네의 아들 칼렙의 상속 재산이 되어 오늘에 이른다. 그가 주 이스라엘의 하느님을 온전히 따랐기 때문이다.","그리하여 헤브론은 크니즈 사람 여분네의 아들 갈렙의 소유가 되어 오늘에 이른 것이다. 이는 그가 야훼 이스라엘의 하느님께 충성을 다한 덕분이다.","헤브론이 그니스 사람 여분네의 아들 갈렙의 기업이 되어 오늘까지 이르렀으니 이는 그가 이스라엘의 하나님 여호와를 온전히 좇았음이라","헤브론이 그니스 사람 여분네의 아들 갈렙의 기업이 되어 오늘날까지 이르렀으니 이는 그가 이스라엘의 하나님 여호와를 온전히 좇았음이며","그런 까닭에 헤브론은 지금까지도 그니스 사람 여분네의 아들 갈렙의 몫으로 지정되어 대대로 물려 내려왔다. 그 모든 것은 갈렙이 이스라엘의 하나님 여호와를 온전히 따랐기 때문이다.","Therefore Hebron remains the heritage of the Kenizzite Caleb, son of Jephunneh, to the present day, because he was completely loyal to the LORD, the God of Israel.","Hebron therefore became the inheritance of Caleb the son of Jephunneh the Kenezite unto this day, because that he wholly followed the LORD God of Israel.","So Hebron has belonged to Caleb son of Jephunneh the Kenizzite ever since, because he followed the LORD, the God of Israel, wholeheartedly.","atque ex eo fuit Hebron Chaleb filio Iephonne Cenezaeo usque in praesentem diem, quia adimplevit, ut sequeretur Dominum, Deum Israel.","על כן היתה חברון לכלב בן יפנה הקנזי לנחלה עד היום הזה יען אשר מלא אחרי יהוה אלהי ישראל׃"],["6","14","15","헤브론의 옛 이름은 키르얏 아르바였는데, 아르바는 아낙인들 가운데 가장 큰 인물이었다. 이로써 전쟁은 끝나고 이 땅은 평온해졌다.","헤브론의 예전 이름은 키럇아르바였는데 아나킴 가운데서 아르바만큼 큰 인물은 없었다.","헤브론의 옛 이름은 기럇 아르바라 아르바는 아낙 사람 가운데에서 가장 큰 사람이었더라 그리고 그 땅에 전쟁이 그쳤더라","헤브론의 옛 이름은 기럇 아르바라 아르바는 아낙 사람 가운데 가장 큰 사람이었더라 그 땅에 전쟁이 그쳤더라","헤브론은 옛날에 \"아르바의 마을\"이라는 뜻으로 기럇아르바라고 불렸다. 이 아르바는 거인족인 아낙 사람들 가운데서도 가장 큰 사람이었다. 이제는 더 이상 전쟁이 없이 그 땅이 평화로웠다.","Hebron was formerly called Kiriath-arba, for Arba, the greatest among the Anakim. And the land had rest from war.","And the name of Hebron before was Kirjatharba; which Arba was a great man among the Anakims. And the land had rest from war.","(Hebron used to be called Kiriath Arba after Arba, who was the greatest man among the Anakites.) Then the land had rest from war.","Nomen Hebron antea vocabatur Cariatharbe (id est civitas Arbe), hominis maximi inter Enacim. Et terra cessavit a proeliis.","ושם חברון לפנים קרית ארבע האדם הגדול בענקים הוא והארץ שקטה ממלחמה׃"],["6","15","1","유다 자손들의 지파가 씨족별로 제비를 뽑아 받은 땅은, 남쪽으로는 에돔의 경계, 남쪽 맨 끝에 있는 친 광야까지 이른다.","유다 후손의 지파에게 갈래를 따라 돌아온 몫은 씬 사막으로서 에돔과 접경하고 남쪽을 향해 내려가다가 그 남단까지 이른다.","또 유다 자손의 지파가 그들의 가족대로 제비 뽑은 땅의 남쪽으로는 에돔 경계에 이르고 또 남쪽 끝은 신 광야까지라","유다 자손의 지파가 그 가족대로 제비 뽑은 땅의 극남단은 에돔 지경에 이르고 또 남으로 신 광야까지라","유다 지파 사람들이 제비를 뽑아 각 씨족에 따라 배당받은 지역은 다음과 같다. 남쪽으로 에돔 땅과 접경해 있고 최남단은 신 광야까지 펼쳐 있는 땅이 유다 지파가 분배받은 땅이다.","The lot for the tribe of Judah by their clans fell toward the boundary of Edom, the wilderness of Zin in the Negeb, in the extreme south.","This then was the lot of the tribe of the children of Judah by their families; even to the border of Edom the wilderness of Zin southward was the uttermost part of the south coast.","The allotment for the tribe of Judah, clan by clan, extended down to the territory of Edom, to the Desert of Zin in the extreme south.","Sors tribus filiorum Iudae per cognationes suas ista fuit: usque ad terminum Edom, ad desertum Sin contra Nageb, usque ad extremam partem australis plagae.","ויהי הגורל למטה בני יהודה למשפחתם אל גבול אדום מדבר צן נגבה מקצה תימן׃"],["6","15","2","그래서 그들의 남쪽 경계는 ‘소금 바다’ 끝, 그 남쪽 끝에서 시작하여,","다시 말하면 남쪽 경계는 짠물호수 끝, 그 호수 남쪽 물굽이에서 시작하여,","또 그들의 남쪽 경계는 염해의 끝 곧 남향한 해만에서부터","그 남편 경계는 염해의 극단 곧 남향한 해만에서부터","이것을 더 자세히 말하면 다음과 같다. 남쪽 경계는 사해라고도 부르는 소금바다의 남단에서 시작하여","Their southern boundary ran from the end of the Salt Sea, from the tongue of land that faces the Negeb,","And their south border was from the shore of the salt sea, from the bay that looketh southward:","Their southern boundary started from the bay at the southern end of the Salt Sea,","Terminus eius meridionalis a summitate maris Salsissimi et a lingua eius, quae respicit meridiem.","ויהי להם גבול נגב מקצה ים המלח מן הלשן הפנה נגבה׃"],["6","15","3","계속 남쪽으로 ‘아크라삠 오르막’으로 뻗어 나가, 친을 지나서 카데스 바르네아의 남쪽으로 올라간다. 거기에서 헤츠론을 지나 아따르로 올라가다가 카르카 쪽으로 돌고,","아크라삠 비탈 남쪽으로 뻗어 씬을 지나서 카데스바르네아 남쪽으로 올라간다. 거기에서 헤스론을 거쳐 아딸로 올라가다가 다시 카르카로 꺾인다.","아그랍빔 비탈 남쪽으로 지나 신에 이르고 가데스 바네아 남쪽으로 올라가서 헤스론을 지나며 아달로 올라가서 돌이켜 갈가에 이르고","아그랍빔 비탈 남편으로 지나 신에 이르고 가데스 바네아 남편으로 올라가서 헤스론을 지나며 아달로 올라가서 돌이켜 갈가에 이르고","아그랍빔 비탈을 지나 신 광야를 지나간다. 다시 거기에서 가데스바네아 남쪽으로 올라가며 헤스론을 지나 아달로 올라가서는 갈가 쪽으로 돌아간다.","and went southward below the pass of Akrabbim, across through Zin, up to a point south of Kadesh-barnea, across to Hezron, and up to Addar; from there, looping around Karka,","And it went out to the south side to Maalehacrabbim, and passed along to Zin, and ascended up on the south side unto Kadeshbarnea, and passed along to Hezron, and went up to Adar, and fetched a compass to Karkaa:","crossed south of Scorpion Pass, continued on to Zin and went over to the south of Kadesh Barnea. Then it ran past Hezron up to Addar and curved around to Karka.","Egrediturque contra ascensum Acrabbim et pertransit in Sin ascenditque in meridie Cadesbarne et pervenit in Esron ascendens ad Addar et vertitur in Carca;","ויצא אל מנגב למעלה עקרבים ועבר צנה ועלה מנגב לקדש ברנע ועבר חצרון ועלה אדרה ונסב הקרקעה׃"],["6","15","4","거기에서 다시 아츠몬을 지나 ‘이집트 마른내’로 나가다가 그 끝이 바다에 이른다. “이것이 너희의 남쪽 경계이다.”","거기에서 아스몬을 지나 이집트 개울로 나가 바다에 이르러 경계가 끝난다. 이것이 너희 남쪽 경계가 될 것이다.","거기서 아스몬에 이르러 애굽 시내로 나아가 바다에 이르러 경계의 끝이 되나니 이것이 너희 남쪽 경계가 되리라","거기서 아스몬에 이르고 애굽 시내에 미치며 바다에 이르러 경계의 끝이 되나니 이것이 너희 남편 경계가 되리라","거기서 아스몬을 지나 애굽 시내를 죽 따라가면 바다라고 일컫는 지중해까지 경계가 뻗친다. 바로 이러한 경로가 유다 지파가 분배받은 땅의 남쪽 경계선이다.","it crossed to Azmon and then joined the Wadi of Egypt before coming out at the sea. (This is your southern boundary.)","From thence it passed toward Azmon, and went out unto the river of Egypt; and the goings out of that coast were at the sea: this shall be your south coast.","It then passed along to Azmon and joined the Wadi of Egypt, ending at the sea. This is their southern boundary.","atque inde pertransiens in Asemona pervenit ad torrentem Aegypti; eruntque exitus eius ad mare Magnum: hic erit vobis finis meridianae plagae.","ועבר עצמונה ויצא נחל מצרים והיה תצאות הגבול ימה זה יהיה לכם גבול נגב׃"],["6","15","5","동쪽 경계는 ‘소금 바다’인데 요르단이 끝나는 데까지 이른다. 북쪽 경계는 요르단이 끝나는 ‘소금 바다’ 북쪽 끝에서 시작한다.","짠물호수가 동쪽 경계를 이루는데 요르단 강이 끝나는 지점까지다. 북쪽 경계선은 요르단 강이 끝나는 호수 물굽이에서 시작된다.","그 동쪽 경계는 염해이니 요단 끝까지요 그 북쪽 경계는 요단 끝에 있는 해만에서부터","그 동편 경계는 염해니 요단 끝까지요 그 북편 경계는 요단 끝에 당한 해만에서부터","유다 지파가 물려받은 땅의 동쪽 경계선은 사해라고도 부르는 소금바다로 요단강이 사해로 흘러드는 끝이 바로 동쪽 경계의 마지막 지점이다. 유다 지파가 몫으로 받은 땅의 북쪽 경계선 역시 소금바다로 앞서 말한 요단강과 소금바다가 만나는 지점에서 시작한다.","The eastern boundary was the Salt Sea as far as the mouth of the Jordan. The northern boundary climbed northward from the tongue of the sea, toward the mouth of the Jordan,","And the east border was the salt sea, even unto the end of Jordan. And their border in the north quarter was from the bay of the sea at the uttermost part of Jordan:","The eastern boundary is the Salt Sea as far as the mouth of the Jordan. The northern boundary started from the bay of the sea at the mouth of the Jordan,","Ab oriente vero terminus erit mare Salsissimum usque ad extrema Iordanis. Terminus aquilonis a lingua maris et ab extremis Iordanis","וגבול קדמה ים המלח עד קצה הירדן וגבול לפאת צפונה מלשון הים מקצה הירדן׃"],["6","15","6","그 경계는 벳 호글라로 올라가서 벳 아라바 북쪽을 지나, 다시 르우벤의 아들 ‘보한의 바위’까지 올라간다.","그 경계는 거기에서 벳호글라로 올라가 베다라바 북쪽을 지난다. 그 경계는 르우벤의 아들 보한의 바위까지 올라간다.","벧 호글라로 올라가서 벧 아라바 북쪽을 지나 르우벤 자손 보한의 돌에 이르고","벧호글라로 올라가서 벧 아라바 북편을 지나 르우벤 자손 보한의 돌에 이르고","그곳에서 벧호글라로 올라가다가 벧아라바 북쪽을 지나고 거기서 다시 \"보한의 돌\"이라는 뜻의 이름을 지닌 에벤 보한까지 올라간다. 보한은 르우벤의 아들이었다.","up to Beth-hoglah, and ran north of Beth-arabah, up to Eben-Bohan-ben-Reuben.","And the border went up to Bethhogla, and passed along by the north of Betharabah; and the border went up to the stone of Bohan the son of Reuben:","went up to Beth Hoglah and continued north of Beth Arabah to the Stone of Bohan son of Reuben.","ascendit in Bethagla et transit ab aquilone Betharaba ascendens ad lapidem Boen filii Ruben","ועלה הגבול בית חגלה ועבר מצפון לבית הערבה ועלה הגבול אבן בהן בן ראובן׃"],["6","15","7","또 그 경계는 ‘아코르 골짜기’에서 드비르로 올라간 다음에 북쪽으로 돌아, 그 마른내 남쪽에 있는 ‘아둠밈 오르막’ 맞은쪽의 길갈로 향한다. 그러고 나서 ‘엔 세메스 물’ 쪽을 지나 그 끝이 엔 로겔에 이른다.","그 경계는 아골 골짜기로부터 드빌로 올라가서 개울 남쪽에 있는 아둠밈 언덕 맞은편 길갈로 향한다. 그 경계는 다시 엔세메스를 거쳐 엔로겔로 빠지며","또 아골 골짜기에서부터 드빌을 지나 북쪽으로 올라가서 그 강 남쪽에 있는 아둠밈 비탈 맞은편 길갈을 향하고 나아가 엔 세메스 물들을 지나 엔로겔에 이르며","또 아골 골짜기에서부터 드빌을 지나 북으로 올라가서 강 남편에 있는 아둠밈 비탈 맞은편 길갈을 향하고 나아가 엔 세메스 물을 지나 엔로겔에 이르며","거기에서 다시 아골 골짜기와 드빌을 지나 북쪽으로 올라가다가 계곡 남쪽에 있는 아둠밈 비탈이 마주 바라다 보이는 길갈로 방향을 바꾸어 간다. 다시 거기에서 엔세메스 샘을 지나 엔로겔까지 나아간다.","Thence the boundary climbed to Debir, north of the Valley of Achor, in the direction of the Gilgal that faces the pass of Adummim, on the south side of the wadi; from there it crossed to the waters of En-shemesh and emerged at En-rogel.","And the border went up toward Debir from the valley of Achor, and so northward, looking toward Gilgal, that is before the going up to Adummim, which is on the south side of the river: and the border passed toward the waters of Enshemesh, and the goings out thereof were at Enrogel:","The boundary then went up to Debir from the Valley of Achor and turned north to Gilgal, which faces the Pass of Adummim south of the gorge. It continued along to the waters of En Shemesh and came out at En Rogel.","et ascendens ad Dabir de valle Achor et contra aquilonem vergens ad Galiloth (hi sunt circuli), qui sunt ex adverso ascensionis Adommim, quae est ab australi parte torrentis, transit ad aquas, quae vocantur fons Solis, et erunt exitus eius ad fontem Rogel.","ועלה הגבול דברה מעמק עכור וצפונה פנה אל הגלגל אשר נכח למעלה אדמים אשר מנגב לנחל ועבר הגבול אל מי עין שמש והיו תצאתיו אל עין רגל׃"],["6","15","8","그 경계는 다시 여부스 곧 예루살렘의 남쪽 비탈을 따라 ‘벤 힌놈 골짜기’로 올라간 다음, 서쪽으로 ‘힌놈 골짜기’ 맞은편 산꼭대기로 올라가서는 르파임 골짜기의 북쪽 끝에 다다른다.","벤힌놈 골짜기를 끼고 여부스인의 산 중턱에 있는 예루살렘 남쪽에 이르고 또 서쪽으로 가다가 힌놈 골짜기 맞은편에 있는 산마루로 올라가 르바임 계곡 북단에 이른다.","또 힌놈의 아들의 골짜기로 올라가서 여부스 곧 예루살렘 남쪽 어깨에 이르며 또 힌놈의 골짜기 앞 서쪽에 있는 산 꼭대기로 올라가나니 이곳은 르바임 골짜기 북쪽 끝이며","또 힌놈의 아들의 골짜기로 올라가서 여부스 곧 예루살렘 남편 어깨에 이르며 또 힌놈의 골짜기 앞 서편에 있는 산 꼭대기로 올라가나니 이곳은 르바임 골짜기 북편 끝이며","그러다가 힌놈 골짜기를 끼고 올라가다가 여부스 사람들의 도성 예루살렘이 서 있는 산 남쪽 등성이를 끼고 돌아 힌놈 골짜기의 서쪽에 맞닿아 있는 언덕의 꼭대기까지 계속된다. 이 언덕 꼭대기는 르바임 계곡의 북쪽 끝에 자리잡고 있다.","Climbing again to the Valley of Ben-hinnom on the southern flank of the Jebusites (that is, Jerusalem), the boundary rose to the top of the mountain at the northern end of the Valley of Rephaim, which bounds the Valley of Hinnom on the west.","And the border went up by the valley of the son of Hinnom unto the south side of the Jebusite; the same is Jerusalem: and the border went up to the top of the mountain that lieth before the valley of Hinnom westward, which is at the end of the valley of the giants northward:","Then it ran up the Valley of Ben Hinnom along the southern slope of the Jebusite city (that is, Jerusalem). From there it climbed to the top of the hill west of the Hinnom Valley at the northern end of the Valley of Rephaim.","Ascenditque per convallem Benennom ex latere Iebusaei ad meridiem - haec est Ierusalem - et inde se erigens ad verticem montis, qui est contra vallem Ennom ad occidentem in extrema parte vallis Raphaim contra aquilonem;","ועלה הגבול גי בן הנם אל כתף היבוסי מנגב היא ירושלם ועלה הגבול אל ראש ההר אשר על פני גי הנם ימה אשר בקצה עמק רפאים צפנה׃"],["6","15","9","다시 산꼭대기에서 넵토아 샘으로 구부러져 에프론 산 성읍들 쪽으로 나간 다음, 바알라, 곧 키르얏 여아림 쪽으로 구부러진다.","그 산마루로부터 경계는 다시 넵도아 샘터로 꺾여 에브론 산 성들 쪽으로 빠졌다가 다시 키럇여아림이라고 하는 바알라로 꺾인다.","또 이 산 꼭대기에서부터 넵도아 샘물까지 이르러 에브론 산 성읍들로 나아가고 또 바알라 곧 기럇 여아림으로 접어들며","또 이 산 꼭대기에서부터 넵도아 샘물까지 이르러 에브론산 성읍들에 미치고 또 바알라 곧 기럇 여아림에 미치며","경계선은 이 언덕 꼭대기에서부터 다시 시작하여 넵도아 샘물까지 다다르고 거기서 에브론산에 자리잡고 있는 여러 성읍까지 뻗치고 다시 기럇여아림이라고도 부르는 바알라라는 곳까지 이어진다.","From the top of the mountain it ran to the fountain of waters of Nephtoah, extended to the cities of Mount Ephron, and continued to Baalah, or Kiriath-jearim.","And the border was drawn from the top of the hill unto the fountain of the water of Nephtoah, and went out to the cities of mount Ephron; and the border was drawn to Baalah, which is Kirjathjearim:","From the hilltop the boundary headed toward the spring of the waters of Nephtoah, came out at the towns of Mount Ephron and went down toward Baalah (that is, Kiriath Jearim).","pertransitque a vertice montis usque ad fontem aquae Nephtoa et pervenit usque ad vicos montis Ephron inclinaturque in Baala, quae est Cariathiarim.","ותאר הגבול מראש ההר אל מעין מי נפתוח ויצא אל ערי הר עפרון ותאר הגבול בעלה היא קרית יערים׃"],["6","15","10","그리고 바알라에서 서쪽으로 돌아 세이르 산으로 가서 여아림 산, 곧 크살론의 북쪽 비탈을 지난 다음, 벳 세메스로 내려가 팀나를 지난다.","거기 바알라에서 서편으로 세일 산을 돌아 크살론이라고 하는 여아림 산 북쪽 중턱을 지난다. 거기에서 벳세메스로 내려가 딤나를 거쳐","또 바알라에서부터 서쪽으로 돌이켜 세일 산에 이르러 여아림 산 곧 그살론 곁 북쪽에 이르고 또 벧 세메스로 내려가서 딤나를 지나고","또 바알라에서부터 서편으로 돌이켜 세일산에 이르러 여아림산 곧 그살론 곁 북편에 이르고 또 벧 세메스로 내려가서 딤나로 지나고","이 바알라에서 또 서쪽으로 세일산을 휘감아 돌아 나아가다가 여아림산까지 다다른다. 여아림산은 그살론이라고도 부르는데 이곳의 북쪽까지 경계선이 이어진다. 다시 이곳에서 벧세메스에서 딤나까지 내려간다.","From Baalah the boundary curved westward to Mount Seir and passed north of the ridge of Mount Jearim (that is, Chesalon); it descended to Beth-shemesh, and ran across to Timnah.","And the border compassed from Baalah westward unto mount Seir, and passed along unto the side of mount Jearim, which is Chesalon, on the north side, and went down to Bethshemesh, and passed on to Timnah:","Then it curved westward from Baalah to Mount Seir, ran along the northern slope of Mount Jearim (that is, Kesalon), continued down to Beth Shemesh and crossed to Timnah.","Et vergit de Baala contra occidentem usque ad montem Seir transitque iuxta latus montis Iarim ad aquilonem - id est Cheslon - et descendit in Bethsames transitque in Thamna","ונסב הגבול מבעלה ימה אל הר שעיר ועבר אל כתף הר יערים מצפונה היא כסלון וירד בית שמש ועבר תמנה׃"],["6","15","11","그 경계는 또 에크론 북쪽 비탈로 나가서 시카론 쪽으로 구부러져 바알라 산을 지난 다음, 야브느엘로 나가 그 끝이 바다에 이른다.","에크론 북쪽 산 중턱으로 빠진다. 거기에서 시끄론쪽으로 돌아 바알라 산을 거쳐 얍느엘로 빠진다. 경계는 거기에서 바다에 이르러 끝난다.","또 에그론 비탈 북쪽으로 나아가 식그론으로 접어들어 바알라 산을 지나고 얍느엘에 이르나니 그 끝은 바다며","또 에그론 북편으로 나아가 식그론에 이르러 바알라산에 미치고 얍느엘에 이르나니 그 끝은 바다며","또 딤나에서 경계선은 에그론 북쪽 산등성이를 타고 가다가 식그론으로 방향을 바꾼 다음 그곳에서 바알라산을 가로지르고 다시 얍느엘까지 뻗친다. 경계선은 이곳 얍느엘에서 바다까지 이어져 끝이 난다.","It then extended along the northern flank of Ekron, continued through Shikkeron, and across to Mount Baalah, from there to include Jabneel, before it came out at the sea.","And the border went out unto the side of Ekron northward: and the border was drawn to Shicron, and passed along to mount Baalah, and went out unto Jabneel; and the goings out of the border were at the sea.","It went to the northern slope of Ekron, turned toward Shikkeron, passed along to Mount Baalah and reached Jabneel. The boundary ended at the sea.","et pervenit ad latus septentrionale Accaron inclinaturque in Sechron et transit montem Baala pervenitque in Iebneel et finitur mari. Terminus occidentalis est mare Magnum.","ויצא הגבול אל כתף עקרון צפונה ותאר הגבול שכרונה ועבר הר הבעלה ויצא יבנאל והיו תצאות הגבול ימה׃"],["6","15","12","서쪽 경계는 큰 바다와 그 연안이다. 이것이 바로 씨족별로 유다의 자손들에게 돌아간 땅의 사방 경계이다.","1)대해 해안선이 서쪽 경계를 이룬다. 이상이 유다 후손의 각 갈래에 배당된 땅의 사면 경계이다.지중해를 가리킨다.","서쪽 경계는 대해와 그 해안이니 유다 자손이 그들의 가족대로 받은 사방 경계가 이러하니라","서편 경계는 대해와 그 해변이니 유다 자손이 그 가족대로 얻은 사면 경계가 이러하니라","서쪽은 흔히 큰 바다라고 부르는 지중해가 경계선을 이룬다. 이상이 유다 지파 사람들이 각 씨족에 따라 분배받아 살고 있는 땅의 경계선이다.","The western boundary was the Great Sea and its coast. This was the complete boundary of the Judahites by their clans.","And the west border was to the great sea, and the coast thereof. This is the coast of the children of Judah round about according to their families.","The western boundary is the coastline of the Great Sea. These are the boundaries around the people of Judah by their clans.","Hi sunt termini filiorum Iudae per circuitum in cognationibus suis.","וגבול ים הימה הגדול וגבול זה גבול בני יהודה סביב למשפחתם׃"],["6","15","13","주님께서 여호수아에게 내리신 분부대로, 여푼네의 아들 칼렙은 유다의 자손들 가운데에서 몫을 받았는데, 헤브론이라고도 하는 키르얏 아르바이다. 아르바는 아낙의 아버지다.","여분네의 아들 갈렙은 야훼께서 여호수아에게 내린 명령을 따라 유다 후손 틈에서 한몫을 차지하게 되었는데 여호수아는 그에게 헤브론이라고 하는 키럇아르바를 주었다. 아르바는 아낙인의 조상이었다.","여호와께서 여호수아에게 명령하신 대로 여호수아가 기럇 아르바 곧 헤브론을 유다 자손 중에서 분깃으로 여분네의 아들 갈렙에게 주었으니 아르바는 아낙의 아버지였더라","여호와께서 여호수아에게 명하신대로 여호수아가 기럇 아르바 곧 헤브론 성을 유다 자손 중에서 분깃으로 여분네의 아들 갈렙에게 주었으니 아르바는 아낙의 아비였더라","유다 사람이 몫으로 차지한 땅 중에서 여분네의 아들 갈렙은 여호와께서 여호수아에게 직접 분부를 내리신 대로 헤브론을 차지하였다. 그런데 이 헤브론은 본래 \"아르바의 마을\"이라는 뜻으로 기럇아르바라고 불렸다. 이 아르바는 아낙이라는 사람의 아버지이다. 아낙이라는 사람은 거인족인 아낙 사람의 조상이다.","As the LORD had commanded, Joshua gave Caleb, son of Jephunneh, a portion among the Judahites, namely, Kiriath-arba (Arba was the father of Anak), that is, Hebron.","And unto Caleb the son of Jephunneh he gave a part among the children of Judah, according to the commandment of the LORD to Joshua, even the city of Arba the father of Anak, which city is Hebron.","In accordance with the LORD'S command to him, Joshua gave to Caleb son of Jephunneh a portion in Judah--Kiriath Arba, that is, Hebron. (Arba was the forefather of Anak.)","Chaleb vero filio Iephonne dedit partem in medio filiorum Iudae, sicut praeceperat Dominus Iosue: Cariatharbe (id est civitas Arbe), patris Enac, ipsa est Hebron.","ולכלב בן יפנה נתן חלק בתוך בני יהודה אל פי יהוה ליהושע את קרית ארבע אבי הענק היא חברון׃"],["6","15","14","칼렙은 아낙의 세 자손, 세사이와 아히만과 탈마이를 그곳에서 쫓아냈다. 그들은 아낙의 후손이다.","갈렙은 아낙의 세 갈래 후손인 세새와 아히만과 탈매를 그 곳에서 몰아냈다. 그들은 아낙에게서 난 자손들이었다.","갈렙이 거기서 아낙의 소생 그 세 아들 곧 세새와 아히만과 달매를 쫓아내었고","갈렙이 거기서 아낙의 소생 곧 그 세 아들 세새와 아히만과 달매를 쫓아내었고","갈렙은 그곳에서 아낙의 세 아들인 세새와 아히만과 달매를 몰아냈다. 이 성에는 아낙의 세 아들을 조상으로 삼고 있는 씨족 사람들이 살고 있었다.","And Caleb dispossessed from there the three Anakim, the descendants of Anak: Sheshai, Ahiman, and Talmai.","And Caleb drove thence the three sons of Anak, Sheshai, and Ahiman, and Talmai, the children of Anak.","From Hebron Caleb drove out the three Anakites--Sheshai, Ahiman and Talmai--descendants of Anak.","Delevitque ex ea Chaleb tres filios Enac: Sesai et Ahiman et Tholmai de stirpe Enac.","וירש משם כלב את שלושה בני הענק את ששי ואת אחימן ואת תלמי ילידי הענק׃"],["6","15","15","그리고 거기에서 칼렙은 드비르의 주민들을 치러 올라갔다. 드비르의 옛 이름은 키르얏 세페르이다.","거기에서 그는 드빌의 주민들을 쳐 올라갔다. 드빌의 예전 이름은 키럇세벨이었다.","거기서 올라가서 드빌 주민을 쳤는데 드빌의 본 이름은 기럇 세벨이라","거기서 올라가서 드빌 거민을 쳤는데 드빌의 본 이름은 기럇 세벨이라","그곳에서 갈렙은 드빌 사람들이 살고 있는 곳으로 쳐들어 올라갔다. 옛날에는 드빌을 \"책의 마을\"이라는 뜻으로 기럇세벨이라 불렀다.","From there he marched up against the inhabitants of Debir, which was formerly called Kiriath-sepher.","And he went up thence to the inhabitants of Debir: and the name of Debir before was Kirjathsepher.","From there he marched against the people living in Debir (formerly called Kiriath Sepher).","Atque inde conscendens venit ad habitatores Dabir, quae prius vocabatur Cariathsepher (id est civitas Litterarum).","ויעל משם אל ישבי דבר ושם דבר לפנים קרית ספר׃"],["6","15","16","그때에 칼렙이 말하였다. “키르얏 세페르를 쳐서 점령하는 이에게 내 딸 악사를 아내로 주겠다.”","갈렙은 키럇세벨을 쳐서 함락시키는 사람에게 자기 딸 악사를 아내로 주겠다고 선언했는데,","갈렙이 말하기를 기럇 세벨을 쳐서 그것을 점령하는 자에게는 내가 내 딸 악사를 아내로 주리라 하였더니","갈렙이 말하기를 기럇 세벨을 쳐서 그것을 취하는 자에게는 내가 내 딸 악사를 아내로 주리라 하였더니","그곳으로 쳐올라가면서 갈렙은 기럇세벨로 쳐들어가 점령하는 사람에게는 자기 딸 악사를 아내로 주겠다고 말하였다.","Caleb said, “To the man who attacks Kiriath-sepher and captures it, I will give my daughter Achsah in marriage.”","And Caleb said, He that smiteth Kirjathsepher, and taketh it, to him will I give Achsah my daughter to wife.","And Caleb said, \"I will give my daughter Acsah in marriage to the man who attacks and captures Kiriath Sepher.\"","Dixitque Chaleb:  “Qui percusserit Cariathsepher et ceperit eam, dabo illi Axam filiam meam uxorem “.","ויאמר כלב אשר יכה את קרית ספר ולכדה ונתתי לו את עכסה בתי לאשה׃"],["6","15","17","칼렙의 아우 크나즈의 아들 오트니엘이 그곳을 점령하자, 칼렙이 그에게 자기 딸 악사를 아내로 주었다.","그 성을 함락시킨 사람은 바로 갈렙의 조카 오드니엘이었다. 그의 아버지 크나즈는 갈렙과 동기간이었다. 갈렙은 그에게 자기의 딸 악사를 아내로 주었다.","갈렙의 아우 그나스의 아들인 옷니엘이 그것을 점령함으로 갈렙이 자기 딸 악사를 그에게 아내로 주었더라","갈렙의 아우요 그나스의 아들인 옷니엘이 그것을 취함으로 갈렙이 그 딸 악사를 그에게 아내로 주었더라","그런데 기럇세벨로 쳐들어가 점령한 사람은 바로 갈렙의 조카 옷니엘이었다. 옷니엘의 아버지 그나스와 갈렙은 친형제지간이었다. 그래서 갈렙은 조카 옷니엘이 자기 딸 악사에게 장가 들도록 허락하였다.","Othniel captured it, the son of Caleb’s brother Kenaz; so Caleb gave him his daughter Achsah in marriage.","And Othniel the son of Kenaz, the brother of Caleb, took it: and he gave him Achsah his daughter to wife.","Othniel son of Kenaz, Caleb's brother, took it; so Caleb gave his daughter Acsah to him in marriage.","Cepitque eam Othoniel filius Cenez frater Chaleb, deditque ei Axam filiam suam uxorem.","וילכדה עתניאל בן קנז אחי כלב ויתן לו את עכסה בתו לאשה׃"],["6","15","18","오트니엘에게 간 악사는 그를 부추겨 자기 아버지에게 밭을 요구하게 하였다. 악사가 나귀에서 내리자 칼렙이 “무슨 일이냐?” 하고 물었다.","신부가 시집으로 갈 때가 되어, 신랑은 신부를 시켜 아버지에게 밭을 달라고 하였다. 신부가 나귀에서 내리자 갈렙은 무엇을 원하느냐고 물었다.","악사가 출가할 때에 그에게 청하여 자기 아버지에게 밭을 구하자 하고 나귀에서 내리매 갈렙이 그에게 묻되 네가 무엇을 원하느냐 하니","악사가 출가할 때에 그에게 청하여 자기 아비에게 밭을 구하자 하고 나귀에서 내리매 갈렙이 그에게 묻되 네가 무엇을 원하느냐","악사는 시집 가는 날 신랑 옷니엘과 짜고 자기 아버지에게 밭을 달라고 하였다. 악사가 타고 가던 나귀에서 내리자 갈렙이 딸 악사에게 \"내가 네게 무엇을 해주랴\" 하고 물었다.","When she came to him, she induced him to ask her father for some land. Then, as she alighted from the donkey, Caleb asked her, “What do you want?”","And it came to pass, as she came unto him, that she moved him to ask of her father a field: and she lighted off her ass; and Caleb said unto her, What wouldest thou?","One day when she came to Othniel, she urged him to ask her father for a field. When she got off her donkey, Caleb asked her, \"What can I do for you?\"","Quae cum veniret, suasit viro suo, ut peteret a patre suo agrum; descenditque de asino. Cui Chaleb:  “Quid habes? “, inquit.","ויהי בבואה ותסיתהו לשאול מאת אביה שדה ותצנח מעל החמור ויאמר לה כלב מה לך׃"],["6","15","19","악사가 말하였다. “저를 네겝 땅으로 보내시니 저에게 선물을 하나 주십시오. 샘을 몇 개 주십시오.” 그래서 칼렙이 악사에게 윗샘과 아랫샘을 주었다.","\"저에게 선물을 주십시오. 네겝 지방으로 시집 보내시는 이 마당에 저에게 샘을 몇 개 주십시오.\" 이 말을 듣고 그의 아버지는 윗샘과 아랫샘을 주었다.","이르되 내게 복을 주소서 아버지께서 나를 네겝 땅으로 보내시오니 샘물도 내게 주소서 하매 갈렙이 윗샘과 아랫샘을 그에게 주었더라","가로되 내게 복을 주소서 아버지께서 나를 남방 땅으로 보내시오니 샘물도 내게 주소서 하매 갈렙이 윗샘과 아랫샘을 그에게 주었더라","\"예, 아버지. 저에게 선물을 주셔야겠어요. 아버지께서 저를 물이 귀한 남쪽지방으로 시집 보내지 않으시나요? 그러니 저에게 샘을 몇 개 주셔야겠어요\" 하고 악사가 아버지께 청하였다. 갈렙은 악사에게 윗샘과 아랫샘을 주었다.","She answered, “Give me a present! Since you have assigned to me land in the Negeb, give me also pools of water.” So he gave her the upper and the lower pools.","Who answered, Give me a blessing; for thou hast given me a south land; give me also springs of water. And he gave her the upper springs, and the nether springs.","She replied, \"Do me a special favor. Since you have given me land in the Negev, give me also springs of water.\" So Caleb gave her the upper and lower springs.","At illa respondit:  “Da mihi benedictionem. Terram Nageb arentem dedisti mihi; iunge et irriguam “. Dedit itaque ei Chaleb irriguum superius et inferius.","ותאמר תנה לי ברכה כי ארץ הנגב נתתני ונתתה לי גלת מים ויתן לה את גלת עליות ואת גלת תחתיות׃"],["6","15","20","이것이 씨족에 따라 유다 자손들의 지파가 받은 상속 재산이다.","이상이 유다 후손 지파에게 갈래를 따라 돌아간 유산이다.","유다 자손의 지파가 그들의 가족대로 받은 기업은 이러하니라","유다 자손의 지파가 그 가족대로 얻은 기업은 이러하니라","다음은 유다 지파 사람들이 각 씨족에 따라 몫으로 받은 성읍이다.","This is the heritage of the tribe of Judahites by their clans:","This is the inheritance of the tribe of the children of Judah according to their families.","This is the inheritance of the tribe of Judah, clan by clan:","Haec est possessio tribus filiorum Iudae per cognationes suas.","זאת נחלת מטה בני יהודה למשפחתם׃"],["6","15","21","에돔 경계 가까이 네겝 지방에 있는 유다 자손 지파의 남쪽 가장자리 성읍들은,","네겝 쪽으로 에돔과 접경하고 있는 유다 후손 지파 남단 성읍들은 아래와 같다. 캅스엘, 에델, 야굴,","유다 자손의 지파의 남쪽 끝 에돔 경계에 접근한 성읍들은 갑스엘과 에델과 야굴과","유다 자손의 지파의 남으로 에돔 경계에 접근한 성읍들은 갑스엘과 에델과 야굴과","유다 지파 사람들이 차지한 성읍들 가운데에서 남쪽 끝에 있기 때문에 에돔의 경계선에 가까이 접해 있는 성읍은 갑스엘과 에델과 야굴과","The cities of the tribe of the Judahites in the extreme southern district toward Edom were: Kabzeel, Eder, Jagur,","And the uttermost cities of the tribe of the children of Judah toward the coast of Edom southward were Kabzeel, and Eder, and Jagur,","The southernmost towns of the tribe of Judah in the Negev toward the boundary of Edom were: Kabzeel, Eder, Jagur,","Erantque civitates ab extremis partibus filiorum Iudae iuxta terminos Edom in Nageb: Cabseel et Eder et Iagur","ויהיו הערים מקצה למטה בני יהודה אל גבול אדום בנגבה קבצאל ועדר ויגור׃"],["6","15","22","캅츠엘, 에데르, 야구르, 키나, 디모나, 아드아다,","키나, 디모나, 아드아다,","기나와 디모나와 아다다와","기나와 디모나와 아다다와","기나와 디모나와 아다다와","Kinah, Dimonah, Adadah,","And Kinah, and Dimonah, and Adadah,","Kinah, Dimonah, Adadah,","et Cina et Dimona et Adada","וקינה ודימונה ועדעדה׃"],["6","15","23","케데스, 하초르, 이트난,","케데스, 하솔, 잇난,","게데스와 하솔과 잇난과","게데스와 하솔과 잇난과","게데스와 하솔과 잇난과","Kedesh, Hazor, and Ithnan;","And Kedesh, and Hazor, and Ithnan,","Kedesh, Hazor, Ithnan,","et Cades et Asor et Iethnan,","וקדש וחצור ויתנן׃"],["6","15","24","지프, 텔렘, 브알롯,","지브, 텔렘, 브알롯,","십과 델렘과 브알롯과","십과 델렘과 브알롯과","십과 델렘과 브알롯과","Ziph, Telem, Bealoth,","Ziph, and Telem, and Bealoth,","Ziph, Telem, Bealoth,","Ziph et Telem et Baloth","זיף וטלם ובעלות׃"],["6","15","25","하초르 하다타, 크리욧 헤츠론 곧 하초르,","하솔하다따, 크리욧헤스론 곧 하솔,","하솔 하닷다와 그리욧 헤스론 곧 하솔과","하솔 하닷다와 그리욧 헤스론 곧 하솔과","하솔 하닷다와 그리욧 헤스론이라고 부르는 하솔과","Hazor-hadattah, and Kerioth-hezron (that is, Hazor);","And Hazor, Hadattah, and Kerioth, and Hezron, which is Hazor,","Hazor Hadattah, Kerioth Hezron (that is, Hazor),","et Asorhadatta et Carioth, Esron - haec est Asor -","וחצור חדתה וקריות חצרון היא חצור׃"],["6","15","26","아맘, 스마, 몰라다,","아맘, 세마, 몰라다,","아맘과 세마와 몰라다와","아맘과 세마와 몰라다와","아맘과 세마와 몰라다와","Amam, Shema, Moladah,","Amam, and Shema, and Moladah,","Amam, Shema, Moladah,","Amam et Sama et Molada","אמם ושמע ומולדה׃"],["6","15","27","하차르 가따, 헤스몬, 벳 펠렛,","하살가따, 헤스몬, 벳벨렛,","하살갓다와 헤스몬과 벧 벨렛과","하살갓다와 헤스몬과 벧 벨렛과","하살 갓다와 헤스몬과 벧벨렛과","Hazar-gaddah, Heshmon, Beth-pelet,","And Hazargaddah, and Heshmon, and Bethpalet,","Hazar Gaddah, Heshmon, Beth Pelet,","et Asargadda et Hasemon et Bethphelet","וחצר גדה וחשמון ובית פלט׃"],["6","15","28","하차르 수알, 브에르 세바, 비즈요트야,","하살수알, 브엘세바, 비즈요드야,","하살 수알과 브엘세바와 비스요댜와","하살 수알과 브엘세바와 비스요댜와","하살 수알과 브엘세바와 비스요댜와","Hazar-shual, Beer-sheba, and Biziothiah;","And Hazarshual, and Beersheba, and Bizjothjah,","Hazar Shual, Beersheba, Biziothiah,","et Asarsual et Bersabee et Baziothia,","וחצר שועל ובאר שבע ובזיותיה׃"],["6","15","29","바알라, 이임, 에쳄,","바알라, 이임, 에셈,","바알라와 이임과 에셈과","바알라와 이임과 에셈과","바알라와 이임과 에셈과","Baalah, Iim, Ezem,","Baalah, and Iim, and Azem,","Baalah, Iim, Ezem,","Baala et Iim et Esem","בעלה ועיים ועצם׃"],["6","15","30","엘톨랏, 크실, 호르마,","엘돌랏, 그실, 호르마,","엘돌랏과 그실과 홀마와","엘돌랏과 그실과 홀마와","엘돌랏과 그실과 홀마와","Eltolad, Chesil, Hormah,","And Eltolad, and Chesil, and Hormah,","Eltolad, Kesil, Hormah,","et Eltholad et Cesil et Horma","ואלתולד וכסיל וחרמה׃"],["6","15","31","치클락, 마드만나, 산산나,","시글락, 마드만나, 산산나,","시글락과 맛만나와 산산나와","시글락과 맛만나와 산산나와 르바옷과","시글락과 맛만나와 산산나와","Ziklag, Madmannah, Sansannah,","And Ziklag, and Madmannah, and Sansannah,","Ziklag, Madmannah, Sansannah,","et Siceleg et Madmena et Sensenna","וצקלג ומדמנה וסנסנה׃"],["6","15","32","르바옷, 실힘, 아인, 림몬, 이렇게 모두 스물아홉 성읍과 거기에 딸린 촌락들이다.","르바옷, 실힘, 엔림몬. 이렇게 모두 스물아홉 성과 그 변두리 천막촌들이다.","르바옷과 실힘과 아인과 림몬이니 모두 스물아홉 성읍과 그 마을들이었으며","실힘과 아인과 림몬이니 모두 이십 구 성읍이요 또 그 촌락이었으며","르바옷과 실힘과 아인과 림몬, 이렇게 모두 스물 아홉 성읍과 각 성읍에 딸려 있는 마을들이다.","Lebaoth, Shilhim, and Ain and Rimmon; a total of twenty-nine cities with their villages.","And Lebaoth, and Shilhim, and Ain, and Rimmon: all the cities are twenty and nine, with their villages:","Lebaoth, Shilhim, Ain and Rimmon--a total of twenty-nine towns and their villages.","et Lebaoth et Selim et Enremmon: omnes civitates viginti novem et villae earum.","ולבאות ושלחים ועין ורמון כל ערים עשרים ותשע וחצריהן׃"],["6","15","33","평원 지대에 있는 성읍들은 에스타올, 초르아, 아스나,","야산 지대에 있는 성읍은 아래와 같다. 에스다올, 소라, 아스나,","평지에는 에스다올과 소라와 아스나와","평지에는 에스다올과 소라와 아스나와","저지대에 있는 성읍들은 다음과 같다. 에스다올과 소라와 아스나와","In the Shephelah: Eshtaol, Zorah, Ashnah,","And in the valley, Eshtaol, and Zoreah, and Ashnah,","In the western foothills: Eshtaol, Zorah, Ashnah,","In campestribus vero: Esthaol et Saraa et Asena","בשפלה אשתאול וצרעה ואשנה׃"],["6","15","34","자노아, 엔 간님, 타푸아, 에남,","자노아, 엔간님, 다부아, 에남,","사노아와 엔간님과 답부아와 에남과","사노아와 엔간님과 답부아와 에남과","사노아와 엔간님과 답부아와 에남과","Zanoah, Engannim, Tappuah, Enam,","And Zanoah, and Engannim, Tappuah, and Enam,","Zanoah, En Gannim, Tappuah, Enam,","et Zanoa et Engannim, Thapphua et Enaim,","וזנוח ועין גנים תפוח והעינם׃"],["6","15","35","야르뭇, 아둘람, 소코, 아제카,","야르뭇, 아둘람, 소코, 아제카,","야르뭇과 아둘람과 소고와 아세가와","야르뭇과 아둘람과 소고와 아세가와","야르뭇과 아둘람과 소고와 아세가와","Jarmuth, Adullam, Socoh, Azekah,","Jarmuth, and Adullam, Socoh, and Azekah,","Jarmuth, Adullam, Socoh, Azekah,","Ierimoth et Odollam, Socho et Azeca","ירמות ועדלם שוכה ועזקה׃"],["6","15","36","사아라임, 아디타임, 그데라, 그데로타임, 이렇게 열네 성읍과 거기에 딸린 촌락들이다.","사아라임, 아디다임, 그데라, 그데로다임. 이렇게 열네 성과 그 변두리 천막촌.","사아라임과 아디다임과 그데라와 그데로다임이니 열네 성읍과 그 마을들이었으며","사아라임과 아디다임과 그데라와 그데로다임이니 모두 십 사 성읍이요 또 그 촌락이었으며","사아라임과 아디다임과 그데라와 그데로다임 이렇게 모두 열네 성읍과 각 성읍에 딸려 있는 마을들이다.","Shaaraim, Adithaim, Gederah, and Gederothaim; fourteen cities and their villages.","And Sharaim, and Adithaim, and Gederah, and Gederothaim; fourteen cities with their villages:","Shaaraim, Adithaim and Gederah (or Gederothaim)--fourteen towns and their villages.","et Saarim et Adithaim et Gedera et Gederothaim: urbes quattuordecim et villae earum.","ושערים ועדיתים והגדרה וגדרתים ערים ארבע עשרה וחצריהן׃"],["6","15","37","그리고 츠난, 하다사, 믹달 가드,","스난, 하다사, 믹달가드,","스난과 하다사와 믹달갓과","스난과 하다사와 믹달갓과","스난과 하다사와 믹달갓과","Zenan, Hadashah, Migdal-gad,","Zenan, and Hadashah, and Migdalgad,","Zenan, Hadashah, Migdal Gad,","Sanan et Hadasa et Magdalgad","צנן וחדשה ומגדל גד׃"],["6","15","38","딜안, 미츠페, 욕트엘,","딜르안, 미스베, 욕드엘,","딜르안과 미스베와 욕드엘과","딜르안과 미스베와 욕드엘과","딜르안과 미스베와 욕드엘과","Dilean, Mizpeh, Joktheel,","And Dilean, and Mizpeh, and Joktheel,","Dilean, Mizpah, Joktheel,","et Delean et Maspha et Iecethel,","ודלען והמצפה ויקתאל׃"],["6","15","39","라키스, 보츠캇, 에글론,","라기스, 보스캇, 에글론,","라기스와 보스갓과 에글론과","라기스와 보스갓과 에글론과","라기스와 보스갓과 에글론과","Lachish, Bozkath, Eglon,","Lachish, and Bozkath, and Eglon,","Lachish, Bozkath, Eglon,","Lachis et Bascath et Eglon","לכיש ובצקת ועגלון׃"],["6","15","40","카뽄, 라흐마스, 키틀리스,","가뽄, 라마스, 기들리스,","갑본과 라맘과 기들리스와","갑본과 라맘과 기들리스와","갑본과 라맘과 기들리스와","Cabbon, Lahmas, Chitlish,","And Cabbon, and Lahmam, and Kithlish,","Cabbon, Lahmas, Kitlish,","et Chebbon et Lehemas et Cethlis","וכבון ולחמס וכתליש׃"],["6","15","41","그데롯, 벳 다곤, 나아마, 마케다, 이렇게 열여섯 성읍과 거기에 딸린 촌락들이다.","그데롯, 벳다곤, 나아마, 막케다. 이렇게 열여섯 성과 그 변두리 천막촌들.","그데롯과 벧다곤과 나아마와 막게다이니 열여섯 성읍과 그 마을들이었으며","그데롯과 벧다곤과 나아마와 막게다니 모두 십 륙 성읍이요 또 그 촌락이었으며","그데롯과 벧다곤과 나아마와 막게다 이렇게 모두 열여섯 성읍과 각 성읍에 딸려 있는 마을들이 더 있다.","Gederoth, Beth-dagon, Naamah, and Makkedah; sixteen cities and their villages.","And Gederoth, Bethdagon, and Naamah, and Makkedah; sixteen cities with their villages:","Gederoth, Beth Dagon, Naamah and Makkedah--sixteen towns and their villages.","et Gederoth, Bethdagon et Naama et Maceda: civitates sedecim et villae earum.","וגדרות בית דגון ונעמה ומקדה ערים שש עשרה וחצריהן׃"],["6","15","42","또 리브나, 에테르, 아산,","리브나, 에델, 아산,","립나와 에델과 아산과","립나와 에델과 아산과","립나와 에델과 아산과","Libnah, Ether, Ashan,","Libnah, and Ether, and Ashan,","Libnah, Ether, Ashan,","Lobna et Ether et Asan","לבנה ועתר ועשן׃"],["6","15","43","입타, 아스나, 느칩,","입다, 아스나, 느십,","입다와 아스나와 느십과","입다와 아스나와 느십과","입다와 아스나와 느십과","Iphtah, Ashnah, Nezib,","And Jiphtah, and Ashnah, and Nezib,","Iphtah, Ashnah, Nezib,","et Iephtha et Esna et Nesib","ויפתח ואשנה ונציב׃"],["6","15","44","크일라, 악집, 마레사, 이렇게 아홉 성읍과 거기에 딸린 촌락들이다.","크일라, 악집, 마레사. 이렇게 아홉 성과 그 변두리 천막촌들.","그일라와 악십과 마레사니 아홉 성읍과 그 마을들이었으며","그일라와 악십과 마레사니 모두 아홉 성읍이요 또 그 촌락이었으며","그일라와 악십과 마레사 이렇게 아홉 성읍과 각 성읍에 딸려 있는 마을들이 더 있다.","Keilah, Achzib, and Mareshah; nine cities and their villages.","And Keilah, and Achzib, and Mareshah; nine cities with their villages:","Keilah, Aczib and Mareshah--nine towns and their villages.","et Ceila et Achzib et Maresa: civitates novem et villae earum.","וקעילה ואכזיב ומראשה ערים תשע וחצריהן׃"],["6","15","45","또한 에크론과 거기에 딸린 마을과 촌락들,","에크론과 그 변두리 촌락과 천막촌들.","에그론과 그 촌락들과 그 마을들과","에그론과 그 향리와 촌락과","에그론과 그에 딸려 있는 성읍들과 마을들이 있다.","Ekron and its towns and villages;","Ekron, with her towns and her villages:","Ekron, with its surrounding settlements and villages;","Accaron cum filiabus et villulis suis;","עקרון ובנתיה וחצריה׃"],["6","15","46","에크론에서 바다까지 아스돗 가까이에 있는 모든 성읍과 거기에 딸린 촌락들,","에크론과 바다 사이의 땅, 아스돗 경계에 이르는 전지역의 천막촌들.","에그론에서부터 바다까지 아스돗 곁에 있는 모든 성읍과 그 마을들이었으며","에그론에서부터 바다까지 아스돗 곁에 있는 모든 성읍과 그 촌락이었으며","또 에그론에서 큰 바다라 불리는 지중해에 이르기까지 아스돗 부근에 있는 모든 성읍들, 그리고 여기에 딸려져 있는 마을들이 있고","from Ekron to the sea, all the towns that lie alongside Ashdod, and their villages;","From Ekron even unto the sea, all that lay near Ashdod, with their villages:","west of Ekron, all that were in the vicinity of Ashdod, together with their villages;","ab Accaron usque ad mare: omnia, quae sunt ad latus Azoti, et viculos eorum,","מעקרון וימה כל אשר על יד אשדוד וחצריהן׃"],["6","15","47","아스돗과 거기에 딸린 마을과 촌락들, ‘이집트 마른내’와 큰 바다, 그리고 그 연안까지 퍼져 있는 가자와 거기에 딸린 마을과 촌락들이다.","아스돗과 그 변두리 촌락과 천막촌들. 가자와 그 변두리 촌락과 천막촌들. 이집트 개울과 대해가 경계를 이룬다.","아스돗과 그 촌락들과 그 마을들과 가사와 그 촌락들과 그 마을들이니 애굽 시내와 대해의 경계에까지 이르렀으며","아스돗과 그 향리와 촌락과 가사와 그 향리와 촌락이니 애굽 시내와 대해 가에 이르기까지였으며","아스돗과 그에 딸려 있는 성읍들과 마을들, 가사와 그에 딸려 있는 성읍들과 마을들이 더 있다. 곧 저지대는 애굽 시내까지, 그리고 서쪽으로는 큰 바다라고 부르는 지중해 해변이 그 경계를 이룬다.","Ashdod and its towns and villages; Gaza and its towns and villages, as far as the Wadi of Egypt and the coast of the Great Sea.","Ashdod with her towns and her villages, Gaza with her towns and her villages, unto the river of Egypt, and the great sea, and the border thereof:","Ashdod, its surrounding settlements and villages; and Gaza, its settlements and villages, as far as the Wadi of Egypt and the coastline of the Great Sea.","Azotus cum filiabus et villulis suis, Gaza cum filiabus et villulis suis usque ad torrentem Aegypti, et mare Magnum terminus.","אשדוד בנותיה וחצריה עזה בנותיה וחצריה עד נחל מצרים והים הגבול וגבול׃"],["6","15","48","산악 지방에 있는 성읍들은 사미르, 야티르, 소코,","산악 지대에 있는 성읍은 아래와 같다. 사밀, 야띨, 소코,","산지는 사밀과 얏딜과 소고와","산지는 사밀과 얏딜과 소고와","산악지대에 있는 성읍들은 다음과 같다. 사밀과 얏딜과 소고와","In the mountain regions: Shamir, Jattir, Socoh,","And in the mountains, Shamir, and Jattir, and Socoh,","In the hill country: Shamir, Jattir, Socoh,","Et in monte: Samir et Iether et Socho","ובהר שמיר ויתיר ושוכה׃"],["6","15","49","단나, 키르얏 산나 곧 드비르,","단나, 키럇산나 곧 드빌,","단나와 기럇 산나 곧 드빌과","단나와 기럇 산나 곧 드빌과","단나와 기럇산나라고 부르는 드빌과","Dannah, Kiriath-sannah (that is, Debir),","And Dannah, and Kirjathsannah, which is Debir,","Dannah, Kiriath Sannah (that is, Debir),","et Danna et Cariathsenna - haec est Dabir -","ודנה וקרית סנה היא דבר׃"],["6","15","50","아납, 에스트모, 아님,","아납, 에스드모, 아님,","아납과 에스드모와 아님과","아납과 에스드모와 아님과","아납과 에스드모와 아님과","Anab, Eshtemoh, Anim,","And Anab, and Eshtemoh, and Anim,","Anab, Eshtemoh, Anim,","et Anab et Esthemo et Anim","וענב ואשתמה וענים׃"],["6","15","51","고센, 홀론, 길로, 이렇게 열한 성읍과 거기에 딸린 촌락들이다.","고센, 홀른, 길로. 이렇게 열한 성과 그 변두리 천막촌들.","고센과 홀론과 길로이니 열한 성읍과 그 마을들이었으며","고센과 홀론과 길로니 모두 십 일 성읍이요 또 그 촌락이었으며","고센과 홀론과 길로 이렇게 모두 열한 성읍과 각 성읍에 딸려 있는 마을들이 있다.","Goshen, Holon, and Giloh; eleven cities and their villages.","And Goshen, and Holon, and Giloh; eleven cities with their villages:","Goshen, Holon and Giloh--eleven towns and their villages.","et Gosen et Helon et Gilo: civitates undecim et villae earum.","וגשן וחלן וגלה ערים אחת עשרה וחצריהן׃"],["6","15","52","그리고 아라브, 두마, 에스안,","아랍, 두마, 에스안,","아랍과 두마와 에산과","아랍과 두마와 에산과","또 아랍과 두마와 에산과","Arab, Dumah, Eshan,","Arab, and Dumah, and Eshean,","Arab, Dumah, Eshan,","Arab et Duma et Esaan","ארב ורומה ואשען׃"],["6","15","53","야눔, 벳 타푸아, 아페카,","야님, 벳다부아, 아베카,","야님과 벧 답부아와 아베가와","야님과 벧 답부아와 아베가와","야님과 벧답부아와 아베가와","Janim, Beth-tappuah, Aphekah,","And Janum, and Bethtappuah, and Aphekah,","Janim, Beth Tappuah, Aphekah,","et Ianum et Beththapphua et Apheca","וינים ובית תפוח ואפקה׃"],["6","15","54","훔타, 키르얏 아르바 곧 헤브론, 치오르, 이렇게 아홉 성읍과 거기에 딸린 촌락들이다.","훔타, 키럇아르바 곧 지금의 헤브론, 시올. 이렇게 아홉 성과 그 변두리 천막촌들.","훔다와 기럇 아르바 곧 헤브론과 시올이니 아홉 성읍과 그 마을들이었으며","훔다와 기럇 아르바 곧 헤브론과 시올이니 모두 아홉 성읍이요 또 그 촌락이었으며","훔다와 기럇아르바라고 불리는 헤브론과 시올 이렇게 모두 아홉 성읍과 각 성읍에 딸려 있는 마을들이 있다.","Humtah, Kiriath-arba (that is, Hebron), and Zior; nine cities and their villages.","And Humtah, and Kirjatharba, which is Hebron, and Zior; nine cities with their villages:","Humtah, Kiriath Arba (that is, Hebron) and Zior--nine towns and their villages.","et Ammatha et Cariatharbe - haec est Hebron - et Sior: civitates novem et villae earum.","וחמטה וקרית ארבע היא חברון וציער ערים תשע וחצריהן׃"],["6","15","55","또 마온, 카르멜, 지프, 유타,","마온, 가르멜, 지브, 유타,","마온과 갈멜과 십과 윳다와","마온과 갈멜과 십과 윳다와","또 마온과 갈멜과 십과 윳다와","Maon, Carmel, Ziph, Juttah,","Maon, Carmel, and Ziph, and Juttah,","Maon, Carmel, Ziph, Juttah,","Maon et Carmel et Ziph et Iutta","מעון כרמל וזיף ויוטה׃"],["6","15","56","이즈르엘, 욕드암, 자노아,","이즈르엘, 욕드암, 자노아,","이스르엘과 욕드암과 사노아와","이스르엘과 욕드암과 사노아와","이스르엘과 욕드암과 사노아와","Jezreel, Jokdeam, Zanoah,","And Jezreel, and Jokdeam, and Zanoah,","Jezreel, Jokdeam, Zanoah,","et Iezrahel et Iucadam et Zanoa,","ויזרעאל ויקדעם וזנוח׃"],["6","15","57","카인, 기브아, 팀나, 이렇게 열 성읍과 거기에 딸린 촌락들이다.","카인, 기브아, 딤나. 이렇게 열 성과 그 변두리 천막촌들.","가인과 기브아와 딤나니 열 성읍과 그 마을들이었으며","가인과 기브아와 딤나니 모두 열 성읍이요 또 그 촌락이었으며","가인과 기브아와 딤나 이렇게 열 성읍과 각 성읍에 딸려 있는 마을들이 있다.","Kain, Gibbeah, and Timnah; ten cities and their villages.","Cain, Gibeah, and Timnah; ten cities with their villages:","Kain, Gibeah and Timnah--ten towns and their villages.","Accain, Gabaa et Thamna: civitates decem et villae earum.","הקין גבעה ותמנה ערים עשר וחצריהן׃"],["6","15","58","또한 할훌, 벳 추르, 그도르,","할훌, 벳술, 그돌,","할훌과 벧술과 그돌과","할훌과 벧 술과 그돌과","또 할훌과 벧술과 그돌과","Halhul, Beth-zur, Gedor,","Halhul, Bethzur, and Gedor,","Halhul, Beth Zur, Gedor,","Halhul, Bethsur et Gedor","חלחול בית צור וגדור׃"],["6","15","59","마아랏, 벳 아놋, 엘트콘, 이렇게 여섯 성읍과 거기에 딸린 촌락들이다.","마아랏, 벳아놋, 엘드콘. 이렇게 여섯 성과 그 변두리 천막촌들.","마아랏과 벧 아놋과 엘드곤이니 여섯 성읍과 그 마을들이었으며","마아랏과 벧 아놋과 엘드곤이니 모두 여섯 성읍이요 또 그 촌락이었으며","마아랏과 벧아놋과 엘드곤 이렇게 여섯 성읍과 각 성읍에 딸린 마을들이 있다.","Maarath, Beth-anoth, and Eltekon; six cities and their villages. Tekoa, Ephrathah (that is, Bethlehem), Peor, Etam, Kulom, Tatam, Zores, Karim, Gallim, Bether, and Manoko; eleven cities and their villages.","And Maarath, and Bethanoth, and Eltekon; six cities with their villages:","Maarath, Beth Anoth and Eltekon--six towns and their villages.","et Mareth et Bethanoth et Eltecon: civitates sex et villae earum. Thecue et Ephratha - haec est Bethlehem - et Phegor et Etam et Culon et Tatam et Sores et Carem et Gallim et Bether et Manahath: civitates undecim et villae earum.","ומערת ובית ענות ואלתקן ערים שש וחצריהן׃"],["6","15","60","그리고 키르얏 바알 곧 키르얏 여아림, 라빠, 이렇게 두 성읍과 거기에 딸린 촌락들이다.","키럇바알 곧 지금의 키럇여아림, 라빠 이 두 성과 그 변두리 천막촌들.","기럇 바알 곧 기럇 여아림과 랍바이니 두 성읍과 그 마을들이었으며","기럇 바알 곧 기럇 여아림과 라빠니 모두 두 성읍이요 또 그 촌락이었으며","또 기럇바알이라고 부르는 기럇여아림과 라빠 이렇게 두 성읍과 그에 딸려 있는 마을들이 있다.","Kiriath-baal (that is, Kiriath-jearim) and Rabbah; two cities and their villages.","Kirjathbaal, which is Kirjathjearim, and Rabbah; two cities with their villages:","Kiriath Baal (that is, Kiriath Jearim) and Rabbah--two towns and their villages.","Cariathbaal - haec est Cariathiarim (urbs Silvarum) - et Arebba: civitates duae et villae earum.","קרית בעל היא קרית יערים והרבה ערים שתים וחצריהן׃"],["6","15","61","광야에 있는 성읍들은 벳 아라바, 미딘, 스카카,","사막 지대에 있는 성읍은 아래와 같다. 베다라바, 미띤, 스가가,","광야에는 벧 아라바와 밋딘과 스가가와","광야에는 벧 아라바와 밋딘과 스가가와","빈들에는 다음과 같은 성읍들이 있다. 벧아라바와 밋딘과 스가가와","In the wilderness: Beth-arabah, Middin, Secacah,","In the wilderness, Betharabah, Middin, and Secacah,","In the desert: Beth Arabah, Middin, Secacah,","In deserto: Betharaba, Meddin et Sachacha","במדבר בית הערבה מדין וסככה׃"],["6","15","62","닙산, ‘소금 성읍’, 엔 게디, 이렇게 여섯 성읍과 거기에 딸린 촌락들이다.","닙산, 소금성, 엔게디. 이렇게 여섯 성과 그 변두리 천막촌.","닙산과 소금 성읍과 엔 게디니 여섯 성읍과 그 마을들이었더라","닙산과 염성과 엔 게디니 모두 여섯 성읍이요 또 그 촌락이었더라","닙산과 \"소금성\"이라는 뜻을 지닌 이르 엘라흐와 엔게디 이렇게 여섯 성읍과 각 성읍에 딸려 있는 마을들이 있다.","Nibshan, Ir-hamelah, and En-gedi; six cities and their villages.","And Nibshan, and the city of Salt, and Engedi; six cities with their villages.","Nibshan, the City of Salt and En Gedi--six towns and their villages.","et Nebsan et civitas Salis et Engaddi: civitates sex et villae earum.","והנבשן ועיר המלח ועין גדי ערים שש וחצריהן׃"],["6","15","63","예루살렘에 사는 여부스족은 유다의 자손들이 쫓아내지 못하였다. 그래서 여부스족은 오늘날까지 유다의 자손들과 함께 예루살렘에 살고 있다.","그러나 유다 후손들은 예루살렘에 사는 여부스족은 몰아내지 못하였다. 그래서 여부스족은 이날까지 유다 후손들과 함께 예루살렘에 섞여 살고 있다.","예루살렘 주민 여부스 족속을 유다 자손이 쫓아내지 못하였으므로 여부스 족속이 오늘까지 유다 자손과 함께 예루살렘에 거주하니라","예루살렘 거민 여부스 사람을 유다 자손이 쫓아내지 못하였으므로 여부스 사람이 오늘날까지 유다 자손과 함께 예루살렘에 거하니라","이렇게 여러 성읍과 마을을 차지했지만 유다 지파 사람들이 예루살렘을 차지하여 살고 있는 여부스 사람들만은 몰아내지 못하였다. 그런 까닭에 예루살렘 주민인 여부스 사람들은 오늘날까지도 유다 지파 사람들이 살고 있는 지역에 포함되어 있는 예루살렘에서 살고 있다.","But the Jebusites who lived in Jerusalem the Judahites could not dispossess; so the Jebusites dwell in Jerusalem beside the Judahites to the present day.","As for the Jebusites the inhabitants of Jerusalem, the children of Judah could not drive them out; but the Jebusites dwell with the children of Judah at Jerusalem unto this day.","Judah could not dislodge the Jebusites, who were living in Jerusalem; to this day the Jebusites live there with the people of Judah.","Iebusaeum autem habitatorem Ierusalem non potuerunt filii Iudae delere; habitavitque Iebusaeus cum filiis Iudae in Ierusalem usque in praesentem diem.","ואת היבוסי יושבי ירושלם לא יוכלו בני יהודה להורישם וישב היבוסי את בני יהודה בירושלם עד היום הזה׃"],["6","16","1","제비를 뽑아 요셉의 자손들에게 돌아간 땅은, 예리코의 샘 동쪽에 있는 예리코의 요르단에서 시작하여, 예리코에서 베텔 산악 지방으로 올라가는 광야로 이어지고,","요셉 후손들에게 돌아간 몫은 동쪽으로 예리고 가까이 요르단 강에서 시작한다. 예리고에서 베델 산악 지대로 사막을 거쳐 올라간다.","요셉 자손이 제비 뽑은 것은 여리고 샘 동쪽 곧 여리고 곁 요단으로부터 광야로 들어가 여리고로부터 벧엘 산지로 올라가고","요셉 자손이 제비 뽑은 것은 여리고 곁 요단 곧 여리고 물 동편 광야에서부터 나아가 여리고로 말미암아 올라가서 산지를 지나 벧엘에 이르고","요셉의 후손들이 제비를 뽑아 그들 몫으로 돌아간 남쪽 지역인 여리고 가까이에 있는 요단강에서 시작한다. 더 자세히 말하자면 빈들 동쪽에 있는 여리고 샘물에서 시작한다. 이렇게 여리고에서 시작하여 산악지대를 거쳐 벧엘까지 올라간다.","The lot that fell to the Josephites extended from the Jordan at Jericho to the waters of Jericho east of the wilderness; then the boundary went up from Jericho to the heights at Bethel.","And the lot of the children of Joseph fell from Jordan by Jericho, unto the water of Jericho on the east, to the wilderness that goeth up from Jericho throughout mount Bethel,","The allotment for Joseph began at the Jordan of Jericho, east of the waters of Jericho, and went up from there through the desert into the hill country of Bethel.","Cecidit quoque sors filiorum Ioseph ab Iordane contra Ie richo et aquas eius ab oriente, solitudo, quae ascendit de Iericho ad montem Bethel","ויצא הגורל לבני יוסף מירדן יריחו למי יריחו מזרחה המדבר עלה מיריחו בהר בית אל׃"],["6","16","2","베텔에서 다시 루즈로 나가 에렉족의 경계를 지나 아타롯에 다다른 다음,","루즈라고도 하는 그 베델에서 시작하여 아타롯에 있는 하르키족의 경계를 지나","벧엘에서부터 루스로 나아가 아렉 족속의 경계를 지나 아다롯에 이르고","벧엘에서부터 루스로 나아가 아렉 사람의 경계로 지나 아다롯에 이르고","벧엘에서 다시 루스로 뻗어 가다가 아렉 사람들이 사는 지역의 경계선인 아다롯을 지나","Leaving Bethel for Luz, it crossed the ridge to the border of the Archites at Ataroth,","And goeth out from Bethel to Luz, and passeth along unto the borders of Archi to Ataroth,","It went on from Bethel (that is, Luz), crossed over to the territory of the Arkites in Ataroth,","et egreditur de Bethel Luz transitque per terminum Arachitarum in Ataroth","ויצא מבית אל לוזה ועבר אל גבול הארכי עטרות׃"],["6","16","3","서쪽 야플렛족의 경계로 ‘아래 벳 호론’과 게제르까지 내려가 그 끝이 바다에 이른다.","서쪽으로 야블렛족의 경계로 내려가 아래쪽 벳호론 경계를 지나 게젤에 이르렀다가 바다로 빠진다.","서쪽으로 내려가서 야블렛 족속의 경계와 아래 벧호론과 게셀에까지 이르고 그 끝은 바다라","서편으로 내려가서 야블렛 사람의 경계에 이르러 아래 벧 호론 곧 게셀에 미치고 그 끝은 바다라","서쪽으로 계속해서 내려가다가 보면 야블렛 사람들이 사는 지역의 경계선까지 내려가고 급기야는 아래 벧호론까지와 게셀까지 내려간다. 그렇게 내려가다가 큰 바다라 부르는 지중해까지 이르러서야 그 경계선이 끝난다.","and descended westward to the border of the Japhletites, to that of the Lower Beth-horon, and to Gezer, and from there to the sea.","And goeth down westward to the coast of Japhleti, unto the coast of Bethhoron the nether, and to Gezer; and the goings out thereof are at the sea.","descended westward to the territory of the Japhletites as far as the region of Lower Beth Horon and on to Gezer, ending at the sea.","et descendit ad occidentem ad terminum Iephlethi usque ad terminos Bethoron inferioris et Gazer; finiunturque regiones eius mari Magno.","וירד ימה אל גבול היפלטי עד גבול בית חורן תחתון ועד גזר והיו תצאתו ימה׃"],["6","16","4","이렇게 요셉의 아들 므나쎄와 에프라임이 자기들의 상속 재산을 받았다.","요셉의 아들 므나쎄와 에브라임은 아래와 같이 유산을 받았다.","요셉의 자손 므낫세와 에브라임이 그들의 기업을 받았더라","요셉의 자손 므낫세와 에브라임이 그 기업을 얻었더라","이상이 요셉의 후손인 에브라임 지파와 므낫세 지파 사람들이 그들 몫으로 차지한 땅의 경계이다.","Within the heritage of Manasseh and Ephraim, sons of Joseph,","So the children of Joseph, Manasseh and Ephraim, took their inheritance.","So Manasseh and Ephraim, the descendants of Joseph, received their inheritance.","Hereditaverunt illas filii Ioseph Manasses et Ephraim.","וינחלו בני יוסף מנשה ואפרים׃"],["6","16","5","에프라임의 자손들이 씨족별로 받은 땅의 경계는 이러하다. 그들이 받은 상속 재산의 경계는 동쪽으로 아타롯 아따르에서 ‘위 벳 호론’까지다.","에브라임 후손도 갈래를 따라 영토를 유산으로 받았는데 그 경계는 동쪽 아타롯아달에서 시작하여 윗벳호론에 이른다.","에브라임 자손이 그들의 가족대로 받은 지역은 이러하니라 그들의 기업의 경계는 동쪽으로 아다롯 앗달에서 윗 벧호론에 이르고","에브라임 자손의 그 가족대로 얻은 것의 경계는 이러하니라 그 기업의 경계는 동으로 아다롯 앗달에서 윗 벧 호론에 이르고","에브라임 지파 사람들이 각 지파에 따라 그들 몫으로 차지할 땅은 다음과 같다. 이들이 차지한 땅의 경계선은 아다롯 앗달에서 시작하여 동쪽으로 윗 벧호론까지 뻗는다.","the dividing line for the heritage of the Ephraimites by their clans ran from east of Ataroth-addar to Upper Beth-horon","And the border of the children of Ephraim according to their families was thus: even the border of their inheritance on the east side was Atarothaddar, unto Bethhoron the upper;","This was the territory of Ephraim, clan by clan: The boundary of their inheritance went from Ataroth Addar in the east to Upper Beth Horon","Et factus est terminus filiorum Ephraim per cognationes suas et possessio eorum contra orientem Atarothaddar usque Bethoron superiorem;","ויהי גבול בני אפרים למשפחתם ויהי גבול נחלתם מזרחה עטרות אדר עד בית חורן עליון׃"],["6","16","6","그 경계는 다시 바다 쪽으로 나가 북쪽 미크므탓에 다다른다. 그리고 동쪽으로 돌아서 타아낫 실로에 다다르고, 그곳을 거쳐 동쪽으로 야노아를 향하여 간다.","그 경계는 거기에서 바다로 빠졌다가 북쪽 믹므닷에서 동쪽으로 돌아서 다아낫실로에 이르러 야노하 동쪽을 지난다.","또 서쪽으로 나아가 북쪽 믹므다에 이르고 동쪽으로 돌아 다아낫 실로에 이르러 야노아 동쪽을 지나고","또 서편으로 나아가 북편 믹므다에 이르고 동편으로 돌아 다아낫 실로에 이르러 야노아 동편을 지나고","또 여기에서 흔히 큰 바다라고 부르는 지중해까지 경계선이 나아간다. 이 경계선의 북쪽 선상에는 믹므다가 자리잡고 있고 믹므다에서 동쪽으로 돌아 죽 내려가다가 다아낫실로에 다다른다. 경계선은 다아낫실로에서 야노아 동쪽을 지나간다.","and thence to the sea. From Michmethath on the north, their boundary curved eastward around Taanath-shiloh, and continued east of it to Janoah;","And the border went out toward the sea to Michmethah on the north side; and the border went about eastward unto Taanathshiloh, and passed by it on the east to Janohah;","and continued to the sea. From Micmethath on the north it curved eastward to Taanath Shiloh, passing by it to Janoah on the east.","egrediunturque confinia in mare, Machmethath vero aquilonem respicit et vertitur terminus contra orientem in Thanathselo et pertransit ab oriente Ianoe.","ויצא הגבול הימה המכמתת מצפון ונסב הגבול מזרחה תאנת שלה ועבר אותו ממזרח ינוחה׃"],["6","16","7","야노아에서 다시 아타롯과 나아라로 내려가다가 예리코에 닿고서 요르단으로 나간 다음,","다시 야노하에서 아타롯과 나아라로 내려가 예리고를 스쳐 요르단 강으로 빠진다.","야노아에서부터 아다롯과 나아라로 내려가 여리고를 만나서 요단으로 나아가고","야노아에서부터 아다롯과 나아라로 내려가서 여리고에 미치며 요단으로 나아가고","야노아에서 죽 내려가다가 아다롯과 나아라에 이르고 그곳에서 계속해서 여리고에 다다르고 다시 요단강까지 경계선이 계속된다.","from there it descended to Ataroth and Naarah, and reaching Jericho, it ended at the Jordan.","And it went down from Janohah to Ataroth, and to Naarath, and came to Jericho, and went out at Jordan.","Then it went down from Janoah to Ataroth and Naarah, touched Jericho and came out at the Jordan.","Descenditque de Ianoe in Ataroth et Naaratha et pervenit in Iericho et egreditur ad Iordanem.","וירד מינוחה עטרות ונערתה ופגע ביריחו ויצא הירדן׃"],["6","16","8","다시 타푸아에서 서쪽으로 카나천까지 가서 그 끝이 바다에 이른다. 이것이 에프라임 자손 지파가 씨족별로 받은 상속 재산이다.","또 그 경계는 다부아에서 서쪽으로 나가 가나 골짜기를 지나 바다로 빠진다. 이상이 에브라임 후손 지파가 그 갈래를 따라 받은 유산이다.","또 답부아에서부터 서쪽으로 지나서 가나 시내에 이르나니 그 끝은 바다라 에브라임 자손의 지파가 그들의 가족대로 받은 기업이 이러하였고","또 답부아에서부터 서편으로 지나서 가나 시내에 미치나니 그 끝은 바다라 에브라임 자손의 지파가 그 가족대로 얻은 기업이 이러하였고","서쪽의 경계선은 답부아에서 시작하여 가나 개울까지 이어진다. 그러다가 그곳에서 큰바다라고 흔히 부르는 지중해까지 가서야 경계선이 끝난다. 이상이 에브라임 지파 사람들이 각 씨족별로 그들 몫으로 차지한 땅이다.","From Tappuah the boundary ran westward to the Wadi Kanah and ended at the sea. This was the heritage of the Ephraimites by their clans,","The border went out from Tappuah westward unto the river Kanah; and the goings out thereof were at the sea. This is the inheritance of the tribe of the children of Ephraim by their families.","From Tappuah the border went west to the Kanah Ravine and ended at the sea. This was the inheritance of the tribe of the Ephraimites, clan by clan.","De Thapphua pertransit terminus ad occidentem ad torrentem Cana, suntque egressus eius in mare: haec est possessio tribus filiorum Ephraim per familias suas,","מתפוח ילך הגבול ימה נחל קנה והיו תצאתיו הימה זאת נחלת מטה בני אפרים למשפחתם׃"],["6","16","9","이 밖에도 에프라임의 자손들에게는, 므나쎄 자손들의 상속 재산 가운데에서 따로 떼어 놓은 성읍들이 있었는데, 그 모든 성읍과 거기에 딸린 촌락들도 그들의 몫이었다.","그 밖에도 에브라임 후손에게는 므나쎄 후손의 유산 가운데서 따로 떼어낸 성과 천막들이 있었다.","그 외에 므낫세 자손의 기업 중에서 에브라임 자손을 위하여 구분한 모든 성읍과 그 마을들도 있었더라","그 외에 므낫세 자손의 기업 중에서 에브라임 자손을 위하여 구별한 모든 성읍과 촌락도 있었더라","이 밖에도 므낫세 지파 사람들이 그들 몫으로 차지한 땅가운데에도 에브라임 지파 사람들이 차지한 성읍들과 각 성읍에 딸려있는 여러 마을들이 많이 있었다.","including the villages that belonged to each city set aside for the Ephraimites within the heritage of the Manassites.","And the separate cities for the children of Ephraim were among the inheritance of the children of Manasseh, all the cities with their villages.","It also included all the towns and their villages that were set aside for the Ephraimites within the inheritance of the Manassites.","urbesque separatae filiis Ephraim in medio possessionis filiorum Manasse, omnes urbes et villae earum.","והערים המבדלות לבני אפרים בתוך נחלת בני מנשה כל הערים וחצריהן׃"],["6","16","10","그러나 그들은 게제르에 사는 가나안족을 쫓아내지 않았다. 그래서 그 가나안족은 오늘날까지 에프라임 사람들 가운데에 살면서 노역을 하게 되었다.","게젤에 사는 가나안 사람들은 쫓겨나지 않은 채 이날까지 에브라임에 섞여 살면서 노동을 하고 있다.","그들이 게셀에 거주하는 가나안 족속을 쫓아내지 아니하였으므로 가나안 족속이 오늘까지 에브라임 가운데에 거주하며 노역하는 종이 되니라","그들이 게셀에 거하는 가나안 사람을 쫓아내지 아니하였으므로 가나안 사람이 오늘날까지 에브라임 가운데 거하며 사역하는 종이 되니라","또 하나 이야기해야 할 사실은 에브라임 지파 사람들이 가나안 주민인 게셀 사람들을 쫓아내지 못하였기에 오늘날까지도 게셀의 가나안 사람들은 에브라임 사람들과 함께 섞여 살고 있다. 게셀 사람들은 오늘날까지도 강제 노동에 동원되어 일하며 살아가고 있다.","But they did not dispossess the Canaanites living in Gezer; they live within Ephraim to the present day, though they have been put to forced labor.","And they drave not out the Canaanites that dwelt in Gezer: but the Canaanites dwell among the Ephraimites unto this day, and serve under tribute.","They did not dislodge the Canaanites living in Gezer; to this day the Canaanites live among the people of Ephraim but are required to do forced labor.","Et non interfecerunt filii Ephraim Chananaeum, qui habitabat in Gazer; habitavitque Chananaeus in medio Ephraim usque in diem hanc et factus est tributarius.","ולא הורישו את הכנעני היושב בגזר וישב הכנעני בקרב אפרים עד היום הזה ויהי למס עבד׃"],["6","17","1","므나쎄가 요셉의 맏아들이기 때문에, 그의 지파도 제비를 뽑아 받은 땅이 있었다. 므나쎄의 맏아들이며 길앗의 아버지인 마키르는 전사였으므로, 이미 길앗과 바산을 자기 것으로 차지하였다.","므나쎄는 요셉의 맏아들이기 때문에 그 지파에게도 몫이 돌아갔다. 므나쎄의 큰아들이자 길르앗의 조상인 마길은 용사였으므로 그 상으로 길르앗과 바산 지역을 받았다.","므낫세 지파를 위하여 제비 뽑은 것은 이러하니라 므낫세는 요셉의 장자였고 므낫세의 장자 마길은 길르앗의 아버지라 그는 용사였기 때문에 길르앗과 바산을 받았으므로","므낫세 지파를 위하여 제비 뽑은 것은 이러하니라 므낫세는 요셉의 장자이었고 므낫세의 장자 마길은 길르앗의 아비라 그는 무사이어서 길르앗과 바산을 얻었으므로","므낫세 지파가 제비를 뽑아 그들 몫으로 차지한 땅은 다음과 같다. 므낫세는 요셉의 맏아들이었다. 마길은 므낫세의 맏아들이고 길르앗의 아버지인데다가 또한 전쟁에 매우 능한 용사였다. 그래서 마길은 길르앗과 바산을 그의 몫으로 차지하였다.","Now as for the lot that fell to the tribe of Manasseh as the firstborn of Joseph: since Manasseh’s eldest son, Machir, the father of Gilead, was a warrior, who had already obtained Gilead and Bashan,","There was also a lot for the tribe of Manasseh; for he was the firstborn of Joseph; to wit, for Machir the firstborn of Manasseh, the father of Gilead: because he was a man of war, therefore he had Gilead and Bashan.","This was the allotment for the tribe of Manasseh as Joseph's firstborn, that is, for Makir, Manasseh's firstborn. Makir was the ancestor of the Gileadites, who had received Gilead and Bashan because the Makirites were great soldiers.","Cecidit autem sors tribui Manasse - ipse est enim pri mogenitus Ioseph C; Machir primogenito Manasse patri Galaad, quia fuit vir pugnator, accepit in possessionem Galaad et Basan.","ויהי הגורל למטה מנשה כי הוא בכור יוסף למכיר בכור מנשה אבי הגלעד כי הוא היה איש מלחמה ויהי לו הגלעד והבשן׃"],["6","17","2","므나쎄의 나머지 자손들에게도 씨족별로 땅이 주어졌다. 곧 아비에제르의 자손들, 헬렉의 자손들, 아스리엘의 자손들, 세켐의 자손들, 헤페르의 자손들, 스미다의 자손들이다. 이들이 씨족별로 본, 요셉의 아들 므나쎄의 남자 자손들이다.","므나쎄의 나머지 아들들도 갈래를 따라 받을 몫이 있었다. 아비에젤 후손, 헬렉 후손, 아스리엘 후손, 세겜 후손, 헤벨 후손, 스미다 후손, 이들이 요셉의 아들, 므나쎄의 남자 후손 갈래이다.","므낫세의 남은 자손을 위하여 그들의 가족대로 제비를 뽑았는데 그들은 곧 아비에셀의 자손과 헬렉의 자손과 아스리엘의 자손과 세겜의 자손과 헤벨의 자손과 스미다의 자손이니 그들의 가족대로 요셉의 아들 므낫세의 남자 자손들이며","므낫세의 남은 자손을 위하여 그 가족대로 제비를 뽑았는데 그들은 곧 아비에셀의 자손과 헬렉의 자손과 아스리엘의 자손과 세겜의 자손과 헤벨의 자손과 스미다의 자손이니 그들의 가족대로 요셉의 아들 므낫세의 남 자손이며","또한 므낫세의 나머지 자손들인 아비에셀 자손과 헬렉 자손과 아스리엘 자손과 세겜 자손과 헤벨 자손과 스미다 자손도 마찬가지로 각각 그 씨족에 따라 땅을 그들 몫으로 분배받았다. 이들 자손의 씨족 할아버지는 모두 다 므낫세의 아들들이고 므낫세 또한 앞서 말한 대로 요셉의 아들이기에 그 씨족에 따라 각각 그들이 대대로 물려줄 몫으로 땅을 분배받았던 것이다. 이러한 자손들이 요셉에게서 퍼져 나간 것을 남자 후손들의 계열로 구분해서 설명한 것이다.","the allotment was now made to the rest of the Manassites by their clans: the descendants of Abiezer, Helek, Asriel, Shechem, Hepher, and Shemida; these are the other male children of Manasseh, son of Joseph, by their clans.","There was also a lot for the rest of the children of Manasseh by their families; for the children of Abiezer, and for the children of Helek, and for the children of Asriel, and for the children of Shechem, and for the children of Hepher, and for the children of Shemida: these were the male children of Manasseh the son of Joseph by their families.","So this allotment was for the rest of the people of Manasseh--the clans of Abiezer, Helek, Asriel, Shechem, Hepher and Shemida. These are the other male descendants of Manasseh son of Joseph by their clans.","Et reliqui filiorum Manasse acceperunt iuxta familias suas: filii Abiezer et filii Helec et filii Asriel et filii Sechem et filii Hepher et filii Semida: isti sunt filii Manasse filii Ioseph, mares per cognationes suas.","ויהי לבני מנשה הנותרים למשפחתם לבני אביעזר ולבני חלק ולבני אשריאל ולבני שכם ולבני חפר ולבני שמידע אלה בני מנשה בן יוסף הזכרים למשפחתם׃"],["6","17","3","츨롭핫은 헤페르의 아들, 헤페르는 길앗의 아들, 길앗은 마키르의 아들, 마키르는 므나쎄의 아들인데, 츨롭핫에게는 아들이 없고 딸들뿐이었다. 그 딸들의 이름은 마흘라, 노아, 호글라, 밀카, 티르차이다.","므나쎄의 아들 마길에게서 길르앗이 태어났고, 길르앗의 아들 헤벨에게서 슬롭핫이 태어났는데 슬롭핫은 아들이 없고 딸뿐이었다. 그 딸들의 이름은 마흘라, 노아, 호글라, 밀가, 디르사였다.","헤벨의 아들 길르앗의 손자 마길의 증손 므낫세의 현손 슬로브핫은 아들이 없고 딸뿐이요 그 딸들의 이름은 말라와 노아와 호글라와 밀가와 디르사라","헤벨의 아들 길르앗의 손자 마길의 증손 므낫세의 현손 슬로브핫은 아들이 없고 딸 뿐이요 그 딸들의 이름은 말라와 노아와 호글라와 밀가와 디르사라","슬로브핫이란 사람이 있었다. 이 사람의 아버지는 헤벨이고 할아버지는 길르앗이고 또 증조 할아버지는 마길이고 고조 할아버지는 므낫세였다. 므낫세의 4대손인 이 슬로브핫에게는 아들이 하나도 없고 단지 딸들만 있었다. 그 딸들의 이름은 말라와 노아와 호글라와 밀가와 디르사였다.","Furthermore, Zelophehad, son of Hepher, son of Gilead, son of Machir, son of Manasseh, had no sons, but only daughters, whose names were Mahlah, Noah, Hoglah, Milcah, and Tirzah.","But Zelophehad, the son of Hepher, the son of Gilead, the son of Machir, the son of Manasseh, had no sons, but daughters: and these are the names of his daughters, Mahlah, and Noah, Hoglah, Milcah, and Tirzah.","Now Zelophehad son of Hepher, the son of Gilead, the son of Makir, the son of Manasseh, had no sons but only daughters, whose names were Mahlah, Noah, Hoglah, Milcah and Tirzah.","Salphaad vero filio Hepher filii Galaad filii Machir filii Manasse non erant filii, sed solae filiae, quarum ista sunt nomina: Maala et Noa, Hegla et Melcha et Thersa.","ולצלפחד בן חפר בן גלעד בן מכיר בן מנשה לא היו לו בנים כי אם בנות ואלה שמות בנתיו מחלה ונעה חגלה מלכה ותרצה׃"],["6","17","4","그들이 엘아자르 사제와 눈의 아들 여호수아와 수장들 앞으로 나아가 말하였다. “저희 남자 친족들과 함께 저희에게도 상속 재산을 주라고, 주님께서 모세께 명령하셨습니다.” 그래서 그들은 주님의 분부대로 아버지의 친족들과 함께 상속 재산을 받았다.","이들이 사제 엘르아잘과 눈의 아들 여호수아와 대표자들에게 와서 청원하였다. \"야훼께서 모세에게 명령하신 대로 우리 일가들과 같이 우리에게도 유산을 주십시오.\" 야훼의 명령대로 그들의 아버지의 근친과 함께 그들에게도 유산이 돌아갔다.","그들이 제사장 엘르아살과 눈의 아들 여호수아와 지도자들 앞에 나아와서 말하기를 여호와께서 모세에게 명령하사 우리 형제 중에서 우리에게 기업을 주라 하셨다 하매 여호와의 명령을 따라 그들에게 그들의 아버지 형제들 중에서 기업을 주므로","그들이 제사장 엘르아살과 눈의 아들 여호수아와 방백들 앞에 나아와서 말하기를 여호와께서 모세에게 명하사 우리 형제 중에서 우리에게 기업을 주라 하셨다 하매 여호와의 명령을 따라 그들에게 기업을 그 아비 형제 중에서 주므로","하루는 슬로브핫의 딸들이 엘르아살 제사장과 눈의 아들 여호수아와 백성의 지도자들에게 나아와 이렇게 말하였다. \"여호와께서 이미 모세에게 명령하신 일이 있지 않습니까? 우리에게도 몫으로 차지할 땅을 나누어 주라고 말입니다. 우리 피붙이가 자기들 몫으로 땅을 차지하는 것처럼 우리들에게도 몫을 나누어 주라고 하시지 않았습니까?\" 그들이 이렇게 청을 하자 여호와의 말씀에 따라 슬로브핫의 딸들도 그들의 형제들과 함께 그들 몫으로 땅을 나누어 받았다.","These presented themselves to Eleazar the priest, to Joshua, son of Nun, and to the leaders, saying, “The LORD commanded Moses to give us a heritage among our relatives.” So in accordance with the command of the LORD a heritage was given them among their father’s relatives.","And they came near before Eleazar the priest, and before Joshua the son of Nun, and before the princes, saying, The LORD commanded Moses to give us an inheritance among our brethren. Therefore according to the commandment of the LORD he gave them an inheritance among the brethren of their father.","They went to Eleazar the priest, Joshua son of Nun, and the leaders and said, \"The LORD commanded Moses to give us an inheritance among our brothers.\" So Joshua gave them an inheritance along with the brothers of their father, according to the LORD'S command.","Veneruntque in conspectu Eleazari sacerdotis et Iosue filii Nun et principum dicentes:  “Dominus praecepit per manum Moysi, ut daretur nobis possessio in medio fratrum nostrorum “. Deditque eis iuxta imperium Domini possessionem in medio fratrum patris earum.","ותקרבנה לפני אלעזר הכהן ולפני יהושע בן נון ולפני הנשיאים לאמר יהוה צוה את משה לתת לנו נחלה בתוך אחינו ויתן להם אל פי יהוה נחלה בתוך אחי אביהן׃"],["6","17","5","이렇게 하여 므나쎄에게는 요르단 건너편에 있는 길앗과 바산 땅 외에 열 몫이 더 돌아갔다.","이렇게 하여 므나쎄에게는 요르단 강 건너편에 있는 길르앗과 바산 지역 외에도 열 몫이 더 돌아갔다.","요단 동쪽 길르앗과 바산 외에 므낫세에게 열 분깃이 돌아갔으니","요단 동편 길르앗과 바산 외에 므낫세에게 열 분깃이 돌아갔으니","이렇게 해서 므낫세 지파 사람들이 요단강 건너 동쪽에 있는 길르앗과 바산 땅 외에 더 배당받은 땅은 열 몫이나 되었다.","Thus ten shares fell to Manasseh apart from the land of Gilead and Bashan beyond the Jordan,","And there fell ten portions to Manasseh, beside the land of Gilead and Bashan, which were on the other side Jordan;","Manasseh's share consisted of ten tracts of land besides Gilead and Bashan east of the Jordan,","Et ceciderunt funiculi Manasse decem, absque terra Galaad et Basan trans Iordanem.","ויפלו חבלי מנשה עשרה לבד מארץ הגלעד והבשן אשר מעבר לירדן׃"],["6","17","6","므나쎄 지파의 딸들이 아들들과 함께 상속 재산을 받았기 때문이다. 그러나 길앗 땅은 므나쎄의 나머지 자손들이 차지하게 되었다.","므나쎄의 딸들이 아들들과 마찬가지로 유산을 받았기 때문이다. 길르앗 지역은 므나쎄의 나머지 후손의 차지가 되었다.","므낫세의 여자 자손들이 그의 남자 자손들 중에서 기업을 받은 까닭이었으며 길르앗 땅은 므낫세의 남은 자손들에게 속하였더라","므낫세의 여손들이 그 남 자손 중에서 기업을 얻은 까닭이었으며 길르앗 땅은 므낫세의 남은 자손에게 속하였더라","므낫세의 딸들이 그의 아들들과 함께 땅을 그들 몫으로 분배받았기 때문이다. 길르앗 땅은 므낫세의 나머지 자손들의 몫으로 돌아갔다.","since these female descendants of Manasseh received each a portion among his sons. The land of Gilead fell to the rest of the Manassites.","Because the daughters of Manasseh had an inheritance among his sons: and the rest of Manasseh's sons had the land of Gilead.","because the daughters of the tribe of Manasseh received an inheritance among the sons. The land of Gilead belonged to the rest of the descendants of Manasseh.","Filiae enim Manasse acceperunt hereditatem in medio filiorum eius. Terra autem Galaad cecidit in sortem filiorum Manasse, qui reliqui erant.","כי בנות מנשה נחלו נחלה בתוך בניו וארץ הגלעד היתה לבני מנשה הנותרים׃"],["6","17","7","므나쎄의 경계는 아세르에서 출발하여 스켐 맞은쪽에 있는 미크므탓에 다다라, 다시 남쪽으로 엔 타푸아 주민들이 살고 있는 곳으로 간다.","므나쎄의 영토는 아셀에서 세겜 맞은편 믹므닷에 이르는데 그 경계는 거기에서 남쪽으로 엔다부아 주민들이 있는 곳으로 내려간다.","므낫세의 경계는 아셀에서부터 세겜 앞 믹므닷까지이며 그 오른쪽으로 가서 엔답부아 주민의 경계에 이르나니","므낫세의 경계는 아셀에서부터 세겜 앞 믹므닷에 미치고 우편으로 가서 엔답부아 거민의 땅에 이르나니","므낫세 지파 사람들이 차지한 땅의 경계선은 아셀에서 시작하여 세겜 동쪽에 있는 믹므닷까지 이어지고 그곳에서 다시 남쪽으로 죽 내려가 엔답부아 주민들이 살고 있는 땅까지 경계선이 내려간다.","Manasseh bordered on Asher. From Michmethath, near Shechem, another boundary ran southward to include the inhabitants of En-Tappuah,","And the coast of Manasseh was from Asher to Michmethah, that lieth before Shechem; and the border went along on the right hand unto the inhabitants of Entappuah.","The territory of Manasseh extended from Asher to Micmethath east of Shechem. The boundary ran southward from there to include the people living at En Tappuah.","Fuitque terminus Manasse ab Aser: Machmethath, quae respicit Sichem et egreditur ad dextram in Iasib apud fontem Thapphuae.","ויהי גבול מנשה מאשר המכמתת אשר על פני שכם והלך הגבול אל הימין אל ישבי עין תפוח׃"],["6","17","8","타푸아 땅은 므나쎄의 소유이지만, 므나쎄의 경계에 있는 타푸아 성읍은 에프라임 자손들의 소유가 되었다.","다부아 지방은 므나쎄의 차지였다. 그런데 므나쎄 경계선 가까이에 있는 다부아는 에브라임 후손에게 넘어갔다.","답부아 땅은 므낫세에게 속하였으되 므낫세 경계에 있는 답부아는 에브라임 자손에게 속하였으며","답부아 땅은 므낫세에게 속하였으되 므낫세 경계에 있는 답부아 읍은 에브라임 자손에게 속하였으며","답부아 둘레에 있는 지역은 므낫세 지파 사람들의 소유이지만 이 답부아 성읍 자체는 에브라임 지파 사람들의 소유이다.","because the district of Tappuah belonged to Manasseh, although Tappuah itself was an Ephraimite city on the border of Manasseh.","Now Manasseh had the land of Tappuah: but Tappuah on the border of Manasseh belonged to the children of Ephraim;","(Manasseh had the land of Tappuah, but Tappuah itself, on the boundary of Manasseh, belonged to the Ephraimites.)","Etenim in sorte Manasse ceciderat terra Thapphuae; Thapphua autem ipsa, quae est iuxta terminos Manasse, fuit filiis Ephraim.","למנשה היתה ארץ תפוח ותפוח אל גבול מנשה לבני אפרים׃"],["6","17","9","이어서 그 경계는 카나천으로 내려간다. 므나쎄의 성읍들 가운데에서 그 개천 남쪽의 성읍들은 에프라임에 속한다. 므나쎄의 경계는 다시 그 개천 북쪽에서 시작하여 그 끝이 바다에 이른다.","그 경계는 다시 가나 골짜기를 끼고 내려간다. 골짜기 남쪽에 있던 므나쎄 성들 사이에 에브라임 성들도 있었다. 그러나 므나쎄의 영토는 골짜기 북쪽인데 그 경계는 바다로 빠진다.","또 그 경계가 가나 시내로 내려가서 그 시내 남쪽에 이르나니 므낫세의 성읍 중에 이 성읍들은 에브라임에게 속하였으며 므낫세의 경계는 그 시내 북쪽이요 그 끝은 바다이며","또 경계가 가나 시내로 내려가서 그 시내 남편에 이르나니 므낫세의 성읍 중에 이 성읍들은 에브라임에게 속하였으며 므낫세의 경계는 그 시내 북편이요 그 끝은 바다며","또 경계선은 가나 개울 쪽으로 내려간다. 이 땅이 본래는 므낫세 지파 사람들에게 분배된 것이기는 하였어도 가나 개울 남쪽에 맞닿아 있는 성읍들 가운데에는 에브라임 지파에 속해 있는 성읍들도 있다. 므낫세 지파가 차지한 땅의 경계선은 이 가나 개울의 북쪽을 지나 큰바다라고 흔히 부르는 지중해에서 끝난다.","This same boundary continued down to the Wadi Kanah. The cities that belonged to Ephraim from among the cities in Manasseh were those to the south of that wadi; thus the territory of Manasseh ran north of the wadi and ended at the sea.","And the coast descended unto the river Kanah, southward of the river: these cities of Ephraim are among the cities of Manasseh: the coast of Manasseh also was on the north side of the river, and the outgoings of it were at the sea:","Then the boundary continued south to the Kanah Ravine. There were towns belonging to Ephraim lying among the towns of Manasseh, but the boundary of Manasseh was the northern side of the ravine and ended at the sea.","Descenditque terminus ad torrentem Cana. In meridie torrentis civitates sunt Ephraim in medio urbium Manasse. Terminus Manasse est ab aquilone torrentis, et exitus eius pergit ad mare,","וירד הגבול נחל קנה נגבה לנחל ערים האלה לאפרים בתוך ערי מנשה וגבול מנשה מצפון לנחל ויהי תצאתיו הימה׃"],["6","17","10","이렇게 남쪽은 에프라임의 소유이고 북쪽은 므나쎄의 소유인데, 바다가 그 경계를 이룬다. 그리고 북쪽으로는 아세르에 닿고 동쪽으로는 이사카르에 닿는다.","남쪽에 에브라임을 끼고 므나쎄는 북쪽에 자리잡고 있는데 1)바다가 그 경계선을 이룬다. 그리고 북쪽으로는 아셀과 접경하고 동쪽으로는 이싸갈과 접경한다. 지중해를 가리킨다.","남쪽으로는 에브라임에 속하였고 북쪽으로는 므낫세에 속하였고 바다가 그 경계가 되었으며 그들의 땅의 북쪽은 아셀에 이르고 동쪽은 잇사갈에 이르렀으며","그 남편은 에브라임에 속하였고 북편은 므낫세에 속하였고 바다가 그 경계가 되었으며 그들의 땅의 북은 아셀에 미쳤고 동은 잇사갈에 미쳤으며","에브라임 지파가 차지한 땅의 남쪽과 므낫세 지파가 차지한 땅의 북쪽 경계선은 흔히 큰바다라고 부르는 지중해이다. 그리고 므낫세 지파의 북쪽 경계는 아셀 지파의 땅과 맞닿아 있고 동쪽 경계는 잇사갈 지파의 땅과 맞닿아 있다.","The land on the south belonged to Ephraim and that on the north to Manasseh; with the sea as their common boundary, they reached Asher on the north and Issachar on the east.","Southward it was Ephraim's, and northward it was Manasseh's, and the sea is his border; and they met together in Asher on the north, and in Issachar on the east.","On the south the land belonged to Ephraim, on the north to Manasseh. The territory of Manasseh reached the sea and bordered Asher on the north and Issachar on the east.","ita ut ab austro sit possessio Ephraim et ab aquilone Manasse, et utramque claudat mare, et attingunt tribum Aser ab aquilone et tribum Issachar ab oriente.","נגבה לאפרים וצפונה למנשה ויהי הים גבולו ובאשר יפגעון מצפון וביששכר ממזרח׃"],["6","17","11","이사카르와 아세르에도 므나쎄의 소유가 있었는데, 그것은 벳 스안과 거기에 딸린 마을들, 이블르암과 거기에 딸린 마을들, 도르 주민들과 거기에 딸린 마을들, 엔 도르 주민들과 거기에 딸린 마을들, 타아낙 주민들과 거기에 딸린 마을들, 므기또 주민들과 거기에 딸린 마을들이다. 셋째 성읍은 바로 네펫이다.","므나쎄가 이싸갈과 아셀 지역 안에서 차지한 것이 있는데, 그것은 벳스안과 거기 딸린 촌락들, 이블르암과 거기 딸린 촌락들, 도르의 주민과 거기 딸린 촌락들, 엔도르 주민과 거기 딸린 촌락들, 다아낙 주민과 거기 딸린 촌락들, 므기또 주민과 거기 딸린 촌락들, 그리고 네벳의 삼분의 일이다.","잇사갈과 아셀에도 므낫세의 소유가 있으니 곧 벧 스안과 그 마을들과 이블르암과 그 마을들과 돌의 주민과 그 마을들이요 또 엔돌 주민과 그 마을들과 다아낙 주민과 그 마을들과 므깃도 주민과 그 마을들 세 언덕 지역이라","잇사갈과 아셀에도 므낫세의 소유가 있으니 곧 벧 스안과 그 향리와 이블르암과 그 향리와 돌의 거민과 그 향리요 또 엔돌 거민과 그 향리와 다아낙 거민과 그 향리와 므깃도 거민과 그 향리들 세 높은 곳이라","잇사갈 지파가 차지한 땅과 아셀 지파가 차지한 땅 안에도 므낫세 지파의 몫으로 분배받은 성읍이 있는데, 그것은 다음과 같다. 벧스안과 그에 딸려 있는 마을들, 이블르암과 그에 딸려 있는 마을들, 돌의 주민들이 사는 지역과 이에 딸려 있는 마을들, 엔돌 주민들이 살고 있는 땅과 이 지역에 딸려 있는 마을들, 다아낙 주민들이 살고 있는 지역과 이에 달려 있는 마을들, 므깃도 주민들이 살고 있는 지역과 이에 딸려 있는 마을들, 그리고 높은 지역 세 곳이다.","Moreover, in Issachar and in Asher Manasseh was awarded Beth-shean and its towns, Ibleam and its towns, the inhabitants of Dor and its towns, the inhabitants of Endor and its towns, the inhabitants of Taanach and its towns, the inhabitants of Megiddo and its towns (the third is Naphath-dor).","And Manasseh had in Issachar and in Asher Bethshean and her towns, and Ibleam and her towns, and the inhabitants of Dor and her towns, and the inhabitants of Endor and her towns, and the inhabitants of Taanach and her towns, and the inhabitants of Megiddo and her towns, even three countries.","Within Issachar and Asher, Manasseh also had Beth Shan, Ibleam and the people of Dor, Endor, Taanach and Megiddo, together with their surrounding settlements (the third in the list is Naphoth).","Fuitque hereditas Manasse in Issachar et in Aser: Bethsan et filiae eius et Ieblaam cum filiabus suis et habitatores Dor cum filiabus suis, habitatores quoque Endor cum filiabus suis; similiterque habitatores Thanach cum filiabus suis et habitatores Mageddo cum filiabus suis et tertia pars regionis Nopheth.","ויהי למנשה ביששכר ובאשר בית שאן ובנותיה ויבלעם ובנותיה ואת ישבי דאר ובנותיה וישבי עין דר ובנתיה וישבי תענך ובנתיה וישבי מגדו ובנותיה שלשת הנפת׃"],["6","17","12","이 성읍들은 므나쎄의 자손들이 차지하지 못하였다. 그래서 가나안족이 그 땅에 계속 살기로 작정하였던 것이다.","므나쎄 후손은 이 마을들을 점령하지 못했다. 그래서 가나안 사람들이 그대로 그 땅에 살고 있었다.","그러나 므낫세 자손이 그 성읍들의 주민을 쫓아내지 못하매 가나안 족속이 결심하고 그 땅에 거주하였더니","그러나 므낫세 자손이 그 성읍들의 거민을 쫓아내지 못하매 가나안 사람이 결심하고 그 땅에 거하였더니","그렇지만 므낫세 지파 사람들은 이 성읍에 살고 있는 가나안 사람들을 내쫓지 못하였다. 그래서 가나안 사람들은 여전히 그 지역에서 버티면서 살고 있다.","Since the Manassites were not able to dispossess these cities, the Canaanites continued to inhabit this region.","Yet the children of Manasseh could not drive out the inhabitants of those cities; but the Canaanites would dwell in that land.","Yet the Manassites were not able to occupy these towns, for the Canaanites were determined to live in that region.","Nec potuerunt filii Manasse has occupare civitates, sed Chananaeus permansit in terra ista.","ולא יכלו בני מנשה להוריש את הערים האלה ויואל הכנעני לשבת בארץ הזאת׃"],["6","17","13","그러다가 이스라엘 자손들이 강해진 다음에, 그 가나안인들에게 강제 노동을 시켰다. 그러나 완전히 쫓아내지는 않았다.","그러나 이스라엘 자손들은 차츰 강해지면서 가나안 사람들을 몰아내지 않고 노동을 시켰다.","이스라엘 자손이 강성한 후에야 가나안 족속에게 노역을 시켰고 다 쫓아내지 아니하였더라","이스라엘 자손이 강성한 후에야 가나안 사람에게 사역을 시켰고 다 쫓아내지 아니하였더라","이스라엘 사람들은 점점 힘을 키워 가면서도 가나안 사람들을 몰아내지 않고 그들에게 강제 노동을 시켰다.","When the Israelites grew stronger they put the Canaanites to forced labor, but they did not dispossess them.","Yet it came to pass, when the children of Israel were waxen strong, that they put the Canaanites to tribute, but did not utterly drive them out.","However, when the Israelites grew stronger, they subjected the Canaanites to forced labor but did not drive them out completely.","Postquam autem convaluerunt filii Israel, subiecerunt Chananaeos et fecerunt sibi tributarios nec expulerunt eos.","ויהי כי חזקו בני ישראל ויתנו את הכנעני למס והורש לא הורישו׃"],["6","17","14","요셉의 자손들이 여호수아에게 말하였다. “주님께서 지금까지 우리에게 복을 내려 주셔서 우리가 이토록 큰 무리가 되었는데, 어찌하여 제비를 딱 한 번 뽑아서 그 한 몫만 우리에게 상속 재산으로 주십니까?”","요셉 후손이 여호수아에게 이렇게 물었다. \"우리가 야훼께 복을 받아 이렇게 많은 무리를 이루었는데 어째서 우리에게 당신의 유산을 겨우 한몫만 떼어주십니까?\"","요셉 자손이 여호수아에게 말하여 이르되 여호와께서 지금까지 내게 복을 주시므로 내가 큰 민족이 되었거늘 당신이 나의 기업을 위하여 한 제비, 한 분깃으로만 내게 주심은 어찌함이니이까 하니","요셉 자손이 여호수아에게 말하여 가로되 여호와께서 지금까지 내게 복을 주시므로 내가 큰 민족이 되었거늘 당신이 나의 기업을 위하여 한 제비, 한 분깃으로만 내게 주심은 어찜이니이까","하루는 요셉의 자손들이 여호수아에게 따졌다. \"어째서 우리들에게는 대대로 물려줄 땅을 몫으로 배당받는데 제비를 하나밖에는 허락하시지 않습니까? 한 몫만 우리에게 주신다는 것이 말이나 될 일입니까? 여호와께서 우리에게 복을 내리셔서 우리 지파 사람들이 얼마나 많이 불어났습니까?\"","The descendants of Joseph said to Joshua, “Why have you given us only one lot and one share as our heritage? Our people are too many, because of the extent to which the LORD has blessed us.”","And the children of Joseph spake unto Joshua, saying, Why hast thou given me but one lot and one portion to inherit, seeing I am a great people, forasmuch as the LORD hath blessed me hitherto?","The people of Joseph said to Joshua, \"Why have you given us only one allotment and one portion for an inheritance? We are a numerous people and the LORD has blessed us abundantly.\"","Locutique sunt filii Ioseph ad Iosue atque dixerunt:  “Quare dedisti mihi possessionem sortis et funiculi unius, cum sim tantae multitudinis et benedixerit mihi Dominus? “.","וידברו בני יוסף את יהושע לאמר מדוע נתתה לי נחלה גורל אחד וחבל אחד ואני עם רב עד אשר עד כה ברכני יהוה׃"],["6","17","15","여호수아가 대답하였다. “너희가 그렇게 큰 무리라면 에프라임 산악 지방이 너희에게 비좁을 터이니, 프리즈족과 르파임족의 땅에 있는 수풀 지역으로 올라가서 그곳을 개간하여라.”","여호수아가 대답하였다. \"너희가 그렇게 많은 무리를 이루었으니, 숲이 있는 곳으로 올라가 개간하여라. 그 곳은 브리즈 사람과 르바임 사람의 땅이다. 에브라임 산악 지대는 너희들에게 정말 좁겠구나.\"","여호수아가 그들에게 이르되 네가 큰 민족이 되므로 에브라임 산지가 네게 너무 좁을진대 브리스 족속과 르바임 족속의 땅 삼림에 올라가서 스스로 개척하라 하니라","여호수아가 그들에게 이르되 네가 큰 민족이 되므로 에브라임 산지가 네게 너무 좁을찐대 브리스 사람과 르바임 사람의 땅 삼림에 올라가서 스스로 개척하라","\"너희 지파 사람들이 너무 많아 너희가 지금 살고 있는 에브라임 산악지대가 너무 비좁다면 숲이 있는 곳으로 올라가거라. 그곳에는 브리스 사람과 거인족인 르바임 사람들이 살고 있지만 그곳을 개간하고 살아라\" 여호수아가 대답하였다.","Joshua answered them, “If you are too many, go up to the forest and clear out a place for yourselves there in the land of the Perizzites and Rephaim, since the mountain regions of Ephraim are so narrow.”","And Joshua answered them, If thou be a great people, then get thee up to the wood country, and cut down for thyself there in the land of the Perizzites and of the giants, if mount Ephraim be too narrow for thee.","\"If you are so numerous,\" Joshua answered, \"and if the hill country of Ephraim is too small for you, go up into the forest and clear land for yourselves there in the land of the Perizzites and Rephaites.\"","Ad quos Iosue ait:  “Si populus multus es, ascende in silvam et succide tibi spatia in terra Pherezaei et Raphaim, quia angusta est tibi possessio montis Ephraim “.","ויאמר אליהם יהושע אם עם רב אתה עלה לך היערה ובראת לך שם בארץ הפרזי והרפאים כי אץ לך הר אפרים׃"],["6","17","16","요셉의 자손들이 말하였다. “산악 지방만으로는 우리에게 충분하지 않습니다. 더구나 평야에 사는 모든 가나안족이며, 벳 스안과 거기에 딸린 촌락들, 또 이즈르엘 평야에 사는 자들에게는 철 병거가 있습니다.”","요셉의 후손이 대답하였다. \"그 산악 지대만 가지고는 안 됩니다. 게다가 그 계곡 지역에 사는 가나안 사람들, 벳스안과 거기 딸린 촌락과 이즈르엘 계곡에 사는 사람들은 철병거를 갖고 있습니다.\"","요셉 자손이 이르되 그 산지는 우리에게 넉넉하지도 못하고 골짜기 땅에 거주하는 모든 가나안 족속에게는 벧 스안과 그 마을들에 거주하는 자이든지 이스르엘 골짜기에 거주하는 자이든지 다 철 병거가 있나이다 하니","요셉 자손이 가로되 그 산지는 우리에게 넉넉지도 못하고 골짜기 땅에 거하는 가나안 사람에게는 벧 스안과 그 향리에 거하는 자든지 이스르엘 골짜기에 거하는 자든지 다 철병거가 있나이다","요셉의 자손들이 말하였다. \"그 산악지대는 우리에게 적당치 않습니다. 더군다나 평원지대에 살고 있는 그 사람들은 철병거를 갖고 있지 않습니까? 벧스안에 살고 있는 가나안 사람들뿐만 아니라 그에 딸려 있는 여러 마을에 살고 있는 가나안 사람들, 그리고 이스르엘 평원지대에 살고 있는 가나안 사람들 모두가 철병거를 몰고 다닌다는 사실을 어르신께서도 잘 알고 계시지 않습니까?\"","For the Josephites said, “Our mountain regions are not enough for us; on the other hand, the Canaanites living in the valley region all have iron chariots, in particular those in Beth-shean and its towns, and those in the valley of Jezreel.”","And the children of Joseph said, The hill is not enough for us: and all the Canaanites that dwell in the land of the valley have chariots of iron, both they who are of Bethshean and her towns, and they who are of the valley of Jezreel.","The people of Joseph replied, \"The hill country is not enough for us, and all the Canaanites who live in the plain have iron chariots, both those in Beth Shan and its settlements and those in the Valley of Jezreel.\"","Cui responderunt filii Ioseph:  “Montana non sufficiunt nobis, et ferreis curribus utuntur omnes Chananaei, qui habitant in terra campestri, Bethsan cum filiabus suis et illi, qui sunt in planitie Iezrahel “.","ויאמרו בני יוסף לא ימצא לנו ההר ורכב ברזל בכל הכנעני הישב בארץ העמק לאשר בבית שאן ובנותיה ולאשר בעמק יזרעאל׃"],["6","17","17","여호수아가 요셉 집안, 곧 에프라임과 므나쎄에게 말하였다. “너희는 큰 무리일뿐더러 힘도 세다. 제비를 한 번만 뽑아 얻은 땅으로는 안 되겠다.","여호수아가 요셉 가문인 에브라임과 므나쎄 지파에게 일렀다. \"너희는 사람도 많고 또 힘도 세다. 비록 한몫밖에는 돌아가지 않는다 하더라도,","여호수아가 다시 요셉의 족속 곧 에브라임과 므낫세에게 말하여 이르되 너는 큰 민족이요 큰 권능이 있은즉 한 분깃만 가질 것이 아니라","여호수아가 다시 요셉의 족속 곧 에브라임과 므낫세에게 일러 가로되 너는 큰 민족이요 큰 권능이 있은즉 한 분깃만 가질 것이 아니라","\"비록 너희가 차지할 땅을 배분하는데 뽑는 제비가 너희에게는 하나밖에 없다 할지라도 너희 지파에는 사람들이 많이 있지 않느냐? 또한 너희 지파가 힘을 합치면 그 힘을 누가 당해 내겠느냐? 내 생각으로는 뽑을 제비가 하나뿐이라도 한 몫 이상이라고 말할 수 있겠다.\" 여호수아는 요셉의 두 아들인 에브라임과 므낫세에게서 퍼져 나간 지파 사람들에게 이렇게 대꾸하면서 말을 이었다.","Joshua therefore said to Ephraim and Manasseh, the house of Joseph, “You are a numerous people and very strong. You shall not have merely one share,","And Joshua spake unto the house of Joseph, even to Ephraim and to Manasseh, saying, Thou art a great people, and hast great power: thou shalt not have one lot only:","But Joshua said to the house of Joseph--to Ephraim and Manasseh--\"You are numerous and very powerful. You will have not only one allotment","Dixitque Iosue ad domum Ioseph, Ephraim et Manasse:  “Populus multus es et magnae fortitudinis; non habebis sortem unam,","ויאמר יהושע אל בית יוסף לאפרים ולמנשה לאמר עם רב אתה וכח גדול לך לא יהיה לך גורל אחד׃"],["6","17","18","산악 지방이 너희 소유이니, 그 수풀 지대를 개간하여 그 경계 끝까지 차지하여라. 가나안인들이 철 병거가 있고 강력하다 하더라도, 너희는 정녕 그들을 몰아낼 수 있을 것이다.”","그 곳은 숲이 있는 산악 지대이니 개간하여 가져라. 가나안 사람들은 철병거가 있고 강력해서 쫓아내지 못할 터이니 산악 지대가 끝나는 곳까지 차지하여라.\"","그 산지도 네 것이 되리니 비록 삼림이라도 네가 개척하라 그 끝까지 네 것이 되리라 가나안 족속이 비록 철 병거를 가졌고 강할지라도 네가 능히 그를 쫓아내리라 하였더라","그 산지도 네 것이 되리니 비록 삼림이라도 네가 개척하라 그 끝까지 네 것이 되리라 가나안 사람이 비록 철병거를 가졌고 강할찌라도 네가 능히 그를 쫓아내리라","\"산악 지역을 너희 것으로 가져라. 비록 그곳이 삼림지대라 할지라도 말이다. 그 지역을 너희 힘으로 개간하여라. 비록 그곳에 사는 가나안 사람들이 철병거를 소유하고 있고, 또 강하다 하더라도 너희는 그들을 충분히 몰아낼 수 있을 것이다. 그러니 그 산악지역의 가장자리까지 너희가 차지하여라.\"","for the mountain region which is now forest shall be yours when you clear it. Its adjacent land shall also be yours if, despite their strength and iron chariots, you dispossess the Canaanites.”","But the mountain shall be thine; for it is a wood, and thou shalt cut it down: and the outgoings of it shall be thine: for thou shalt drive out the Canaanites, though they have iron chariots, and though they be strong.","but the forested hill country as well. Clear it, and its farthest limits will be yours; though the Canaanites have iron chariots and though they are strong, you can drive them out.\"","sed transibis ad montem et succides tibi atque purgabis ad habitandum spatia; et poteris ultra procedere cum subverteris Chananaeum, qui ferreos habet currus et est fortis “.","כי הר יהיה לך כי יער הוא ובראתו והיה לך תצאתיו כי תוריש את הכנעני כי רכב ברזל לו כי חזק הוא׃"],["6","18","1","이스라엘 자손들의 온 공동체가 실로에 모여, 그곳에 만남의 천막을 쳤다. 땅은 이미 그들 앞에서 점령되었다.","이스라엘 백성 온 회중이 실로에 모여 만남의 장막을 쳤다. 전지역이 이미 그들에게 정복되었던 것이다.","이스라엘 자손의 온 회중이 실로에 모여서 거기에 회막을 세웠으며 그 땅은 그들 앞에서 돌아와 정복되었더라","이스라엘 자손의 온 회중이 실로에 모여서 거기 회막을 세웠으니 그 땅이 이미 그들의 앞에 돌아와 복종하였음이나","온 이스라엘 공동체 식구들은 실로에 모두 모여 만남의 장막을 쳤다. 실로는 이미 이스라엘 사람들의 수중에 들어온 뒤였기 때문에 그곳에 그 거룩한 장막을 칠 수 있었다.","The whole community of the Israelites assembled at Shiloh, where they set up the tent of meeting; and the land was subdued before them.","And the whole congregation of the children of Israel assembled together at Shiloh, and set up the tabernacle of the congregation there. And the land was subdued before them.","The whole assembly of the Israelites gathered at Shiloh and set up the Tent of Meeting there. The country was brought under their control,","Congregatique sunt omnes filii Israel in Silo ibique fixe runt tabernaculum conventus, et fuit eis terra subiecta.","ויקהלו כל עדת בני ישראל שלה וישכינו שם את אהל מועד והארץ נכבשה לפניהם׃"],["6","18","2","그러나 이스라엘 자손들 가운데에는, 아직도 상속 재산을 나누어 받지 못한 지파가 일곱이나 남아 있었다.","그런데 이스라엘 백성 가운데는 아직도 유산을 받지 못한 지파 일곱이 남아 있었다.","그러나 이스라엘 자손 중에 그 기업의 분배를 받지 못한 자가 아직도 일곱 지파라","이스라엘 자손 중에 그 기업의 분배를 얻지 못한 자가 오히려 일곱 지파라","그런데 이스라엘 사람들 가운데에는 아직도 자기 몫으로 부지하고 살아갈 땅을 분배받지 못한 사람들이 있었다. 땅을 나눠 받지 못한 지파는 일곱 지파나 되었다.","There remained seven tribes among the Israelites that had not yet received their heritage.","And there remained among the children of Israel seven tribes, which had not yet received their inheritance.","but there were still seven Israelite tribes who had not yet received their inheritance.","Remanserant autem filiorum Israel septem tribus, quae necdum acceperant possessiones suas.","ויותרו בבני ישראל אשר לא חלקו את נחלתם שבעה שבטים׃"],["6","18","3","그래서 여호수아가 이스라엘 자손들에게 말하였다. “너희는 언제까지 주 너희 조상들의 하느님께서 너희에게 주신 땅을 차지하러 가지 않고 꾸물거릴 작정이냐?","그리하여 여호수아는 이스라엘 백성에게 이렇게 일렀다. \"언제까지 너희 조상의 하느님 야훼께서 너희에게 주신 땅을 차지하지 못하고 머뭇거리겠느냐?","여호수아가 이스라엘 자손에게 이르되 너희가 너희 조상의 하나님 여호와께서 너희에게 주신 땅을 점령하러 가기를 어느 때까지 지체하겠느냐","여호수아가 이스라엘 자손에게 이르되 너희가 너희 열조의 하나님 여호와께서 너희에게 주신 땅을 취하러 가기를 어느 때까지 지체하겠느냐","그래서 여호수아가 이스라엘 사람들을 향하여 입을 떼었다. \"우리 조상들이 섬기고 받들어 모시는 하나님 여호와께서 이미 우리들에게 땅을 주시지 않았더냐? 그런데도 어째서 아직까지 꾸무럭거리고 땅을 차지하지도 못하고 살아간단 말이냐? 대체 언제까지 그렇게 지낼 작정이냐?","Joshua therefore said to the Israelites, “How much longer will you put off taking steps to possess the land which the LORD, the God of your ancestors, has given you?","And Joshua said unto the children of Israel, How long are ye slack to go to possess the land, which the LORD God of your fathers hath given you?","So Joshua said to the Israelites: \"How long will you wait before you begin to take possession of the land that the LORD, the God of your fathers, has given you?","Ad quos Iosue ait:  “Usquequo marcetis ignavia et non intratis ad possidendam terram, quam Dominus, Deus patrum vestrorum,dedit vobis?","ויאמר יהושע אל בני ישראל עד אנה אתם מתרפים לבוא לרשת את הארץ אשר נתן לכם יהוה אלהי אבותיכם׃"],["6","18","4","내가 보낼 사람을 각 지파에서 세 명씩 선발하여라. 그들이 일어나 저 땅을 두루 돌아다니며 자기들이 차지할 상속 재산에 따라 지도를 그려 나에게 가져오도록 하겠다.","당장 각 지파에서 세 사람씩 선출하여라. 내가 그들을 보내어 분할받을 땅을 답사하여 지적도를 만들어 오게 하리라.","너희는 각 지파에 세 사람씩 선정하라 내가 그들을 보내리니 그들은 일어나서 그 땅에 두루 다니며 그들의 기업에 따라 그 땅을 그려 가지고 내게로 돌아올 것이라","너희는 매 지파에 삼인씩 선정하라 내가 그들을 보내리니 그들은 일어나서 그 땅에 두루 다니며 그 기업에 상당하게 그려가지고 내게로 돌아올 것이라","각 지파에서 세 사람씩 뽑도록 하여라. 그들을 이곳 저곳으로 두루 보내어 그곳 땅의 형편이 어떤지 또 차지하고 살아가기에는 어떤지 그 사정을 자세히 알아보고 돌아오라고 일러주겠다.","Choose three representatives from each of your tribes; I will send them to go throughout the land and describe it for purposes of acquiring their heritage. When they return to me","Give out from among you three men for each tribe: and I will send them, and they shall rise, and go through the land, and describe it according to the inheritance of them; and they shall come again to me.","Appoint three men from each tribe. I will send them out to make a survey of the land and to write a description of it, according to the inheritance of each. Then they will return to me.","Eligite de singulis tribubus ternos viros, ut mittam eos, et surgant atque circumeant terram et describant eam iuxta numerum uniuscuiusque multitudinis referantque ad me, quod descripserint.","הבו לכם שלשה אנשים לשבט ואשלחם ויקמו ויתהלכו בארץ ויכתבו אותה לפי נחלתם ויבאו אלי׃"],["6","18","5","그러면 저 땅을 일곱 몫으로 나누어 가질 수 있을 것이다. 그러나 유다는 계속 남쪽에 있는 자기 영토에 머무르고, 요셉 집안은 북쪽에 있는 자기 영토에 머무른다.","그들은 그 지역을 일곱 몫으로 나누는데, 유다는 그대로 남쪽 자기 영토를 차지하고 요셉 가문은 그대로 북쪽 자기 영토를 차지할 것이다.","그들이 그 땅을 일곱 부분으로 나누되 유다는 남쪽 자기 지역에 있고 요셉의 족속은 북쪽에 있는 그들의 지역에 있으니","그들이 그 땅을 일곱 부분에 나누되 유다는 남편 자기 경내에 거하고 요셉의 족속은 그 북편 자기 경내에 거한즉","그런 다음에는 그 땅을 일곱 부분으로 나누어야 할 것이다. 유다는 지금처럼 계속해서 남쪽을 자기 땅으로 알고 살아라. 요셉 집안도 마찬가지로 지금처럼 계속해서 북쪽을 자기 땅으로 알고 살아라.","you shall divide it into seven parts. Judah is to retain its territory in the south, and the house of Joseph its territory in the north.","And they shall divide it into seven parts: Judah shall abide in their coast on the south, and the house of Joseph shall abide in their coasts on the north.","You are to divide the land into seven parts. Judah is to remain in its territory on the south and the house of Joseph in its territory on the north.","Dividite vobis terram in septem partes: Iudas sit in terminis suis in australi plaga, et domus Ioseph in aquilone.","והתחלקו אתה לשבעה חלקים יהודה יעמד על גבולו מנגב ובית יוסף יעמדו על גבולם מצפון׃"],["6","18","6","너희는 저 땅을 일곱 몫으로 나누어 지도를 그려 이리로 나에게 가져오너라. 그러면 내가 여기 주 우리 하느님 앞에서 너희를 위하여 제비를 뽑아 몫을 정하겠다.","너희는 그 땅을 일곱 몫으로 나누어 지적도를 만들어가지고 여기 나에게로 가져오너라. 그러면 내가 우리 하느님 야훼 앞에서 추첨을 하여 너희의 몫을 결정해 주리라.","그 땅을 일곱 부분으로 그려서 이 곳 내게로 가져오라 그러면 내가 여기서 너희를 위하여 우리 하나님 여호와 앞에서 제비를 뽑으리라","그 남은 땅을 일곱 부분으로 그려서 이곳 내게로 가져올찌니 내가 여기서 너희를 위하여 우리 하나님 여호와 앞에서 제비 뽑으리라","그리고 그 나머지 땅을 일곱 부분으로 나눈 지적도를 그려라. 그렇게 분할하였으면 그 지적도를 내게 가져오너라. 우리 하나님 여호와께서 보고 계시는 바로 이 자리에서 내가 각각 너희들에게 어떤 지역이 차지하고 살아갈 몫으로 분배될지 제비를 뽑겠다.","You shall bring to me here the description of the land in seven sections. I will then cast lots for you here before the LORD, our God.","Ye shall therefore describe the land into seven parts, and bring the description hither to me, that I may cast lots for you here before the LORD our God.","After you have written descriptions of the seven parts of the land, bring them here to me and I will cast lots for you in the presence of the LORD our God.","Reliquam terram in septem partes describite; et huc afferetis ad me, ut coram Domino Deo nostro mittam vobis hic sortem,","ואתם תכתבו את הארץ שבעה חלקים והבאתם אלי הנה ויריתי לכם גורל פה לפני יהוה אלהינו׃"],["6","18","7","그러나 너희 가운데에서 레위인들이 받을 몫은 없다. 주님의 사제직이 그들의 상속 재산이다. 또한 가드와 르우벤, 그리고 므나쎄 반쪽 지파는, 주님의 종 모세가 요르단 건너편 동쪽에서 준 상속 재산을 이미 받았다.”","레위 사람들은 너희들과 어울려 한몫 받지 못한다. 야훼를 섬기는 사제 직분이 그들의 몫이기 때문이다. 가드와 르우벤과 므나쎄 지파 절반은 야훼의 종 모세에게서 받은 대로 요르단 강 동편을 유산으로 받았다.\"","레위 사람은 너희 중에 분깃이 없나니 여호와의 제사장 직분이 그들의 기업이 됨이며 갓과 르우벤과 므낫세 반 지파는 요단 저편 동쪽에서 이미 기업을 받았나니 이는 여호와의 종 모세가 그들에게 준 것이니라 하더라","레위 사람은 너희 중에 분깃이 없나니 여호와의 제사장 직분이 그들의 기업이 됨이며 갓과 르우벤과 므낫세 반 지파는 요단 저편 동편에서 이미 기업을 받았나니 이는 여호와의 종 모세가 그들에게 준 것이니라","하지만 레위 지파 사람들은 너희들과 함께 땅을 나눠 받을 수 없다. 레위 사람들이 차지할 몫이란 다름 아니라 여호와를 모시고 섬기며 살아가는 일이다. 제사장 일을 하는 것만이 당연히 그들의 몫이다. 그리고 이미 다 알고 있는 사실이지만 갓 지파 사람들과 르우벤 지파 사람들과 므낫세 반 지파 사람들은 벌써 요단강 건너 동쪽에 그들의 몫을 분배받아서 살고 있다. 여호와의 종인 모세가 그들에게 그 땅을 차지하고 살라고 오래 전에 나눠 주신대로이다.\"","For the Levites have no share among you, because the priesthood of the LORD is their heritage; while Gad, Reuben, and the half-tribe of Manasseh have already received the heritage east of the Jordan which Moses, the servant of the LORD, gave them.”","But the Levites have no part among you; for the priesthood of the LORD is their inheritance: and Gad, and Reuben, and half the tribe of Manasseh, have received their inheritance beyond Jordan on the east, which Moses the servant of the LORD gave them.","The Levites, however, do not get a portion among you, because the priestly service of the LORD is their inheritance. And Gad, Reuben and the half-tribe of Manasseh have already received their inheritance on the east side of the Jordan. Moses the servant of the LORD gave it to them.\"","quia non est inter vos pars Levitarum, sed sacerdotium Domini est eorum hereditas. Gad autem et Ruben et dimidia tribus Manasse iam acceperant possessiones suas trans Iordanem ad orientalem plagam, quas dedit eis Moyses famulus Domini “.","כי אין חלק ללוים בקרבכם כי כהנת יהוה נחלתו וגד וראובן וחצי שבט המנשה לקחו נחלתם מעבר לירדן מזרחה אשר נתן להם משה עבד יהוה׃"],["6","18","8","그 사람들은 일어나 길을 떠났다. 이 땅의 지도를 그리려고 길을 떠나는 이들에게 여호수아가 명령하였다. “가서 저 땅을 두루 돌아다니며 지도를 그려 나에게 돌아오너라. 그러면 내가 여기 실로에서, 너희를 위하여 주님 앞에서 제비를 뽑아 몫을 정하겠다.”","이리하여 그들은 길을 떠났다. 지적도를 만들려고 떠나가는 그들에게 여호수아가 명령하였다. \"너희는 그 지방에 가서 답사하며 지적도를 만들어 그것을 나에게 가져오너라. 내가 여기 실로에서, 야훼 앞에서 추첨을 하여 너희 몫을 결정해 주리라.\"","그 사람들이 일어나 떠나니 여호수아가 그 땅을 그리러 가는 사람들에게 명령하여 이르되 가서 그 땅으로 두루 다니며 그것을 그려 가지고 내게로 돌아오라 내가 여기 실로의 여호와 앞에서 너희를 위하여 제비를 뽑으리라 하니","그 사람들이 일어나 떠나니 여호수아가 땅을 그리러 가는 그들에게 명하여 가로되 가서 그 땅으로 두루 다니며 그려가지고 내게로 돌아 오라 내가 여기 실로에서 여호와 앞에서 너희를 위하여 제비 뽑으리라","그래서 각 지파에서 뽑힌 사람들이 앞으로 차지하여 들어가 살 땅의 형편이 어떤지 지적도를 그려 오려고 떠날 때 여호수아가 또 한번 그들에게 당부하였다. \"너희는 들어가 살 그 땅을 이곳 저곳 다니면서 두루 살펴보아라. 그러면서 몫 그 지세가 어떤지 잘 그려 오너라. 내가 이곳 실로에서 너희들이 어떤 지역을 차지하고 살아갈 수 있을지 제비를 뽑아 정해 주겠다. 여호와 앞에서 공정하게 제비를 뽑을 테니 아무 염려 말고 잘 다녀오도록 하여라.\"","When those who were to describe the land were ready for their journey, Joshua commanded them, “Go throughout the land and describe it; return to me and I will cast lots for you here before the LORD in Shiloh.”","And the men arose, and went away: and Joshua charged them that went to describe the land, saying, Go and walk through the land, and describe it, and come again to me, that I may here cast lots for you before the LORD in Shiloh.","As the men started on their way to map out the land, Joshua instructed them, \"Go and make a survey of the land and write a description of it. Then return to me, and I will cast lots for you here at Shiloh in the presence of the LORD.\"","Cumque surrexissent viri, ut pergerent ad describendam terram, praecepit eis Iosue dicens:  “Circuite terram et describite eam ac revertimini ad me, ut hic coram Domino in Silo mittam vobis sortem “.","ויקמו האנשים וילכו ויצו יהושע את ההלכים לכתב את הארץ לאמר לכו והתהלכו בארץ וכתבו אותה ושובו אלי ופה אשליך לכם גורל לפני יהוה בשלה׃"],["6","18","9","그리하여 그 사람들이 길을 떠나 이 땅을 두루 지나며, 성읍들을 일곱 몫으로 나눈 이 땅의 지도를 책에 그린 다음, 실로 진영에 있는 여호수아에게 돌아갔다.","그들은 길을 떠나 각 지방을 돌아다니면서 그 곳 성들을 일곱 몫으로 나누어 지적도를 만들어가지고 실로의 진지에 있는 여호수아에게 돌아왔다.","그 사람들이 가서 그 땅으로 두루 다니며 성읍들을 따라서 일곱 부분으로 책에 그려서 실로 진영에 돌아와 여호수아에게 나아오니","그 사람들이 가서 그 땅으로 두루 다니며 성읍들을 따라서 일곱 부분으로 책에 그리고 실로 진에 돌아와 여호수아에게 나아오니","각 지파에서 대표로 뽑힌 남자들이 길을 떠났다. 그들은 앞으로 살아갈 그 땅을 여기저기 돌아다니며 각 지역이 어떻게 생겼는지, 또 그 밖에 여러 가지 사정을 자세히 기록하였다. 물론 각 지역에 퍼져 있는 각 성읍들의 형편을 여호수아가 지시한 대로 일곱 부분으로 나누어 잘 기록하였다. 그들은 이렇게 지적도를 작성한 뒤에 실로의 진지에 있는 여호수아에게 되돌아왔다.","So they went through the land, described its cities in writing in seven sections, and returned to Joshua in the camp at Shiloh.","And the men went and passed through the land, and described it by cities into seven parts in a book, and came again to Joshua to the host at Shiloh.","So the men left and went through the land. They wrote its description on a scroll, town by town, in seven parts, and returned to Joshua in the camp at Shiloh.","Itaque perrexerunt et lustrantes terram secundum urbes in septem partes diviserunt scribentes in volumine; reversique sunt ad Iosue in castra Silo.","וילכו האנשים ויעברו בארץ ויכתבוה לערים לשבעה חלקים על ספר ויבאו אל יהושע אל המחנה שלה׃"],["6","18","10","그러자 여호수아가 실로에서, 그들을 위하여 주님 앞에서 제비를 뽑아 몫을 정하였다. 여호수아가 그곳에서 지파별 구분에 따라 이스라엘 자손들에게 몫을 나누어 준 것이다.","여호수아는 실로에서 그들의 몫을 결정하려고 야훼 앞에서 추첨을 하였다. 그리고 여호수아는 그 땅을 이스라엘 백성에게 한몫 한몫 떼어주었다.","여호수아가 그들을 위하여 실로의 여호와 앞에서 제비를 뽑고 그가 거기서 이스라엘 자손의 분파대로 그 땅을 분배하였더라","여호수아가 그들을 위하여 실로 여호와 앞에서 제비 뽑고 그가 거기서 이스라엘 자손의 분파대로 땅을 분배하였더라","여호수아는 여호와께서 계시는 곳 실로에서 제비를 뽑았다. 제비에 뽑힌 대로 여호수아는 아직 땅을 몫으로 분배받지 못한 각 지파에게 한 몫씩 떼어 주었다.","Joshua then cast lots for them before the LORD in Shiloh, and divided up the land for the Israelites into their separate shares.","And Joshua cast lots for them in Shiloh before the LORD: and there Joshua divided the land unto the children of Israel according to their divisions.","Joshua then cast lots for them in Shiloh in the presence of the LORD, and there he distributed the land to the Israelites according to their tribal divisions.","Qui misit eis sortes coram Domino in Silo divisitque ibi terram filiis Israel secundum partes eorum.","וישלך להם יהושע גורל בשלה לפני יהוה ויחלק שם יהושע את הארץ לבני ישראל כמחלקתם׃"],["6","18","11","씨족별로 나뉜 벤야민 자손 지파를 위한 제비가 나왔다. 그렇게 제비를 뽑아 그들에게 돌아간 영토는, 유다 자손들과 요셉 자손들의 영토 사이에 있었다.","베냐민 후손 지파에게 갈래를 따라 몫으로 돌아간 영토는 유다 후손의 영토와 요셉 후손의 영토 사이에 끼여 있다.","베냐민 자손 지파를 위하여 그들의 가족대로 제비를 뽑았으니 그 제비 뽑은 땅의 경계는 유다 자손과 요셉 자손의 중간이라","베냐민 자손 지파를 위하여 그 가족대로 제비를 뽑았으니 그 제비 뽑은 땅의 경계는 유다 자손과 요셉 자손의 중간이라","베냐민 지파 사람들이 제비를 뽑아 각 씨족에 따라 몫으로 차지한 땅은 유다 지파 사람들이 차지한 땅과 요셉에게서 퍼져 나간 사람들이 차지한 땅 사이에 위치해 있었다.","One lot fell to the tribe of Benjaminites by their clans. The territory allotted them lay between the descendants of Judah and those of Joseph.","And the lot of the tribe of the children of Benjamin came up according to their families: and the coast of their lot came forth between the children of Judah and the children of Joseph.","The lot came up for the tribe of Benjamin, clan by clan. Their allotted territory lay between the tribes of Judah and Joseph:","Et ascendit sors prima filiorum Beniamin per familias suas, ut possiderent terram inter filios Iudae et filios Ioseph.","ויעל גורל מטה בני בנימן למשפחתם ויצא גבול גורלם בין בני יהודה ובין בני יוסף׃"],["6","18","12","그들의 북쪽 경계는 요르단에서 시작하여 예리코 북쪽 비탈로 올라간다. 거기에서 서쪽 산악 지방으로 계속 올라가다가 그 끝이 광야, 곧 벳 아웬 광야에 이른다.","그들의 북쪽 경계는 요르단 강에서 시작하여 예리고 북쪽으로 올라간다. 거기에서 서쪽의 산악 지대로 계속 올라가다가 베다웬 사막으로 빠진다.","그들의 북방 경계는 요단에서부터 여리고 북쪽으로 올라가서 서쪽 산지를 넘어서 또 올라가서 벧아웬 황무지에 이르며","그 북방 경계는 요단에서부터 여리고 북편으로 올라가서 서편 산지를 넘어서 또 올라가서 벧아웬 황무지에 이르며","베냐민 지파가 차지한 땅의 북쪽 경계선은 요단강에서 시작하여 여리고 북쪽 언덕빼기 쪽으로 올라간다. 여리고에서 서쪽으로 산악지대를 거쳐 경계선은 벧아웬 광야로 들어선다.","Their northern boundary began at the Jordan and went over the northern flank of Jericho, up westward into the mountains, until it reached the wilderness of Beth-aven.","And their border on the north side was from Jordan; and the border went up to the side of Jericho on the north side, and went up through the mountains westward; and the goings out thereof were at the wilderness of Bethaven.","On the north side their boundary began at the Jordan, passed the northern slope of Jericho and headed west into the hill country, coming out at the desert of Beth Aven.","Fuitque terminus eorum contra aquilonem a Iordane pergens iuxta latus Iericho septentrionalis plagae et inde contra occidentem ad montana conscendens et perveniens in solitudinem Bethaven;","ויהי להם הגבול לפאת צפונה מן הירדן ועלה הגבול אל כתף יריחו מצפון ועלה בהר ימה והיה תצאתיו מדברה בית און׃"],["6","18","13","그 경계는 또 거기에서 남쪽으로 베텔이라고 하는 루즈, 곧 루즈 비탈을 지나 ‘아래 벳 호론’ 남쪽 산 위에 있는 아타롯 아따르로 내려간다.","그 경계는 거기에서 다시 루즈를 지나는데, 베델이라고도 하는 루즈 남쪽 산 중턱에 이른다. 그 경계는 거기에서 아래쪽 벳호론 남쪽 산에 있는 아다롯아달 쪽으로 내려간다.","또 그 경계가 거기서부터 루스로 나아가서 루스 남쪽에 이르나니 루스는 곧 벧엘이며 또 그 경계가 아다롯 앗달로 내려가서 아래 벧호론 남쪽 산 곁으로 지나고","또 그 경계가 거기서부터 루스로 나아가서 루스 남편에 이르나니 루스는 곧 벧엘이며 또 그 경계가 아다롯 앗달로 내려가서 아래 벧 호론 남편 산 곁으로 지나고","경계선은 다시 이곳에서 뻗어 나가 루스에 이르고 그곳의 남쪽으로 이어진다. 이 루스의 언덕빼기 남쪽이 바로 벧엘이다. 경계선은 여기서 아다롯 앗달로 내려가다가 아래 벧호론의 남쪽에 있는 산악지대 곁으로 뻗어 간다.","From there it crossed over to the southern flank of Luz (that is, Bethel). Then it ran down to Ataroth-addar, on the mountaintop south of Lower Beth-horon.","And the border went over from thence toward Luz, to the side of Luz, which is Bethel, southward; and the border descended to Atarothadar, near the hill that lieth on the south side of the nether Bethhoron.","From there it crossed to the south slope of Luz (that is, Bethel) and went down to Ataroth Addar on the hill south of Lower Beth Horon.","atque pertransiens iuxta Luzam ad meridiem - ipsa est Bethel - descendit in Atarothaddar in montem, qui est ad meridiem Bethoron inferioris,","ועבר משם הגבול לוזה אל כתף לוזה נגבה היא בית אל וירד הגבול עטרות אדר על ההר אשר מנגב לבית חרון תחתון׃"],["6","18","14","그 경계는 다시 구부러져 벳 호론 맞은편 남쪽에 있는 산에서 남쪽을 향하여 서쪽으로 돌아, 그 끝이 유다 자손들의 성읍인 키르얏 바알, 곧 키르얏 여아림에 이른다. 이것이 서쪽 방면이다.","경계는 거기에서 방향을 바꾼다. 벳호론 남쪽 산에서 남쪽으로 돌아 서쪽 지경을 타고 내려가다가 유다 후손의 성 키럇바알 곧 키럇여아림으로 빠진다. 이것이 서쪽 지경이다.","벧호론 앞 남쪽 산에서부터 서쪽으로 돌아 남쪽으로 향하여 유다 자손의 성읍 기럇 바알 곧 기럇 여아림에 이르러 끝이 되나니 이는 서쪽 경계며","벧 호론 앞 남편 산에서부터 서방으로 돌아 남편으로 향하여 유다 자손의 성읍 기럇 바알 곧 기럇 여아림에 이르러 끝이 되나니 이는 서방 경계며","그러다가 경계선은 방향을 바꾼다. 곧 벧호론 앞에 있는 산악지대에서 남쪽으로 방향을 틀어 유다 사람들에게 배당된 기럇바알이라고도 부르는 기럇여아림에 다다른다. 여기가 바로 서쪽의 끝이다.","For the western border, the boundary line swung south from the mountaintop opposite Beth-horon until it reached Kiriath-baal (that is, Kiriath-jearim; this city belonged to the Judahites). This was the western boundary.","And the border was drawn thence, and compassed the corner of the sea southward, from the hill that lieth before Bethhoron southward; and the goings out thereof were at Kirjathbaal, which is Kirjathjearim, a city of the children of Judah: this was the west quarter.","From the hill facing Beth Horon on the south the boundary turned south along the western side and came out at Kiriath Baal (that is, Kiriath Jearim), a town of the people of Judah. This was the western side.","et inclinatur vergens contra mare ad meridiem a monte, qui respicit Bethoron contra meridiem; suntque exitus eius in Cariathbaal, quae vocatur et Cariathiarim, urbem filiorum Iudae. Haec est plaga ad occidentem.","ותאר הגבול ונסב לפאת ים נגבה מן ההר אשר על פני בית חרון נגבה והיה תצאתיו אל קרית בעל היא קרית יערים עיר בני יהודה זאת פאת ים׃"],["6","18","15","남쪽으로는 그 경계가 키르얏 여아림 끝에서 시작하여 서쪽으로 나간 다음에 다시 넵토아 샘으로 나가,","남쪽 지경은 키럇여아림 끝에서 시작하여 넵도아 샘에 이르고,","남쪽 경계는 기럇 여아림 끝에서부터 서쪽으로 나아가 넵도아 물 근원에 이르고","남방 경계는 기럇 여아림 끝에서부터 서편으로 나아가 넵도아 물 근원에 이르고","남쪽 가장자리 곧 남쪽 경계선은 기럇여아림 끝에서 시작하여 서쪽으로 계속해서 빠져 나가다가 넵도아 샘 수원지에 다다른다.","The southern boundary began at the limits of Kiriath-jearim and projected to the spring at Nephtoah.","And the south quarter was from the end of Kirjathjearim, and the border went out on the west, and went out to the well of waters of Nephtoah:","The southern side began at the outskirts of Kiriath Jearim on the west, and the boundary came out at the spring of the waters of Nephtoah.","In plaga autem ad meridiem, ex parte Cariathiarim egreditur terminus in Gasim et pervenit usque ad fontem aquarum Nephtoa","ופאת נגבה מקצה קרית יערים ויצא הגבול ימה ויצא אל מעין מי נפתוח׃"],["6","18","16","르파임 골짜기 북쪽에 있는 ‘벤 힌놈 골짜기’ 맞은쪽 산 끝으로 내려간다. 또 여부스 남쪽 비탈을 따라 힌놈 골짜기로 내려가서 엔 로겔로 내려간다.","르바임 계곡 북쪽에 있는 벤힌놈 골짜기 앞의 산기슭으로 내려간다. 거기에서 여부스인의 산 남쪽 중턱으로 해서 엔로겔로 더 내려간다.","르바임 골짜기 북쪽 힌놈의 아들 골짜기 앞에 있는 산 끝으로 내려가고 또 힌놈의 골짜기로 내려가서 여부스 남쪽에 이르러 엔 로겔로 내려가고","르바임 골짜기 북편 힌놈의 아들 골짜기 앞에 있는 산 끝으로 내려가고 또 힌놈의 골짜기로 내려가서 여부스 남편에 이르러 엔 로겔로 내려가고","경계선은 여기에서 힌놈 골짜기를 마주 바라다보고 있는 산악지대의 가장자리로 내려 간다. 힌놈 골짜기는 르바임 계곡 북쪽에 위치해 있다. 거기에서 힌놈 골짜기로 내려가다가 여부스 산마루 남쪽으로 계속해서 내려가고 거기서 엔로겔까지 내려간다.","It went down to the edge of the mountain on the north of the Valley of Rephaim, where it faces the Valley of Ben-hinnom; and continuing down the Valley of Hinnom along the southern flank of the Jebusites, reached En-rogel.","And the border came down to the end of the mountain that lieth before the valley of the son of Hinnom, and which is in the valley of the giants on the north, and descended to the valley of Hinnom, to the side of Jebusi on the south, and descended to Enrogel,","The boundary went down to the foot of the hill facing the Valley of Ben Hinnom, north of the Valley of Rephaim. It continued down the Hinnom Valley along the southern slope of the Jebusite city and so to En Rogel.","descenditque in extremam partem montis, qui respicit vallem Benennom et est contra septentrionalem plagam in extrema parte vallis Raphaim; descenditque in vallem Ennom, iuxta latus Iebusaei ad austrum, et pervenit ad fontem Rogel","וירד הגבול אל קצה ההר אשר על פני גי בן הנם אשר בעמק רפאים צפונה וירד גי הנם אל כתף היבוסי נגבה וירד עין רגל׃"],["6","18","17","거기에서 다시 북쪽으로 구부러져 엔 세메스로 나간다. 그러고서는 ‘아둠밈 오르막’ 앞에 있는 글릴롯으로 나가, 르우벤의 아들 ‘보한의 바위’까지 내려간다.","거기에서 북쪽으로 방향을 바꾸어 엔세메스로 빠진다. 다시 아둠밈 비탈을 바라보는 글릴롯에 이른다. 다시 베다라바에서 북쪽으로 쳐다보이는 산 중턱을 지나 아라바에 이르렀다가 르우벤의 아들 보한의 바위로 내려간다.","또 북쪽으로 접어들어 엔 세메스로 나아가서 아둠밈 비탈 맞은편 글릴롯으로 나아가서 르우벤 자손 보한의 돌까지 내려가고","또 북향하여 엔 세메스로 나아가서 아둠밈 비탈 맞은편 글릴롯으로 나아가서 르우벤 자손 보한의 돌까지 내려가고","엔로겔에서 방향을 바꾸어 북쪽으로 나아가다가 엔세메스에 다다르고 또 아둠밉 오르막길 맞은편에 있는 글릴롯에 이른다. 거기서 \"보한의 돌\"이라는 뜻의 땅 이름을 지닌 에벤 보한까지 내려간다. 보한이란 사람은 르우벤의 아들이었다.","Inclining to the north, it extended to En-shemesh, and thence to Geliloth, opposite the pass of Adummim. Then it dropped to Eben-Bohan-ben-Reuben,","And was drawn from the north, and went forth to Enshemesh, and went forth toward Geliloth, which is over against the going up of Adummim, and descended to the stone of Bohan the son of Reuben,","It then curved north, went to En Shemesh, continued to Geliloth, which faces the Pass of Adummim, and ran down to the Stone of Bohan son of Reuben.","transiens ad aquilonem et egrediens ad Ensemes (id est fontem Solis). Et pertransit usque ad Galiloth (hi sunt circuli), qui sunt e regione ascensus Adommim, descenditque ad Abenboen (id est lapidem Boen) filii Ruben","ותאר מצפון ויצא עין שמש ויצא אל גלילות אשר נכח מעלה אדמים וירד אבן בהן בן ראובן׃"],["6","18","18","이어서 북쪽으로 아라바 맞은쪽 비탈을 지나 아라바로 내려간다.",null,"북으로 아라바 맞은편을 지나 아라바로 내려가고","북으로 아라바 맞은편을 지나 아라바로 내려가고","에벤 보한에서 북쪽으로 뻗어 아라바 어귀로 죽 이어지다가 아라바로 내려간다.","across the northern flank of the Arabah overlook, down into the Arabah.","And passed along toward the side over against Arabah northward, and went down unto Arabah:","It continued to the northern slope of Beth Arabah and on down into the Arabah.","et pertransit ex latere aquilonis Betharaba descenditque in Arabam.","ועבר אל כתף מול הערבה צפונה וירד הערבתה׃"],["6","18","19","그 경계는 다시 북쪽으로 벳 호글라 비탈을 지나, 그 끝이 ‘소금 바다’ 북쪽 끝, 요르단 남쪽 끝에 이른다. 이것이 남쪽 경계이다.","경계는 거기에서 북쪽으로 벳호글라 비탈을 지나 마침내 짠물호수 북쪽 물굽이, 요르단 강 남쪽 끝으로 빠진다. 이것이 남쪽 경계이다.","또 북으로 벧 호글라 곁을 지나서 요단 남쪽 끝에 있는 염해의 북쪽 해만이 그 경계의 끝이 되나니 이는 남쪽 경계며","또 북으로 벧 호글라 곁을 지나서 요단 남단에 당한 염해의 북편 해만이 그 경계의 끝이 되나니 이는 남편 경계며","경계선은 계속해서 북쪽으로 뻗어가 벧호글라의 가장자리를 지나 요단강 남쪽 끝으로 이어지는 소금바다의 북쪽 바닷가로 경계선이 빠져 나간다. 바로 지금까지 말한 경로가 남쪽의 경계선이다.","From there the boundary continued across the northern flank of Beth-hoglah and extended northward to the tongue of the Salt Sea, toward the southern end of the Jordan. This was the southern boundary.","And the border passed along to the side of Bethhoglah northward: and the outgoings of the border were at the north bay of the salt sea at the south end of Jordan: this was the south coast.","It then went to the northern slope of Beth Hoglah and came out at the northern bay of the Salt Sea, at the mouth of the Jordan in the south. This was the southern boundary.","Et praetergreditur contra aquilonem Bethagla; suntque exitus eius contra linguam maris Salsissimi ab aquilone in fine Iordanis. Haec est australis plaga.","ועבר הגבול אל כתף בית חגלה צפונה והיה תצאותיו הגבול אל לשון ים המלח צפונה אל קצה הירדן נגבה זה גבול נגב׃"],["6","18","20","그리고 요르단이 동쪽 경계를 이룬다. 이것이 벤야민의 자손들이 씨족별로 받은 상속 재산의 사방 경계이다.","요르단 강이 그 동쪽 경계선을 이루고 있다. 이상이 베냐민 후손이 갈래를 따라 차지한 유산의 사방 경계선이다.","동쪽 경계는 요단이니 이는 베냐민 자손이 그들의 가족대로 받은 기업의 사방 경계였더라","동방 경계는 요단이니 이는 베냐민 자손이 그 가족대로 얻은 기업의 사면 경계이었더라","마지막으로 동쪽 경계선은 요단강이다. 지금까지 말한 대로 베냐민 지파 사람들은 각 씨족에 따라 사방 경계선 안에 있는 땅을 그들 몫으로 차지하고 살았다.","The Jordan bounded it on the east. This was how the heritage of the Benjaminites by their clans was bounded on all sides.","And Jordan was the border of it on the east side. This was the inheritance of the children of Benjamin, by the coasts thereof round about, according to their families.","The Jordan formed the boundary on the eastern side. These were the boundaries that marked out the inheritance of the clans of Benjamin on all sides.","Iordanis autem est terminus ab oriente. Haec est possessio filiorum Beniamin per terminos suos in circuitu secundum familias suas.","והירדן יגבל אתו לפאת קדמה זאת נחלת בני בנימן לגבולתיה סביב למשפחתם׃"],["6","18","21","벤야민 자손 지파가 씨족별로 받은 성읍은 예리코, 벳 호글라, 에멕 크치츠,","베냐민 후손 지파가 갈래를 따라 차지한 성은 아래와 같다. 예리고, 벳호글라, 에멕크시스,","베냐민 자손의 지파가 그들의 가족대로 받은 성읍들은 여리고와 벧 호글라와 에멕 그시스와","베냐민 자손의 지파가 그 가족대로 얻은 성읍들은 여리고와 벧 호글라와 에멕 그시스와","베냐민 지파 사람들이 각 씨족에 따라 차지한 성읍은 다음과 같다. 여리고와 벧호글라와 에멕 그시스와","Now the cities belonging to the tribe of the Benjaminites by their clans were: Jericho, Beth-hoglah, Emek-keziz,","Now the cities of the tribe of the children of Benjamin according to their families were Jericho, and Bethhoglah, and the valley of Keziz,","The tribe of Benjamin, clan by clan, had the following cities: Jericho, Beth Hoglah, Emek Keziz,","Fueruntque civitates eius: Iericho et Bethagla et Ameccasis","והיו הערים למטה בני בנימן למשפחותיהם יריחו ובית חגלה ועמק קציץ׃"],["6","18","22","벳 아라바, 츠마라임, 베텔,","베다라바, 스마라임, 베델,","벧 아라바와 스마라임과 벧엘과","벧 아라바와 스마라임과 벧엘과","벧아라바와 스마라임과 벧엘과","Beth-arabah, Zemaraim, Bethel,","And Betharabah, and Zemaraim, and Bethel,","Beth Arabah, Zemaraim, Bethel,","et Betharaba et Semaraim et Bethel","ובית הערבה וצמרים ובית אל׃"],["6","18","23","아윔, 파라, 오프라,","아윔, 바라, 오브라,","아윔과 바라와 오브라와","아윔과 바라와 오브라와","아윔과 바라와 오브라와","Avvim, Parah, Ophra,","And Avim, and Pharah, and Ophrah,","Avvim, Parah, Ophrah,","et Avim et Phara et Ophra,","והעוים והפרה ועפרה׃"],["6","18","24","크파르 암모니, 오프니, 게바, 이렇게 열두 성읍과 거기에 딸린 촌락들이다.","그발암모니, 오브니, 게바. 이렇게 열두 성과 거기에 딸린 천막촌들.","그발 암모니와 오브니와 게바이니 열두 성읍과 또 그 마을들이며","그발 암모니와 오브니와 게바니 십 이 성읍이요 또 그 촌락이며","그발 암모니와 오브니와 게바 이렇게 모두 열두 성읍이 있고 각 성읍에 딸려 있는 마을들이 더 있다.","Chephar-ammoni, Ophni, and Geba; twelve cities and their villages.","And Chepharhaammonai, and Ophni, and Gaba; twelve cities with their villages:","Kephar Ammoni, Ophni and Geba--twelve towns and their villages.","Capharemona et Ophni et Gabaa: civitates duodecim et villae earum.","וכפר העמני והעפני וגבע ערים שתים עשרה וחצריהן׃"],["6","18","25","그리고 기브온, 라마, 브에롯,","또 기브온, 라마, 브에롯,","기브온과 라마와 브에롯과","기브온과 라마와 브에롯과","또한 기브온과 라마와 브에롯과","Also Gibeon, Ramah, Beeroth,","Gibeon, and Ramah, and Beeroth,","Gibeon, Ramah, Beeroth,","Gabaon et Rama et Beroth","גבעון והרמה ובארות׃"],["6","18","26","미츠페, 크피라, 모차,","미스베, 그비라, 모사,","미스베와 그비라와 모사와","미스베와 그비라와 모사와","미스베와 그비라와 모사와","Mizpeh, Chephirah, Mozah,","And Mizpeh, and Chephirah, and Mozah,","Mizpah, Kephirah, Mozah,","et Maspha et Cephira et Mosa","והמצפה והכפירה והמצה׃"],["6","18","27","레켐, 이르프엘, 타르알라,","레켐, 이르브엘, 다랄라,","레겜과 이르브엘과 다랄라와","레겜과 이르브엘과 다랄라와","레겜과 이르브엘과 다랄라와","Rekem, Irpeel, Taralah,","And Rekem, and Irpeel, and Taralah,","Rekem, Irpeel, Taralah,","et Recem, Iaraphel et Tharala","ורקם וירפאל ותראלה׃"],["6","18","28","첼라, 엘렙, 여부스 곧 예루살렘, 기브아, 키르얏 여아림, 이렇게 열네 성읍과 거기에 딸린 촌락들이다. 이것이 벤야민의 자손들이 씨족별로 받은 상속 재산이다.","셀라, 엘렙, 여부스 곧 예루살렘, 기브앗, 키럇. 이렇게 열네 성과 거기에 딸린 천막촌들. 이것이 베냐민 후손이 갈래를 따라 차지한 유산이다.","셀라와 엘렙과 여부스 곧 예루살렘과 기부앗과 기럇이니 열네 성읍이요 또 그 마을들이라 이는 베냐민 자손이 그들의 가족대로 받은 기업이었더라","셀라와 엘렙과 여부스 곧 예루살렘과 기부앗과 기럇이니 십 사 성읍이요 또 그 촌락이라 이는 베냐민 자손이 그 가족대로 얻은 기업이었더라","셀라와 엘렙과 여부스라고도 불렀던 예루살렘과 기부앗과 기럇 이렇게 열네 성읍이 더 있고 각 성읍에 딸린 마을들이 있다. 이상이 베냐민 지파 사람들이 각 씨족에 따라 몫으로 차지하고 살아갈 땅이다.","Zela, Haeleph, the Jebusite city (that is, Jerusalem), Gibeah, and Kiriath; fourteen cities and their villages. This was the heritage of the clans of Benjaminites.","And Zelah, Eleph, and Jebusi, which is Jerusalem, Gibeath, and Kirjath; fourteen cities with their villages. This is the inheritance of the children of Benjamin according to their families.","Zelah, Haeleph, the Jebusite city (that is, Jerusalem), Gibeah and Kiriath--fourteen towns and their villages. This was the inheritance of Benjamin for its clans.","et Sela, Eleph et Iebus, quae est Ierusalem, Gabaath et Cariath: civitates quattuordecim et villae earum. Haec est possessio filiorum Beniamin iuxta familias suas.","וצלע האלף והיבוסי היא ירושלם גבעת קרית ערים ארבע עשרה וחצריהן זאת נחלת בני בנימן למשפחתם׃"],["6","19","1","두 번째로 시메온, 곧 씨족별로 나뉜 시메온 자손 지파를 위한 제비가 나왔다. 그들의 상속 재산은 유다 자손들의 상속 재산 가운데에 있었다.","둘째 몫은 갈래를 따라 시므온 후손 각 지파에게 돌아갔다. 그들의 유산은 유다 후손의 유산 한복판에 들어 있다.","둘째로 시므온 곧 시므온 자손의 지파를 위하여 그들의 가족대로 제비를 뽑았으니 그들의 기업은 유다 자손의 기업 중에서라","둘째로 시므온 곧 시므온 자손의 지파를 위하여 그 가족대로 제비를 뽑았으니 그 기업은 유다 자손의 기업 중에서라","두번째 제비를 뽑아 땅을 차지하게 된 지파는 시므온 지파였다. 시므온 지파 사람들이 씨족에 따라 그들 몫으로 차지한 땅은 유다 지파가 차지한 땅의 한가운데에 위치해 있었다.","The second lot fell to Simeon. The heritage of the tribe of Simeonites by their clans lay within that of the Judahites.","And the second lot came forth to Simeon, even for the tribe of the children of Simeon according to their families: and their inheritance was within the inheritance of the children of Judah.","The second lot came out for the tribe of Simeon, clan by clan. Their inheritance lay within the territory of Judah.","Et egressa est sors secunda fi liorum Simeon per cognatio nes suas; fuitque hereditas","ויצא הגורל השני לשמעון למטה בני שמעון למשפחותם ויהי נחלתם בתוך נחלת בני יהודה׃"],["6","19","2","이렇게 하여 그들이 얻은 상속 재산은 브에르 세바, 세바, 몰라다,","그들이 차지한 몫은 브엘세바, 세마, 몰라다,","그들이 받은 기업은 브엘세바 곧 세바와 몰라다와","그 얻은 기업은 브엘세바 곧 세바와 몰라다와","시므몬 지파의 몫으로 배당된 땅에는 다음과 같은 성읍들과 마을들이 들어 있다. 브엘세바라고 흔히 부르는 세바와 몰라다와","For their heritage they received Beer-sheba, Shema, Moladah,","And they had in their inheritance Beersheba, and Sheba, and Moladah,","It included: Beersheba (or Sheba), Moladah,","eorum in medio possessionis filiorum Iudae. Bersabee et Sama et Molada","ויהי להם בנחלתם באר שבע ושבע ומולדה׃"],["6","19","3","하차르 수알, 발라, 에쳄,","하살수알, 발라, 에셈,","하살 수알과 발라와 에셈과","하살 수알과 발라와 에셈과","하살 수알과 발라와 에셈과","Hazar-shual, Balah, Ezem,","And Hazarshual, and Balah, and Azem,","Hazar Shual, Balah, Ezem,","et Asarsual et Bala et Esem","וחצר שועל ובלה ועצם׃"],["6","19","4","엘톨랏, 프토르, 호르마,","엘돌랏, 브돌, 호르마,","엘돌랏과 브둘과 호르마와","엘돌랏과 브둘과 호르마와","엘돌랏과 브둘과 호르마와","Eltolad, Bethul, Hormah,","And Eltolad, and Bethul, and Hormah,","Eltolad, Bethul, Hormah,","et Eltholad et Bethul et Horma","ואלתולד ובתול וחרמה׃"],["6","19","5","치클락, 벳 마르카봇, 하차르 수사,","시글락, 벳마르가봇, 하살수사,","시글락과 벧 말가봇과 하살수사와","시글락과 벧 말가봇과 하살수사와","시글락과 벧말가봇과 하살 수사와","Ziklag, Bethmar-caboth, Hazar-susah,","And Ziklag, and Bethmarcaboth, and Hazarsusah,","Ziklag, Beth Marcaboth, Hazar Susah,","et Siceleg et Bethmarchaboth et Asarsusa","וצקלג ובית המרכבות וחצר סוסה׃"],["6","19","6","벳 르바옷, 사루헨, 이렇게 열세 성읍과 거기에 딸린 촌락들이다.","벳르바옷, 사루헨. 이렇게 열세 성과 거기에 딸린 천막촌들.","벧 르바옷과 사루헨이니 열세 성읍이요 또 그 마을들이며","벧 르바옷과 사루헨이니 십 삼 성읍이요 또 그 촌락이며","벧르바옷과 사루헨까지 이렇게 열세 성읍과 각 성읍에 딸려 있는 마을들이 있고","Beth-lebaoth, and Sharuhen; thirteen cities and their villages.","And Bethlebaoth, and Sharuhen; thirteen cities and their villages:","Beth Lebaoth and Sharuhen--thirteen towns and their villages;","et Bethlebaoth et Sarohen: civitates tredecim et villae earum.","ובית לבאות ושרוחן ערים שלש עשרה וחצריהן׃"],["6","19","7","그리고 아인, 림몬, 에테르, 아산, 이렇게 네 성읍과 거기에 딸린 촌락들,","또 아인, 림몬, 에델, 아산. 이렇게 네 성과 거기에 딸린 천막촌들.","또 아인과 림몬과 에델과 아산이니 네 성읍이요 또 그 마을들이며","또 아인과 림몬과 에델과 아산이니 네 성읍이요 또 그 촌락이며","또 아인과 림론과 에델과 아산 이렇게 네 성읍과 각 성읍에 딸려 있는 마을들이 있다.","Also Ain, Rimmon, Ether, and Ashan; four cities and their villages,","Ain, Remmon, and Ether, and Ashan; four cities and their villages:","Ain, Rimmon, Ether and Ashan--four towns and their villages--","Ain et Remmon et Ethar et Asan: civitates quattuor et villae earum.","עין רמון ועתר ועשן ערים ארבע וחצריהן׃"],["6","19","8","또 바알랏 브에르와 라맛 네겝까지 그 성읍들 주변에 있는 모든 촌락이다. 이것이 시메온 지파가 씨족별로 받은 상속 재산이다.","이 성들을 둘러싸고 있는 모든 천막촌은 바알랏브엘과 네겝 지방 라마까지 이른다. 이것이 시므온 후손 지파가 갈래를 따라 차지한 유산이다.","또 네겝의 라마 곧 바알랏 브엘까지 이 성읍들을 둘러 있는 모든 마을들이니 이는 시므온 자손의 지파가 그들의 가족대로 받은 기업이라","또 남방 라마 곧 바알랏 브엘까지 이 성들을 둘러 있는 모든 촌락이니 이는 시므온 자손의 지파가 그 가족대로 얻은 기업이라","그리고 남쪽에 있는 바알랏 브엘이라고도 부르는 라마까지 펼쳐져 있는 땅에 앞서 죽 나열한 성읍들에 둘려 있는 여러 마을들도 시므온 지파 사람들이 각 씨족별로 차지한 땅 안에 포함되어 있는 마을들이다.","besides all the villages around these cities as far as Baalath-beer (that is, Ramoth-negeb). This was the heritage of the tribe of the Simeonites by their clans.","And all the villages that were round about these cities to Baalathbeer, Ramath of the south. This is the inheritance of the tribe of the children of Simeon according to their families.","and all the villages around these towns as far as Baalath Beer (Ramah in the Negev). This was the inheritance of the tribe of the Simeonites, clan by clan.","Omnes viculi per circuitum urbium istarum usque ad Baalathbeer, Ramathnageb: haec est hereditas filiorum Simeon iuxta cognationes suas.","וכל החצרים אשר סביבות הערים האלה עד בעלת באר ראמת נגב זאת נחלת מטה בני שמעון למשפחתם׃"],["6","19","9","시메온 자손들의 상속 재산은 유다 자손들의 몫에서 떼어 낸 것이다. 유다 자손들의 몫이 너무 컸기 때문이다. 그래서 시메온의 자손들이 유다 자손들의 상속 재산 가운데에서 저희 몫을 나누어 받았다.","시므온 후손의 유산은 유다 후손의 분양지에서 떼어낸 것이다. 유다 후손의 몫이 너무 컸기 때문이다. 그러다 보니 시므온 후손들의 유산이 유다 후손의 유산 한복판에 들게 된 것이다.","시므온 자손의 이 기업은 유다 자손의 기업 중에서 취하였으니 이는 유다 자손의 분깃이 자기들에게 너무 많으므로 시므온 자손이 자기의 기업을 그들의 기업 중에서 받음이었더라","시므온 자손의 이 기업은 유다 자손의 기업 중에서 취하였으니 이는 유다 자손의 분깃이 자기들에게 너무 많으므로 시므온 자손이 자기의 기업을 그들의 기업 중에서 얻음이었더라","앞서 이야기하였듯이 시므온 사람들이 몫으로 차지한 땅은 유다 지파 사람들의 땅안에 들어있다. 그 까닭은 유다 지파 사람들이 차지한 땅이 너무 컸기 때문이다. 그래서 시므온 지파가 유다 지파 사람들이 차지한 땅가운데로 들어가 살게 된 것이다.","This heritage of the Simeonites was within the confines of the Judahites; for since the portion of the latter was too large for them, the Simeonites obtained their heritage within it.","Out of the portion of the children of Judah was the inheritance of the children of Simeon: for the part of the children of Judah was too much for them: therefore the children of Simeon had their inheritance within the inheritance of them.","The inheritance of the Simeonites was taken from the share of Judah, because Judah's portion was more than they needed. So the Simeonites received their inheritance within the territory of Judah.","Sumpta est de funiculo filiorum Iudae, quia maior erat; et idcirco possederunt filii Simeon in medio hereditatis eorum.","מחבל בני יהודה נחלת בני שמעון כי היה חלק בני יהודה רב מהם וינחלו בני שמעון בתוך נחלתם׃"],["6","19","10","세 번째로, 씨족별로 나뉜 즈불룬의 자손들을 위한 제비가 나왔다. 그들이 받은 상속 재산의 경계는 사릿까지 다다라,","셋째 몫은 갈래를 따라 즈불룬 후손에게 돌아갔다. 그들의 유산 경계는 사릿에 이르러,","셋째로 스불론 자손을 위하여 그들의 가족대로 제비를 뽑았으니 그들의 기업의 경계는 사릿까지이며","세째로 스불론 자손을 위하여 그 가족대로 제비를 뽑았으니 그 기업의 경계는 사릿에 미치고","세번째로 제비에 뽑혀 땅을 차지하게 된 지파는 스불론 지파였다. 스불론 지파 사람들이 각 씨족에 따라 몫으로 차지한 땅은 사릿이라는 곳까지 미쳤다.","The third lot fell to the Zebulunites by their clans. The boundary of their heritage was at Sarid.","And the third lot came up for the children of Zebulun according to their families: and the border of their inheritance was unto Sarid:","The third lot came up for Zebulun, clan by clan: The boundary of their inheritance went as far as Sarid.","Ceciditque sors tertia filiorum Zabulon per cognationes suas. Et factus est terminus possessionis eorum usque Sarid","ויעל הגורל השלישי לבני זבולן למשפחתם ויהי גבול נחלתם עד שריד׃"],["6","19","11","서쪽으로 올라가서 마르알라에 이르고 다뻬셋에 닿은 다음, 요크느암 맞은쪽 개천에 닿는다.","서쪽으로 마랄라로 올라가서 다뻬셋을 스쳐 욕느암을 마주보는 개울에 닿는다.","서쪽으로 올라가서 마랄라에 이르러 답베셋을 만나 욕느암 앞 시내를 만나고","서편으로 올라가서 마랄라에 이르러 답베셋에 미치고 욕느암 앞 시내에 미치며","이 사릿이라는 곳까지 경계선은 서쪽으로 올라가 마랄라에 다다르고 계속해서 답베셋을 거치고 욕느암 앞에 죽 이어지는 개울에 다다른다.","Their boundary went up west and through Mareal, reaching Dabbesheth and the wadi that is near Jokneam.","And their border went up toward the sea, and Maralah, and reached to Dabbasheth, and reached to the river that is before Jokneam;","Going west it ran to Maralah, touched Dabbesheth, and extended to the ravine near Jokneam.","ascenditque contra occidentem et Merala et pervenit in Debbaseth usque ad torrentem, qui est contra Iecnaam,","ועלה גבולם לימה ומרעלה ופגע בדבשת ופגע אל הנחל אשר על פני יקנעם׃"],["6","19","12","또 사릿에서 해 뜨는 동쪽으로 돌아 키슬롯 타보르 경계에 다다른 다음, 다브랏 쪽으로 나가다가 야피아로 올라간다.","또 사릿에서 반대편 해 뜨는 동쪽으로 가다가 기슬롯다볼 경계에 이른다. 거기에서 다시 다브랏 쪽으로 가다가 야비아로 올라간다.","사릿에서부터 동쪽으로 돌아 해 뜨는 쪽을 향하여 기슬롯 다볼의 경계에 이르고 다브랏으로 나가서 야비아로 올라가고","사릿에서부터 동편으로 돌아 해 뜨는 편을 향하고 기슬롯 다볼의 경계에 이르고 다브랏으로 나가서 야비아로 올라가고","또 경계선은 사릿에서 동쪽 해뜨는 곳으로 방향을 바꾸어서 기슬롯 다볼의 경계선까지 이어진다. 거기서 다시 다브랏으로 뻗어 나가다가 야비아로 올라간다.","From Sarid eastward it ran to the district of Chisloth-tabor, on to Daberath, and up to Japhia.","And turned from Sarid eastward toward the sunrising unto the border of Chislothtabor, and then goeth out to Daberath, and goeth up to Japhia,","It turned east from Sarid toward the sunrise to the territory of Kisloth Tabor and went on to Daberath and up to Japhia.","et revertitur de Sarid contra orientem in fines Ceseleththabor et egreditur ad Dabereth ascenditque contra Iaphia.","ושב משריד קדמה מזרח השמש על גבול כסלת תבר ויצא אל הדברת ועלה יפיע׃"],["6","19","13","거기에서 다시 해 뜨는 동쪽으로 갓 헤페르와 엣 카친을 지나, 네아를 향해 구부러지면서 림몬 쪽으로 나간다.","거기에서 다시 동편 해 뜨는 쪽으로 지나가다가 갓헤벨과 이따카신에 이른다. 다시 림몬으로 빠졌다가 네아로 굽어져서","또 거기서부터 동쪽으로 가드 헤벨을 지나 엣 가신에 이르고 네아까지 연결된 림몬으로 나아가서","또 거기서부터 동편으로 가드 헤벨을 지나 엣 가신에 이르고 네아까지 연한 림몬으로 나아가서","경계선은 계속해서 야비아에서 이어져 동쪽으로 가드헤벨로 빠진다. 가드헤벨을 지나 엣 가신으로 달리다가 네아 쪽으로 방향을 바꾸어 림몬까지 뻗는다.","From there it continued eastward to Gath-hepher and to Eth-kazin, extended to Rimmon, and turned to Neah.","And from thence passeth on along on the east to Gittahhepher, to Ittahkazin, and goeth out to Remmonmethoar to Neah;","Then it continued eastward to Gath Hepher and Eth Kazin; it came out at Rimmon and turned toward Neah.","Et inde pertransit usque ad orientalem plagam Gethhepher, Etthacasin et egreditur in Remmon et inclinatur in Noa;","ומשם עבר קדמה מזרחה גתה חפר עתה קצין ויצא רמון המתאר הנעה׃"],["6","19","14","그 경계는 다시 북쪽으로 돌아 한나톤으로 가다가, 그 끝이 입타 엘 골짜기에 이른다.","북편으로 한나돈을 향해 가다가 입다엘 골짜기로 빠진다.","북쪽으로 돌아 한나돈에 이르고 입다엘 골짜기에 이르러 끝이 되며","북으로 돌아 한나돈에 이르고 입다엘 골짜기에 이르러 끝이 되며","거기에서 북쪽으로 다시 방향을 바꾼다. 그래서 한나돈에 다다르고 입다엘 골짜기에 이르러서야 경계선이 끝난다.","Skirting north of Hannathon, the boundary ended at the valley of Iphtahel.","And the border compasseth it on the north side to Hannathon: and the outgoings thereof are in the valley of Jiphthahel:","There the boundary went around on the north to Hannathon and ended at the Valley of Iphtah El.","et vergit ad aquilonem ad Hanathon. Suntque egressus eius vallis Iephthael;","ונסב אתו הגבול מצפון חנתן והיו תצאתיו גי יפתח אל׃"],["6","19","15","이렇게 카탓, 나할랄, 시므론, 이드알라, 베들레헴까지 포함하여 열두 성읍과 거기에 딸린 촌락들이다.","이 밖에도 카탓, 나할랄, 시므론, 이드알라, 베들레헴. 이렇게 열두 성과 거기에 딸린 천막촌들이 있다.","또 갓닷과 나할랄과 시므론과 이달라와 베들레헴이니 모두 열두 성읍과 그 마을들이라","또 갓닷과 나할랄과 시므론과 이달라와 베들레헴이니 모두 십 이 성읍이요 또 그 촌락이라","또한 갓닷과 나할랄과 시므론과 이달라와 베들레헴까지 있어서 성읍은 모두 합하면 열둘이고 각 성읍에 딸려 있는 마을들이 더 있다.","Thus, with Kattath, Nahalal, Shimron, Idalah, and Bethlehem, there were twelve cities and their villages.","And Kattath, and Nahallal, and Shimron, and Idalah, and Bethlehem: twelve cities with their villages.","Included were Kattath, Nahalal, Shimron, Idalah and Bethlehem. There were twelve towns and their villages.","et Cateth et Naalol et Semeron et Iedala et Bethlehem: civitates duodecim et villae earum.","וקטת ונהלל ושמרון וידאלה ובית לחם ערים שתים עשרה וחצריהן׃"],["6","19","16","이것이 즈불룬의 자손들이 씨족별 상속 재산으로 받은 성읍들과 거기에 딸린 촌락들이다.","이상의 성들과 거기에 딸린 천막촌들, 이것이 즈불룬 후손이 갈래를 따라 차지한 유산이다.","스불론 자손이 그들의 가족대로 받은 기업은 이 성읍들과 그 마을들이었더라","스불론 자손이 그 가족대로 얻은 기업은 이 성읍들과 그 촌락이었더라","이상이 스불론 지파 사람들이 각 씨족에 따라 몫으로 차지한 성읍과 마을들이다.","This was the heritage of the Zebulunites by their clans, these cities and their villages.","This is the inheritance of the children of Zebulun according to their families, these cities with their villages.","These towns and their villages were the inheritance of Zebulun, clan by clan.","Haec est hereditas tribus filiorum Zabulon per cognationes suas, urbes et viculi earum.","זאת נחלת בני זבולן למשפחותם הערים האלה וחצריהן׃"],["6","19","17","네 번째로 이사카르, 곧 씨족별로 나뉜 이사카르의 자손들을 위한 제비가 나왔다.","이싸갈에게 넷째 몫이 돌아갔다. 이싸갈 후손이 갈래를 따라 받은","넷째로 잇사갈 곧 잇사갈 자손을 위하여 그들의 가족대로 제비를 뽑았으니","네째로 잇사갈 곧 잇사갈 자손을 위하여 그 가족대로 제비를 뽑았으니","네번째로 제비에 뽑혀 땅을 차지하게 된 지파는 잇사갈 지파였다. 잇사갈 지파 사람들이 각 씨족에 따라 그들 몫으로 차지한 땅에는 다음과 같은 성읍들이 있다.","The fourth lot fell to Issachar. The territory of the Issacharites by their clans","And the fourth lot came out to Issachar, for the children of Issachar according to their families.","The fourth lot came out for Issachar, clan by clan.","Issachar egressa est sors quarta per cognationes suas.","ליששכר יצא הגורל הרביעי לבני יששכר למשפחותם׃"],["6","19","18","그들의 영토 안에는 이즈르엘, 크술롯, 수넴,","영토는 이즈르엘, 그술롯, 수넴,","그들의 지역은 이스르엘과 그술롯과 수넴과","그 지경 안은 이스르엘과 그술롯과 수넴과","곧 이스르엘과 그술롯과 수넴과","included Jezreel, Chesulloth, Shunem,","And their border was toward Jezreel, and Chesulloth, and Shunem,","Their territory included: Jezreel, Kesulloth, Shunem,","Fuitque eius hereditas Iezrahel et Chasaloth et Sunam","ויהי גבולם יזרעאלה והכסולת ושונם׃"],["6","19","19","하파라임, 쉬온, 아나하랏,","하바라임, 쉬온, 아나하랏,","하바라임과 시온과 아나하랏과","하바라임과 시온과 아나하랏과","하바라임과 시온과 아나하랏과","Hapharaim, Shion, Anaharath,","And Haphraim, and Shihon, and Anaharath,","Hapharaim, Shion, Anaharath,","et Hapharaim et Seon et Anaharath","וחפרים ושיאן ואנחרת׃"],["6","19","20","라삣, 키스욘, 에베츠,","라빗, 키스욘, 에베스,","랍빗과 기시온과 에베스와","랍빗과 기시온과 에베스와","랍빗과 기시온과 에베스와","Rabbith, Kishion, Ebez,","And Rabbith, and Kishion, and Abez,","Rabbith, Kishion, Ebez,","et Rabbith et Cesion et Abes","והרבית וקשיון ואבץ׃"],["6","19","21","레멧, 엔 간님, 엔 하따, 벳 파체츠가 있다.","레멧, 엔간님, 엔하따, 벳바쎄스이다.","레멧과 엔 간님과 엔핫다와 벧 바세스이며","레멧과 언간님과 엔핫다와 벧 바세스며","레멧과 언간님과 엔핫다와 벧바세스이다.","Remeth, En-gannim, En-haddah, and Beth-pazzez.","And Remeth, and Engannim, and Enhaddah, and Bethpazzez;","Remeth, En Gannim, En Haddah and Beth Pazzez.","et Rameth et Engannim et Enhadda et Bethpheses.","ורמת ועין גנים ועין חדה ובית פצץ׃"],["6","19","22","그리고 그 경계는 타보르, 사하추마, 벳 세메스에 닿은 다음, 그 끝이 요르단에 이른다. 이렇게 열여섯 성읍과 거기에 딸린 촌락들이다.","그 경계는 다볼, 사하시마, 벳세메스를 스쳐 요르단 강으로 빠진다. 이렇게 열여섯 성과 거기에 딸린 천막촌들이다.","그 경계는 다볼과 사하수마와 벧 세메스에 이르고 그 끝은 요단이니 모두 열여섯 성읍과 그 마을들이라","그 경계는 다볼과 사하수마와 벧 세메스에 미치고 그 끝은 요단이니 모두 십 륙 성읍이요 또 그 촌락이라","경계선은 다볼을 거쳐 사하수마와 벧세메스에 다다르고 요단강에서 끝난다. 이 안에 들어 있는 성읍은 모두 열여섯이고 또한 각 성읍에 딸려 있는 마을들이 더 있다.","The boundary reached Tabor, Shahazumah, and Beth-shemesh, ending at the Jordan: sixteen cities and their villages.","And the coast reacheth to Tabor, and Shahazimah, and Bethshemesh; and the outgoings of their border were at Jordan: sixteen cities with their villages.","The boundary touched Tabor, Shahazumah and Beth Shemesh, and ended at the Jordan. There were sixteen towns and their villages.","Et pervenit terminus eius usque Thabor et Sehesima et Bethsames; suntque exitus eius ad Iordanem; civitates sedecim et villae earum.","ופגע הגבול בתבור ושחצומה ובית שמש והיו תצאות גבולם הירדן ערים שש עשרה וחצריהן׃"],["6","19","23","이것이 이사카르 자손 지파가 씨족별 상속 재산으로 받은 성읍들과 거기에 딸린 촌락들이다.","이 성들과 거기에 딸린 천막촌들이 이싸갈 후손 지파가 갈래를 따라 차지한 유산이다.","잇사갈 자손 지파가 그 가족대로 받은 기업은 이 성읍들과 그 마을들이었더라","잇사갈 자손 지파가 그 가족대로 얻은 기업은 이 성읍들과 그 촌락이었더라","이상이 잇사갈 지파 사람들이 그 씨족에 따라 몫으로 차지한 땅에 포함되어 있는 성읍과 마을들이다.","This was the heritage of the Issacharites by their clans, these cities and their villages.","This is the inheritance of the tribe of the children of Issachar according to their families, the cities and their villages.","These towns and their villages were the inheritance of the tribe of Issachar, clan by clan.","Haec est possessio filiorum Issachar per cognationes suas, urbes et viculi earum.","זאת נחלת מטה בני יששכר למשפחתם הערים וחצריהן׃"],["6","19","24","다섯 번째로, 씨족별로 나뉜 아세르 자손 지파를 위한 제비가 나왔다.","다섯째 몫은 갈래를 따라 아셀 후손 지파에게 돌아갔다.","다섯째로 아셀 자손의 지파를 위하여 그 가족대로 제비를 뽑았으니","다섯째로 아셀 자손의 지파를 위하여 그 가족대로 제비를 뽑았으니","다섯번째로 제비에 뽑혀 각 씨족에 따라 땅을 그들 몫으로 차지하게 된 지파는 아셀 지파이다.","The fifth lot fell to the Asherites by their clans.","And the fifth lot came out for the tribe of the children of Asher according to their families.","The fifth lot came out for the tribe of Asher, clan by clan.","Ceciditque sors quinta tribui filiorum Aser per cognationes suas.","ויצא הגורל החמישי למטה בני אשר למשפחותם׃"],["6","19","25","그들의 영토 안에는 헬캇, 할리, 베텐, 악삽,","그들의 영토는 헬캇, 할리, 베텐, 악삽,","그들의 지역은 헬갓과 할리와 베덴과 악삽과","그 지경 안은 헬갓과 할리와 베덴과 악삽과","아셀 지파 사람들이 차지한 땅 안에는 다음과 같은 성읍들이 있다. 곧 헬갓과 할리와 베덴과 악삽과","Their territory included Helkath, Hali, Beten, Achshaph,","And their border was Helkath, and Hali, and Beten, and Achshaph,","Their territory included: Helkath, Hali, Beten, Acshaph,","Fuitque terminus eorum Helcath et Chali et Beten et Achsaph","ויהי גבולם חלקת וחלי ובטן ואכשף׃"],["6","19","26","알람멜렉, 아므앗, 미스알이 있다. 그 경계는 서쪽으로 카르멜과 시호르 리브낫에 닿고,","알라멜렉, 아마드, 미스알이다. 그 경계는 서편으로 가르멜과 리브낫 시내를 스쳐","알람멜렉과 아맛과 미살이며 그 경계의 서쪽은 갈멜을 만나 시홀 림낫에 이르고","알람멜렉과 아맛과 미살이며 그 경계의 서편은 갈멜에 미치며 시홀 림낫에 미치고","알람멜렉과 아맛과 미살이다. 이 지파의 땅 경계선은 서쪽으로 갈멜을 지나 시흘 림낫에 다다르고","Allammelech, Amad, and Mishal, and reached Carmel on the west, and Shihor-libnath.","And Alammelech, and Amad, and Misheal; and reacheth to Carmel westward, and to Shihorlibnath;","Allammelech, Amad and Mishal. On the west the boundary touched Carmel and Shihor Libnath.","et Elmelech et Amaad et Masal et pervenit usque ad Carmelum in occidente et ad Sihorlabanath;","ואלמלך ועמעד ומשאל ופגע בכרמל הימה ובשיחור לבנת׃"],["6","19","27","해 뜨는 쪽으로 벳 다곤을 돌아서 벳 에멕과 느이엘 북쪽에 있는 즈불룬과 입타 엘 골짜기에 닿은 다음, 왼쪽으로 카불을 향하여 나가,","해 뜨는 쪽으로 방향을 바꾸어 벳다곤에 이르렀다가 북쪽으로 즈불룬과 입다엘 골짜기를 스친다. 또 베데멕과 느이엘로 해서 가불 쪽으로 빠진다. 다시 북쪽으로는","해 뜨는 쪽으로 돌아 벧 다곤에 이르며 스불론을 만나고 북쪽으로 입다 엘 골짜기를 만나 벧에멕과 느이엘에 이르고 가불 왼쪽으로 나아가서","꺾여 해 돋는 편을 향하여 벧 다곤에 이르며 스불론에 달하고 북편으로 입다 엘 골짜기에 미쳐서 벧에멕과 느이엘에 이르고 가불 좌편으로 나가서","방향을 바꾸어 해돋는 동쪽으로 뻗어가 벧다곤에 다다라서는 스불론까지 뻗친다. 그리고 북쪽으로 다시 방향을 바꾸어 입다엘 골짜기까지 이어지고 계속해서 벧에멕과 느이엘을 지나 가불로 빠져 나간다. 이렇게 북쪽으로 뻗어 나가","In the other direction, it ran eastward of Beth-dagon, reached Zebulun and the valley of Iphtahel; then north of Beth-emek and Neiel, it extended northward to Cabul,","And turneth toward the sunrising to Bethdagon, and reacheth to Zebulun, and to the valley of Jiphthahel toward the north side of Bethemek, and Neiel, and goeth out to Cabul on the left hand,","It then turned east toward Beth Dagon, touched Zebulun and the Valley of Iphtah El, and went north to Beth Emek and Neiel, passing Cabul on the left.","ac revertitur contra orientem in Bethdagon et pertransit usque Zabulon et vallem Iephthael contra aquilonem in Bethemec et Neiel. Egrediturque ad laevam Chabul","ושב מזרח השמש בית דגן ופגע בזבלון ובגי יפתח אל צפונה בית העמק ונעיאל ויצא אל כבול משמאל׃"],["6","19","28","압돈, 르홉, 함몬, 카나를 거쳐 ‘큰 시돈’에 다다른다.","압돈, 르홉, 함몬, 카나를 지나 대도시 시돈에까지 이른다.","에브론과 르홉과 함몬과 가나를 지나 큰 시돈까지 이르고","에브론과 르홉과 함몬과 가나를 지나 큰 시돈까지 이르고","에브론과 르홉과 함몬과 가나를 지나 큰 시돈까지 다다른다.","Ebron, Rehob, Hammon, and Kanah, near Greater Sidon.","And Hebron, and Rehob, and Hammon, and Kanah, even unto great Zidon;","It went to Abdon, Rehob, Hammon and Kanah, as far as Greater Sidon.","et Abran et Rohob et Hamon et Cana usque ad Sidonem magnam","ועברן ורחב וחמון וקנה עד צידון רבה׃"],["6","19","29","그 경계는 다시 라마 쪽으로 돌아서 요새 성읍 티로에 다다른 다음, 다시 호사 쪽으로 돌아 그 끝이 바다에 이른다. 이렇게 마할랍, 악집,","경계는 다시 방향을 바꾸어 라마 쪽으로 해서 견고한 성 띠로에 이르고 거기에서 또 방향을 바꾸어 호사 쪽으로 해서 바다로 빠진다. 마할랍, 악집,","돌아서 라마와 견고한 성읍 두로에 이르고 돌아서 호사에 이르고 악십 지방 곁 바다가 끝이 되며","돌아서 라마와 견고한 성읍 두로에 이르고 돌아서 호사에 이르고 악십 지방 곁 바다가 끝이 되며","여기에서 경계선은 라마로 방향을 바꾸어 견고한 성읍 두로에 다다르고 그곳에서 다시 방향을 바꾸어 호사에 이르렀다가 큰바다라고 흔히 부르는 지중해로 빠지 나가 끝을 맺는다. 이 밖에도 아셀 지파가 차지한 성읍은 마할랍과 악십과","Then the boundary turned back to Ramah and to the fortress city of Tyre; thence it cut back to Hosah and ended at the sea. Thus, with Mahalab, Achzib,","And then the coast turneth to Ramah, and to the strong city Tyre; and the coast turneth to Hosah; and the outgoings thereof are at the sea from the coast to Achzib:","The boundary then turned back toward Ramah and went to the fortified city of Tyre, turned toward Hosah and came out at the sea in the region of Aczib,","revertiturque in Rama usque ad civitatem munitissimam Tyrum et revertitur in Hosa; suntque exitus eius in mare; Mahaleb, Achazib","ושב הגבול הרמה ועד עיר מבצר צר ושב הגבול חסה ויהיו תצאתיו הימה מחבל אכזיבה׃"],["6","19","30","아코, 아펙, 르홉까지 포함하여 스물두 성읍과 거기에 딸린 촌락들이다.","아꼬, 아벡, 르홉까지 해서 스물두 성과 거기에 딸린 천막촌들.","또 움마와 아벡과 르홉이니 모두 스물두 성읍과 그 마을들이라","또 움마와 아벡과 르홉이니 모두 이십 이 성읍과 그 촌락이라","움마와 아벡과 르홉으로 앞에서 말한 성읍과 합하여 모두 스물두 성읍과 각 성읍에 딸려 있는 마을들이 있다.","Ummah, Acco, Aphek, and Rehob, there were twenty-two cities and their villages.","Ummah also, and Aphek, and Rehob: twenty and two cities with their villages.","Ummah, Aphek and Rehob. There were twenty-two towns and their villages.","et Amma et Aphec et Rohob: civitates viginti duae et villae earum.","ועמה ואפק ורחב ערים עשרים ושתים וחצריהן׃"],["6","19","31","이것이 아세르 자손 지파가 씨족별 상속 재산으로 받은 성읍들과 거기에 딸린 촌락들이다.","이 성들과 거기에 딸린 천막촌들이 아셀 후손 지파가 갈래를 따라 차지한 유산이다.","아셀 자손의 지파가 그 가족대로 받은 기업은 이 성읍들과 그 마을들이었더라","아셀 자손의 지파가 그 가족대로 얻은 기업은 이 성읍들과 그 촌락이었더라","이상이 아셀 지파 사람들이 각 씨족에 따라 그들 몫으로 차지한 성읍들과 마을들이다.","This was the heritage of the tribe of the Asherites by their clans, these cities and their villages.","This is the inheritance of the tribe of the children of Asher according to their families, these cities with their villages.","These towns and their villages were the inheritance of the tribe of Asher, clan by clan.","Haec est possessio filiorum Aser per cognationes suas, urbes et viculi earum.","זאת נחלת מטה בני אשר למשפחתם הערים האלה וחצריהן׃"],["6","19","32","여섯 번째로, 씨족별로 나뉜 납탈리의 자손들을 위한 제비가 나왔다.","납달리 후손에게는 여섯째 몫이 돌아갔다. 갈래를 따라 납달리 후손에게 돌아간 땅의","여섯째로 납달리 자손을 위하여 납달리 자손의 가족대로 제비를 뽑았으니","여섯째로 납달리 자손을 위하여 납달리 자손의 가족대로 제비를 뽑았으니","여섯번째로 제비에 뽑혀 그들 몫으로 땅을 차지하게 된 지파는 납달리 지파이다. 납달리 지파 사람들이 각 씨족에 따라 차지한 땅의","The sixth lot fell to the Naphtalites.","The sixth lot came out to the children of Naphtali, even for the children of Naphtali according to their families.","The sixth lot came out for Naphtali, clan by clan:","Filiorum Nephthali sexta sors cecidit per familias suas.","לבני נפתלי יצא הגורל הששי לבני נפתלי למשפחתם׃"],["6","19","33","그들의 경계는 헬렙과 차아난님 참나무에서 시작하여, 아다미 네켑과 야브느엘을 지나 라쿰까지 다다랐다가 그 끝이 요르단에 이른다.","경계는 헬렙과 사아난님의 상수리나무에서 시작하여 아다미네겝과 얍느엘로 해서 라쿰에 이르렀다가 요르단 강으로 빠진다.","그들의 지역은 헬렙과 사아난님의 상수리나무에서부터 아다미 네겝과 얍느엘을 지나 락굼까지요 그 끝은 요단이며","그 경계는 헬렙과 사아난님의 상수리나무에서부터 아다미 네겝과 얍느엘을 지나 락굼까지요 그 끝은 요단이며","경계선은 헬렙에서 시작하여 사아난님에 있는 상수리나무를 거치고 아다미 네겝과 얍느엘을 지나서 락굼까지 이어지고 요단강에 가서야 끝을 맺는다.","Their boundary extended from Heleph, from the oak at Zaanannim, including Adami-nekeb and Jabneel, to Lakkum, and ended at the Jordan.","And their coast was from Heleph, from Allon to Zaanannim, and Adami, Nekeb, and Jabneel, unto Lakum; and the outgoings thereof were at Jordan:","Their boundary went from Heleph and the large tree in Zaanannim, passing Adami Nekeb and Jabneel to Lakkum and ending at the Jordan.","Et coepit terminus de Heleph et de quercu in Saananim et Adamineceb et Iebnael usque Lecum et egressus eius usque ad Iordanem;","ויהי גבולם מחלף מאלון בצעננים ואדמי הנקב ויבנאל עד לקום ויהי תצאתיו הירדן׃"],["6","19","34","그 경계는 다시 아즈놋 타보르를 향하여 서쪽으로 돌아 거기에서 후콕으로 나간다. 그래서 남쪽으로는 즈불룬에 닿고 서쪽으로는 아세르, 또 해 뜨는 쪽으로는 요르단의 여후다에 닿는다.","거기에서 방향을 바꾸어 서쪽 경계는 아즈놋다볼로 해서 후콕으로 빠진다. 남쪽은 즈불룬과 접경하고 서쪽은 아셀과 접경하고 해 뜨는 동쪽은 요르단 강과 접경한다.","서쪽으로 돌아 아스놋 다볼에 이르고 그 곳에서부터 훅곡으로 나아가 남쪽은 스불론에 이르고 서쪽은 아셀에 이르며 해 뜨는 쪽은 요단에서 유다에 이르고","서편으로 돌아 아스놋 다볼에 이르고 그곳에서부터 나가 훅곡에 이르러는 남은 스불론에 접하였고 서는 아셀에 접하였으며 해 돋는 편은 유다에 달한 요단이며","거기에서 경계선은 서쪽으로 방향을 틀어 아스놋 다볼로 뻗어 나가 훅곡에 다다른다. 따라서 남쪽으로는 스불론과 맞닿고 서쪽으로는 아셀과 맞닿고 해뜨는 동쪽은 요단강과 경계선이 맞닿는다.","In the opposite direction, westerly, it ran through Aznoth-tabor and from there extended to Hukkok; it reached Zebulun on the south, Asher on the west, and the Jordan on the east.","And then the coast turneth westward to Aznothtabor, and goeth out from thence to Hukkok, and reacheth to Zebulun on the south side, and reacheth to Asher on the west side, and to Judah upon Jordan toward the sunrising.","The boundary ran west through Aznoth Tabor and came out at Hukkok. It touched Zebulun on the south, Asher on the west and the Jordan on the east.","revertiturque terminus contra occidentem in Aznotthabor atque inde egreditur in Hucoc et attingit Zabulon contra meridiem et Aser contra occidentem et Iordanem contra ortum solis;","ושב הגבול ימה אזנות תבור ויצא משם חוקקה ופגע בזבלון מנגב ובאשר פגע מים וביהודה הירדן מזרח השמש׃"],["6","19","35","그리고 요새 성읍은 치띰, 체르, 함맛, 라캇, 킨네렛,","여기에는 아래와 같은 견고한 성읍들이 있다. 시띰, 세르, 함맛, 라캇, 긴네렛,","그 견고한 성읍들은 싯딤과 세르와 함맛과 락갓과 긴네렛과","그 견고한 성읍들은 싯딤과 세르와 함맛과 락갓과 긴네렛과","이 경계선 안에 있는 견고한 성읍들은 다음과 같다. 싯딤과 세르와 함맛과 락갓과 긴네렛과","The fortified cities were Ziddim, Zer, Hammath, Rakkath, Chinnereth,","And the fenced cities are Ziddim, Zer, and Hammath, Rakkath, and Chinnereth,","The fortified cities were Ziddim, Zer, Hammath, Rakkath, Kinnereth,","civitates munitissimae Assedim, Ser et Ammath, Reccath et Chenereth","וערי מבצר הצדים צר וחמת רקת וכנרת׃"],["6","19","36","아다마, 라마, 하초르,","아다마, 라마, 하솔,","아다마와 라마와 하솔과","아다마와 라마와 하솔과","아다마와 라마와 하솔과","Adamah, Ramah, Hazor,","And Adamah, and Ramah, and Hazor,","Adamah, Ramah, Hazor,","et Edema et Rama, Asor","ואדמה והרמה וחצור׃"],["6","19","37","케데스, 에드레이, 엔 하초르,","케데스, 에드레이, 엔하솔,","게데스와 에드레이와 엔 하솔과","게데스와 에드레이와 엔 하솔과","게데스와 에드레이와 언 하솔과","Kedesh, Edrei, En-hazor,","And Kedesh, and Edrei, and Enhazor,","Kedesh, Edrei, En Hazor,","et Cedes et Edrai et Enasor,","וקדש ואדרעי ועין חצור׃"],["6","19","38","이르온, 믹달 엘, 호렘, 벳 아낫, 벳 세메스, 이렇게 열아홉 성읍과 거기에 딸린 촌락들이다.","이론, 믹다렐, 호렘, 베다낫, 벳세메스. 이렇게 열아홉 성과 거기에 딸린 천막촌들.","이론과 믹다렐과 호렘과 벧 아낫과 벧 세메스니 모두 열아홉 성읍과 그 마을들이라","이론과 믹다렐과 호렘과 벧 아낫과 벧 세메스니 모두 십 구 성읍이요 또 그 촌락이라","이론과 믹다렐과 호렘과 벧아낫과 벧세메스로 모두 열아홉 성읍이 있고 또 각 성읍에 딸려 있는 마을들이 더 있다.","Yiron, Migdal-el, Horem, Beth-anath, and Beth-shemesh; nineteen cities and their villages.","And Iron, and Migdalel, Horem, and Bethanath, and Bethshemesh; nineteen cities with their villages.","Iron, Migdal El, Horem, Beth Anath and Beth Shemesh. There were nineteen towns and their villages.","Ieron et Magdalel, Horem et Bethanath et Bethsames: civitates decem et novem et villae earum.","ויראון ומגדל אל חרם ובית ענת ובית שמש ערים תשע עשרה וחצריהן׃"],["6","19","39","이것이 납탈리 자손 지파가 씨족별 상속 재산으로 받은 성읍들과 거기에 딸린 촌락들이다.","이 성들과 거기에 딸린 천막촌들이 납달리 후손 지파가 갈래를 따라 차지한 유산이다.","납달리 자손의 지파가 그 가족대로 받은 기업은 이 성읍들과 그 마을들이었더라","납달리 자손의 지파가 그 가족대로 얻은 기업은 이 성읍들과 그 촌락이었더라","이상이 납달리 지파 사람들이 각 씨족에 따라 그들 몫으로 분배받은 성읍들과 마을들이다.","This was the heritage of the tribe of the Naphtalites by their clans, these cities and their villages.","This is the inheritance of the tribe of the children of Naphtali according to their families, the cities and their villages.","These towns and their villages were the inheritance of the tribe of Naphtali, clan by clan.","Haec est possessio tribus filiorum Nephthali per cognationes suas, urbes et viculi earum.","זאת נחלת מטה בני נפתלי למשפחתם הערים וחצריהן׃"],["6","19","40","일곱 번째로, 씨족별로 나뉜 단 지파 자손들을 위한 제비가 나왔다.","단 지파의 후손에게는 갈래를 따라 일곱째 몫이 돌아갔다.","일곱째로 단 자손의 지파를 위하여 그들의 가족대로 제비를 뽑았으니","일곱째로 단 자손의 지파를 위하여 그 가족대로 제비를 뽑았으니","일곱번째 제비가 뽑혀 그들 몫으로 땅을 차지하게 된 지파는 단 지파였다. 단 지파 사람들이 각 씨족에 따라 차지한 땅의","The seventh lot fell to the tribe of Danites by their clans.","And the seventh lot came out for the tribe of the children of Dan according to their families.","The seventh lot came out for the tribe of Dan, clan by clan.","Tribui filiorum Dan per familias suas egressa est sors septima.","למטה בני דן למשפחתם יצא הגורל השביעי׃"],["6","19","41","그들이 상속 재산으로 받은 영토 안에는 초르아, 에스타올, 이르 세메스,","그들이 유산으로 차지한 영토는 소라, 에스다올, 이르세메스,","그들의 기업의 지역은 소라와 에스다올과 이르세메스와","그 기업의 지경은 소라와 에스다올과 이르세메스와","경계선은 소라와 에스다올과 이르세메스와","Their heritage was the territory of Zorah, Eshtaol, Ir-shemesh,","And the coast of their inheritance was Zorah, and Eshtaol, and Irshemesh,","The territory of their inheritance included: Zorah, Eshtaol, Ir Shemesh,","Et fuit terminus possessionis eius Saraa et Esthaol et Hirsemes (id est civitas Solis)","ויהי גבול נחלתם צרעה ואשתאול ועיר שמש׃"],["6","19","42","사알라삔, 아얄론, 이틀라,","사알라삔, 아얄론, 이들라,","사알랍빈과 아얄론과 이들라와","사알랍빈과 아얄론과 이들라와","사알랍빈과 아얄론과 이들라와","Shaalabbin, Aijalon, Ithlah,","And Shaalabbin, and Ajalon, and Jethlah,","Shaalabbin, Aijalon, Ithlah,","et Selebin et Aialon et Iethela","ושעלבין ואילון ויתלה׃"],["6","19","43","엘론, 팀나, 에크론,","엘론, 딤나, 에크론,","엘론과 딤나와 에그론과","엘론과 딤나와 에그론과","엘론과 딤나와 에그론과","Elon, Timnah, Ekron,","And Elon, and Thimnathah, and Ekron,","Elon, Timnah, Ekron,","et Elon et Thamna et Accaron","ואילון ותמנתה ועקרון׃"],["6","19","44","엘트케, 기브톤, 바알랏,","엘드케, 깁돈, 바알랏,","엘드게와 깁브돈과 바알랏과","엘드게와 깁브돈과 바알랏과","엘드게와 깁브돈과 바알랏과","Eltekoh, Gibbethon, Baalath,","And Eltekeh, and Gibbethon, and Baalath,","Eltekeh, Gibbethon, Baalath,","et Elthece et Gebbethon et Baalath","ואלתקה וגבתון ובעלת׃"],["6","19","45","여훗, 브네 브락, 갓 림몬,","여훗, 브네브락, 갓림몬,","여훗과 브네브락과 가드 림몬과","여훗과 브네브락과 가드 림몬과","여훗과 브네브락과 가드림론과","Jehud, Bene-berak, Gath-rimmon,","And Jehud, and Beneberak, and Gathrimmon,","Jehud, Bene Berak, Gath Rimmon,","et Iud et Benebarach et Gethremmon","ויהד ובני ברק וגת רמון׃"],["6","19","46","메 야르콘, 라콘, 그리고 야포 맞은쪽 지역이 들어 있다.","메야르콘, 라콘 그리고 요빠 맞은편 지역까지다.","메얄곤과 락곤과 욥바 맞은편 경계까지라","메얄곤과 락곤과 욥바 맞은편 경계까지라","메얄곤과 락곤, 그리고 욥바 부근 경계선까지이다.","Me-jarkon, and Rakkon, with the coast at Joppa.","And Mejarkon, and Rakkon, with the border before Japho.","Me Jarkon and Rakkon, with the area facing Joppa.","et Meiarcon et Areccon cum termino, qui respicit Ioppen.","ומי הירקון והרקון עם הגבול מול יפו׃"],["6","19","47","그러나 단의 자손들은 자기들의 영토를 잃어버리게 되었다. 그래서 그들은 레셈으로 올라가 싸워서 그곳을 점령하였다. 그곳을 칼로 쳐서 차지하고 그곳에 살게 된 것이다. 그리고 그 레셈을 자기들의 조상 단의 이름을 따서 단이라고 하였다.","그러나 단 후손의 영토가 좁아서 모두 살 수가 없었다. 그래서 단 후손은 레셈으로 쳐 올라가 칼로 무찌르고 그 성을 차지하고 살게 되었다. 그리고 레셈을 단이라는 조상의 이름을 따서 단이라 불렀다.","그런데 단 자손의 경계는 더욱 확장되었으니 이는 단 자손이 올라가서 레셈과 싸워 그것을 점령하여 칼날로 치고 그것을 차지하여 거기 거주하였음이라 그들의 조상 단의 이름을 따라서 레셈을 단이라 하였더라","그런데 단 자손의 지경이 더욱 확장되었으니 이는 단 자손이 올라가서 레센을 쳐서 취하여 칼날로 치고 그것을 얻어 거기 거하였음이라 그 조상 단의 이름을 따라서 레센을 단이라 하였더라","그러나 단 지파의 경계가 그들에게는 살기에 너무 좁았다. 그래서 단 지파 사람들은 올라가 레센을 쳐서 무찌르고 그 성을 차지하고 살았다. 그러고는 레센을 자기들 조상의 이름을 붙여 단이라고 불렀다.","But the territory of the Danites was too small for them; so the Danites marched up and attacked Leshem, which they captured and put to the sword. Once they had taken possession of Leshem, they dwelt there and named it after their ancestor Dan.","And the coast of the children of Dan went out too little for them: therefore the children of Dan went up to fight against Leshem, and took it, and smote it with the edge of the sword, and possessed it, and dwelt therein, and called Leshem, Dan, after the name of Dan their father.","(But the Danites had difficulty taking possession of their territory, so they went up and attacked Leshem, took it, put it to the sword and occupied it. They settled in Leshem and named it Dan after their forefather.)","Et terminus filiorum Dan effugit ab eis. Ascenderuntque filii Dan et pugnaverunt contra Lesem ceperuntque eam; et percusserunt in ore gladii ac possederunt et habitaverunt in ea, vocantes Lesemdan ex nomine Dan patris sui.","ויצא גבול בני דן מהם ויעלו בני דן וילחמו עם לשם וילכדו אותה ויכו אותה לפי חרב וירשו אותה וישבו בה ויקראו ללשם דן כשם דן אביהם׃"],["6","19","48","이것이 단 자손 지파가 씨족별 상속 재산으로 받은 성읍들과 거기에 딸린 촌락들이다.","이 성들과 거기에 딸린 천막촌들이 단 지파의 후손들이 갈래를 따라 차지한 유산이다.","단 자손의 지파가 그에 딸린 가족대로 받은 기업은 이 성읍들과 그들의 마을들이었더라","단 자손의 지파가 그 가족대로 얻은 기업은 이 성읍들과 그 촌락이었더라","단 지파 사람들이 각 씨족에 따라 그들 몫으로 차지한 성읍과 각 성읍에 딸려 있는 마을들은 위와 같다.","This was the heritage of the tribe of the Danites by their clans, these cities and their villages.","This is the inheritance of the tribe of the children of Dan according to their families, these cities with their villages.","These towns and their villages were the inheritance of the tribe of Dan, clan by clan.","Haec est possessio tribus filiorum Dan per cognationes suas, urbes et viculi earum.","זאת נחלת מטה בני דן למשפחתם הערים האלה וחצריהן׃"],["6","19","49","이렇게 그들은 경계에 따라 땅 나누는 일을 마쳤다. 그러고 나서 이스라엘 자손들은 눈의 아들 여호수아에게도 자기들 가운데에 있는 상속 재산을 주었다.","이렇게 하여 각 지역을 따라 땅 분배를 마쳤다. 그리고 나서 이스라엘 백성은 자기들이 받은 유산에 눈의 아들 여호수아도 한몫 끼게 했다.","이스라엘 자손이 그들의 경계를 따라서 기업의 땅 나누기를 마치고 자기들 중에서 눈의 아들 여호수아에게 기업을 주었으니","이스라엘 자손이 그 경계를 따라서 기업의 땅 나누기를 마치고 자기들 중에서 눈의 아들 여호수아에게 기업을 주었으되","이스라엘 사람들은 대대로 물려줄 땅을 다 분배한 뒤에 눈의 아들 여호수아에게도 차지하고 살아갈 땅을 떼어 주었다.","When the last of them had received the portions of the land they were to inherit, the Israelites assigned a heritage in their midst to Joshua, son of Nun.","When they had made an end of dividing the land for inheritance by their coasts, the children of Israel gave an inheritance to Joshua the son of Nun among them:","When they had finished dividing the land into its allotted portions, the Israelites gave Joshua son of Nun an inheritance among them,","Cumque complessent terram sorte dividere singulis per tribus suas, dederunt filii Israel possessionem Iosue filio Nun in medio sui,","ויכלו לנחל את הארץ לגבולתיה ויתנו בני ישראל נחלה ליהושע בן נון בתוכם׃"],["6","19","50","주님의 분부에 따라 여호수아가 요구한 성읍, 곧 에프라임 산악 지방에 있는 팀낫 세라를 주었다. 여호수아는 그곳에 다시 성읍을 세우고 살았다.","야훼의 지시를 따라 그들은 에브라임 산지에 있는 딤낫세라 성을 여호수아의 소원대로 그에게 주었다. 여호수아는 그 성을 재건하고 거기에 정착하였다.","곧 여호와의 명령대로 여호수아가 요구한 성읍 에브라임 산지 딤낫 세라를 주매 여호수아가 그 성읍을 건설하고 거기 거주하였더라","곧 여호와의 명령대로 여호수아의 구한 성읍 에브라임 산지 딤낫 세라를 주매 여호수아가 그 성읍을 중건하고 거기 거하였었더라","여호와께서 친히 말씀하신 대로 이스라엘 사람들은 여호수아가 달라고 하는 성읍을 그에게 주었던 것이다. 여호수아는 에브라임 산악지대에 있는 딤낫세라를 달라고 말해 두었다. 여호수아는 이 성읍을 다시 잘 짓고 그곳에서 살았다.","According to the command of the LORD, they gave him the city he requested, Timnah-serah in the mountain region of Ephraim. He rebuilt the city and made it his home.","According to the word of the LORD they gave him the city which he asked, even Timnathserah in mount Ephraim: and he built the city, and dwelt therein.","as the LORD had commanded. They gave him the town he asked for--Timnath Serah in the hill country of Ephraim. And he built up the town and settled there.","iuxta praeceptum Domini, urbem quam postulavit: Thamnathsare in monte Ephraim. Et aedificavit civitatem habitavitque in ea.","על פי יהוה נתנו לו את העיר אשר שאל את תמנת סרח בהר אפרים ויבנה את העיר וישב בה׃"],["6","19","51","이것이 엘아자르 사제와 눈의 아들 여호수아와 이스라엘 자손 지파들의 각 가문 우두머리들이, 실로에 있는 만남의 천막 어귀, 주님 앞에서 제비를 뽑아 나눈 상속 재산이다. 이렇게 하여 그들은 땅 나누는 일을 마쳤다.","이상이 실로에 있는 만남의 장막 문간, 야훼 앞에서 사제 엘르아잘과 눈의 아들 여호수아와 이스라엘 각 지파, 각 가문의 어른들이 추첨을 하여 나눈 유산이다. 이리하여 땅 분할은 끝났다.","제사장 엘르아살과 눈의 아들 여호수아와 이스라엘 자손의 지파의 족장들이 실로에 있는 회막 문 여호와 앞에서 제비 뽑아 나눈 기업이 이러하니라 이에 땅 나누는 일을 마쳤더라","제사장 엘르아살과 눈의 아들 여호수아와 이스라엘 자손 지파의 족장들이 실로에서 회막 문 여호와 앞에서 제비 뽑아 나눈 기업이 이러하니라 이에 땅 나누는 일이 마쳤더라","지금까지 이스라엘 사람들이 어떤 땅을 나누어 받았는가를 이야기하였다. 대제사장인 엘르아살과 눈의 아들 여호수아와 이스라엘 각 지파에 딸려 있는 집안의 어른들은 실로에서 여호와께 여쭈어 땅을 나누는 제비를 뽑았다. 실로에서 만남의 장막문 앞에 모여 제비를 뽑아 결정하였던 것이다. 이리하여 땅 분배가 끝났다.","These are the heritages which Eleazar the priest, Joshua, son of Nun, and the heads of families in the tribes of the Israelites apportioned by lot in the presence of the LORD, at the door of the tent of meeting in Shiloh. Thus they finished dividing the land.","These are the inheritances, which Eleazar the priest, and Joshua the son of Nun, and the heads of the fathers of the tribes of the children of Israel, divided for an inheritance by lot in Shiloh before the LORD, at the door of the tabernacle of the congregation. So they made an end of dividing the country.","These are the territories that Eleazar the priest, Joshua son of Nun and the heads of the tribal clans of Israel assigned by lot at Shiloh in the presence of the LORD at the entrance to the Tent of Meeting. And so they finished dividing the land.","Hae sunt possessiones, quas sorte diviserunt Eleazar sacerdos et Iosue filius Nun et principes familiarum tribuum filiorum Israel in Silo coram Domino ad ostium tabernaculi conventus; compleveruntque partiri terram.","אלה הנחלת אשר נחלו אלעזר הכהן ויהושע בן נון וראשי האבות למטות בני ישראל בגורל בשלה לפני יהוה פתח אהל מועד ויכלו מחלק את הארץ׃"],["6","20","1","주님께서 여호수아에게 이르셨다.","야훼께서 여호수아에게 이르셨다.","여호와께서 여호수아에게 말씀하여 이르시되","여호와께서 여호수아에게 일러 가라사대","여호와께서 이스라엘 사람들에게 일러주라고 여호수아에게 다음과 같이 말씀하셨다.","The LORD said to Joshua:","The LORD also spake unto Joshua, saying,","Then the LORD said to Joshua:","Et locutus est Dominus ad Iosue dicens:  “Loquere filiis Israel et dic eis:","וידבר יהוה אל יהושע לאמר׃"],["6","20","2","“이스라엘 자손들에게 이렇게 일러라. ‘이제 내가 모세를 통하여 너희에게 일러 준 도피 성읍들을 정하여,","\"이스라엘 백성에게 이렇게 일러라. '내가 모세를 시켜 말한 대로 도피성들을 지정하여라.","이스라엘 자손에게 말하여 이르기를 내가 모세를 통하여 너희에게 말한 도피성들을 너희를 위해 정하여","이스라엘 자손에게 고하여 이르라 내가 모세로 너희에게 말한 도피성을 택정하여","(1절에 포함되어 있음)","Tell the Israelites: Designate for yourselves the cities of refuge of which I spoke to you through Moses,","Speak to the children of Israel, saying, Appoint out for you cities of refuge, whereof I spake unto you by the hand of Moses:","\"Tell the Israelites to designate the cities of refuge, as I instructed you through Moses,","Separate vobis urbes fugitivorum, de quibus locutus sum ad vos per manum Moysi,","דבר אל בני ישראל לאמר תנו לכם את ערי המקלט אשר דברתי אליכם ביד משה׃"],["6","20","3","실수로 생각 없이 사람을 쳐 죽인 살인자가 그곳으로 피신할 수 있게 하여라. 너희는 그 성읍들을 피의 보복자를 피하는 도피처로 삼아야 한다.","자기도 모르는 사이에 실수하여 살인한 사람이 피신할 성들을 지정하여라. 그 성읍들을 살인자가 피살자의 앙갚음을 할 근친에게서 벗어나 피할 곳으로 삼아라.","부지중에 실수로 사람을 죽인 자를 그리로 도망하게 하라 이는 너희를 위해 피의 보복자를 피할 곳이니라","부지중 오살한 자를 그리로 도망하게 하라 이는 너희 중 피의 보수자를 피할 곳이니라","\"내가 모세를 통하여 이미 너희에게 말하였던 것처럼 도피성을 마련하여라. 그래야 자기가 알지도 못하는 사이에 어떤 이의 목숨을 빼앗은 사람, 곧 의도적으로 목숨을 빼앗지 않은 사람이 그곳으로 몸을 피할 수 있을 것 아니겠느냐? 도피성으로 도망하여 죄값을 꼭 갚아야만 하는 가장 가까운 친족의 손에서 벗어나야 할 것 아니냐?","to which anyone guilty of inadvertent and unintentional homicide may flee for asylum from the avenger of blood.","That the slayer that killeth any person unawares and unwittingly may flee thither: and they shall be your refuge from the avenger of blood.","so that anyone who kills a person accidentally and unintentionally may flee there and find protection from the avenger of blood.","ut confugiat ad eas, quicumque animam percusserit per errorem nescius, et possit evadere iram proximi, qui ultor est sanguinis.","לנוס שמה רוצח מכה נפש בשגגה בבלי דעת והיו לכם למקלט מגאל הדם׃"],["6","20","4","살인자는 그 성읍들 가운데 한 곳으로 피신할 수 있다. 그러나 먼저 성문 어귀에 서서, 그 성읍의 원로들에게 자기의 사정을 설명해야 한다. 그러면 원로들은 그를 성읍 안으로 받아들인 다음, 자리를 마련해 주어 자기들과 함께 살도록 해야 한다.","그런 살인자는 그 성읍들 가운데 어디에든지 피신할 수 있다. 그러나 우선 성문 앞에 멈추어 서서 성읍 장로들에게 사실을 진술해야 한다. 그러면 그 성읍에 그를 받아들여 함께 살 곳을 주선해 줄 것이다.","이 성읍들 중의 하나에 도피하는 자는 그 성읍에 들어가는 문 어귀에 서서 그 성읍의 장로들의 귀에 자기의 사건을 말할 것이요 그들은 그를 성읍에 받아들여 한 곳을 주어 자기들 중에 거주하게 하고","그 성읍들의 하나에 도피하는 자는 그 성읍에 들어가는 문 어귀에 서서 그 성읍 장로들의 귀에 자기의 사고를 고할 것이요 그들은 그를 받아 성읍에 들여 한 곳을 주어 자기들 중에 거하게 하고","고의로 사람을 죽이지 않고 갑자기 어쩔 수 없는 상황에서 비의도적으로 사람을 죽인 사람은 여러 도피성 가운데서 어떤 성읍이든 그곳으로 몸을 피할 수 있다. 우선 사람을 죽인 사람은 도피성의 문 위에 있는 마을회관으로 가야 한다. 재판받는 장소인 성문 위 마을회관으로 올라가서는 성에 살고 있는 마을 지도자들에게 사건이 이러이러하게 되어서 어쩔 수 없이 이곳으로 몸을 피하게 되었노라고 일일이 밝혀야 한다. 그러면 마을의 지도자들이 그 사람을 성안으로 데리고 들어가 머물 곳으로 안내할 것이다.","To one of these cities the killer shall flee, and standing at the entrance of the city gate, shall plead his case in the hearing of the elders of the city, who must receive him and assign him a place in which to live among them.","And when he that doth flee unto one of those cities shall stand at the entering of the gate of the city, and shall declare his cause in the ears of the elders of that city, they shall take him into the city unto them, and give him a place, that he may dwell among them.","\"When he flees to one of these cities, he is to stand in the entrance of the city gate and state his case before the elders of that city. Then they are to admit him into their city and give him a place to live with them.","Cum ad unam harum confugerit civitatum, stabit ante portam civitatis et loquetur senioribus urbis illius ea, quae se comprobent innocentem; sicque suscipient eum et dabunt ei locum ad habitandum.","ונס אל אחת מהערים האלה ועמד פתח שער העיר ודבר באזני זקני העיר ההיא את דבריו ואספו אתו העירה אליהם ונתנו לו מקום וישב עמם׃"],["6","20","5","피의 보복자가 뒤쫓아 와도 그 살인자를 그의 손에 넘겨주어서는 안 된다. 전에 그 이웃을 미워한 적 없이 생각 없이 쳐 죽였기 때문이다.","피살자의 앙갚음을 할 근친이 쫓아왔을 경우에도 그 살인자를 그의 손에 내주어서는 안 된다. 그는 한 동족을 죽이기는 했지만, 일찍이 그를 미워한 일이 없이 실수로 살인을 저질렀기 때문이다.","피의 보복자가 그의 뒤를 따라온다 할지라도 그들은 그 살인자를 그의 손에 내주지 말지니 이는 본래 미워함이 없이 부지중에 그의 이웃을 죽였음이라","피의 보수자가 그 뒤를 따라온다 할찌라도 그들은 그 살인자를 그의 손에 내어주지 말찌니 이는 본래 미워함이 없이 부지중에 그 이웃을 죽였음이라","비록 죽은 이의 가장 가까운 친족으로 피로 꼭 복수를 해야만 하는 사람, 곧 죄의 복수자가 이 사람을 뒤쫓아온다 할지라도 도피성에 살고 있는 사람들은 그 사람을 피의 복수자에게 넘겨 주어서는 안 된다. 그 사람이 이웃을 죽인 까닭은 의도적으로 그랬다거나 또는 그에게 앙심을 품어서가 아니라 어쩔 수 없는 상황에서 자기도 모르는 사이에 그를 죽였기 때문이다. 그야말로 순간적인 실수로 그의 목숨을 빼앗았기 때문이다. 도피성에 살고 있는 사람들은 도망 쳐 온 그 사람의 목숨을 반드시 보호해야 한다.","Though the avenger of blood pursues him, they shall not deliver up to him the one who killed a neighbor unintentionally, when there had been no hatred previously.","And if the avenger of blood pursue after him, then they shall not deliver the slayer up into his hand; because he smote his neighbour unwittingly, and hated him not beforetime.","If the avenger of blood pursues him, they must not surrender the one accused, because he killed his neighbor unintentionally and without malice aforethought.","Cumque ultor sanguinis eum fuerit persecutus, non tradent in manus eius, quia ignorans percussit proximum suum nec ante biduum triduumve eius probatur inimicus.","וכי ירדף גאל הדם אחריו ולא יסגרו את הרצח בידו כי בבלי דעת הכה את רעהו ולא שנא הוא לו מתמול שלשום׃"],["6","20","6","그 살인자는 재판을 받기 위하여 공동체 앞에 설 때까지, 그리고 그때의 대사제가 죽을 때까지 그 성읍에서 살아야 한다. 그런 다음에야 자기의 성읍, 곧 자기가 도망쳐 나온 성읍, 자기 집으로 돌아갈 수 있다.’”","그 살인자는 심판을 받으러 회중 앞에 출두하기까지 거기에 머물러 있을 수 있고, 현직 대사제가 죽을 때까지 그 성읍에서 살아야 한다. 그런 후에라야 그 살인자는 자기 성읍, 자기 집으로 돌아갈 수 있다. 도망 오기 전에 살던 성읍으로 돌아갈 수 있는 것이다.'\"","그 살인자는 회중 앞에 서서 재판을 받기까지 또는 그 당시 대제사장이 죽기까지 그 성읍에 거주하다가 그 후에 그 살인자는 그 성읍 곧 자기가 도망하여 나온 자기 성읍 자기 집으로 돌아갈지니라 하라 하시니라","그 살인자가 회중의 앞에 서서 재판을 받기까지나 당시 대제사장의 죽기까지 그 성읍에 거하다가 그 후에 그 살인자가 본 성읍 곧 자기가 도망하여 나온 그 성읍의 자기 집으로 돌아갈찌니라","무의식 중에 살인을 저지른 그 사람은 성에 살고 있는 공동체 식구들 앞에서 재판을 받을 때까지 그 도피성에 머무를 수 있으며, 또한 대제사장이 세상을 떠날 때까지 그 성읍에서 계속 살아갈 수 있다. 살인을 저질렀던 그 사람은 그런 다음에야 비로소 자기 집으로, 자기가 지금까지 살아왔던 성읍으로, 자기 집안 식구들이 있는 곳으로 되돌아갈 수 있다. 다시 말해서 자기가 도망쳐 왔던 그 성읍으로 되돌아갈 수 있다.\"","Once he has stood judgment before the community, he shall live on in that city until the death of the high priest who is in office at the time. Then the killer may return home to the city from where he originally fled.","And he shall dwell in that city, until he stand before the congregation for judgment, and until the death of the high priest that shall be in those days: then shall the slayer return, and come unto his own city, and unto his own house, unto the city from whence he fled.","He is to stay in that city until he has stood trial before the assembly and until the death of the high priest who is serving at that time. Then he may go back to his own home in the town from which he fled.\"","Et habitabit in civitate illa, donec stet ante coetum ad iudicium, causam reddens facti sui, donec moriatur sacerdos magnus, qui fuerit in illo tempore. Tunc revertetur homicida et ingredietur civitatem suam et domum suam, de qua fugerat “.","וישב בעיר ההיא עד עמדו לפני העדה למשפט עד מות הכהן הגדול אשר יהיה בימים ההם אז ישוב הרוצח ובא אל עירו ואל ביתו אל העיר אשר נס משם׃"],["6","20","7","그리하여 그들은 납탈리 산악 지방에서는 갈릴래아의 케데스를, 에프라임 산악 지방에서는 스켐을, 유다 산악 지방에서는 키르얏 아르바 곧 헤브론을 성별하였다.","그리하여 그들은 갈릴리와 납달리 고원 지대에는 케데스를, 에브라임 고원 지대에는 세겜을, 유다 고원 지대에는 헤브론이라고도 하는 키럇아르바를 떼어냈다.","이에 그들이 납달리의 산지 갈릴리 게데스와 에브라임 산지의 세겜과 유다 산지의 기럇 아르바 곧 헤브론과","무리가 납달리의 산지 갈릴리 게데스와 에브라임 산지의 세겜과 유다 산지의 기럇 아르바 곧 헤브론을 구별하였고","그래서 이스라엘 사람들은 다음과 같은 도피성을 다른 성읍과는 다르게 특별히 구별하여 두었다. 납달리 산악시대의 갈릴리에 있는 게데스, 에브라임 산악지대에 있는 세겜, 유다 산악지대에 있는 기럇아르바라고도 불리는 헤브론,","So they set apart Kedesh in Galilee in the mountain region of Naphtali, Shechem in the mountain region of Ephraim, and Kiriath-arba (that is, Hebron) in the mountain region of Judah.","And they appointed Kedesh in Galilee in mount Naphtali, and Shechem in mount Ephraim, and Kirjatharba, which is Hebron, in the mountain of Judah.","So they set apart Kedesh in Galilee in the hill country of Naphtali, Shechem in the hill country of Ephraim, and Kiriath Arba (that is, Hebron) in the hill country of Judah.","Decreveruntque Cedes in Galilaea montis Nephthali et Sichem in monte Ephraim et Cariatharbe - ipsa est Hebron - in monte Iudae;","ויקדשו את קדש בגליל בהר נפתלי ואת שכם בהר אפרים ואת קרית ארבע היא חברון בהר יהודה׃"],["6","20","8","그리고 요르단 건너편, 예리코 동쪽의 르우벤 지파에서는 고원 광야의 베체르를, 가드 지파에서는 길앗의 라못을, 므나쎄 지파에서는 바산의 골란을 정하였다.","요르단 강 건너편 예리고 동쪽에서는 르우벤 지파에서 고원 사막 지대에 있는 베셀을, 가드 지파에서 길르앗에 있는 라못을, 므나쎄 지파에서 바산에 있는 골란을 지정하였다.","여리고 동쪽 요단 저쪽 르우벤 지파 중에서 평지 광야의 베셀과 갓 지파 중에서 길르앗 라못과 므낫세 지파 중에서 바산 골란을 구별하였으니","또 여리고 동 요단 저편 르우벤 지파 중에서 평지 광야의 베셀과 갓 지파 중에서 길르앗라못과 므낫세 지파 중에서 바산 골란을 택하였으니","또 여리고 동쪽 요단강 건너편에는 다음과 같은 성을 도피성으로 지정하였다. 르우벤 지파가 살고 있는 지역 가운데서는 평원 곧 광야에 있는 베셀, 갓 지파가 살고 있는 지역 가운데서는 길르앗라못, 므낫세 지파가 살고 있는 지역 가운데서는 바산에 있는 골란.","And beyond the Jordan east of Jericho they designated Bezer in the wilderness on the tableland in the tribe of Reuben, Ramoth in Gilead in the tribe of Gad, and Golan in Bashan in the tribe of Manasseh.","And on the other side Jordan by Jericho eastward, they assigned Bezer in the wilderness upon the plain out of the tribe of Reuben, and Ramoth in Gilead out of the tribe of Gad, and Golan in Bashan out of the tribe of Manasseh.","On the east side of the Jordan of Jericho they designated Bezer in the desert on the plateau in the tribe of Reuben, Ramoth in Gilead in the tribe of Gad, and Golan in Bashan in the tribe of Manasseh.","et trans Iordanem contra orientalem plagam Iericho statuerunt Bosor, quae sita est in campestri solitudine de tribu Ruben, et Ramoth in Galaad de tribu Gad et Golan in Basan de tribu Manasse.","ומעבר לירדן יריחו מזרחה נתנו את בצר במדבר במישר ממטה ראובן ואת ראמת בגלעד ממטה גד ואת גלון בבשן ממטה מנשה׃"],["6","20","9","이것이 이스라엘의 모든 자손이든 그들 가운데에서 나그네살이하는 이방인이든, 실수로 사람을 쳐 죽인 자는 누구든지 그곳으로 피신할 수 있도록 지정된 성읍들이다. 살인자가 공동체 앞에 서기 전에 피의 보복자 손에 죽는 일이 있어서는 안 된다.","이것이 온 이스라엘 백성과 그들 속에 들어와 몸붙여 사는 사람이 누구든지 실수로 살인했을 경우에 피신하도록 지정된 성읍들이다. 그들은 회중 앞에 출두하기까지 피살자의 앙갚음을 할 근친의 손에 죽어서는 안 된다.","이는 곧 이스라엘 모든 자손과 그들 중에 거류하는 거류민을 위하여 선정된 성읍들로서 누구든지 부지중에 살인한 자가 그리로 도망하여 그가 회중 앞에 설 때까지 피의 보복자의 손에 죽지 아니하게 하기 위함이라","이는 곧 이스라엘 모든 자손과 그들 중에 우거하는 객을 위하여 선정한 성읍들로서 누구든지 부지중 살인한 자로 그리로 도망하여 피의 보수자의 손에 죽지 않게 하기 위함이며 그는 회중 앞에 설 때까지 거기 있을것이니라","이상이 이스라엘 사람들이 도피성으로 지정한 성읍들이다. 이 성읍에는 자기가 알지도 못하는 사이에 어쩔 수 없는 상황에서 실수로 이웃을 죽인 이스라엘 사람이나 그들 가운데 몸붙여 살고 있는 나그네 또는 뜨내기가 몸을 피할 수 있다. 이 성으로 몸을 피한 사람을 그 누구도 죽여서는 안 된다. 성의 공동체 식구들 앞으로 나아와 재판을 받을 때까지 그에게 손대어서는 안 된다. 피의 복수자가 그를 건드려서는 안 된다.","These are the designated cities to which any Israelite or alien residing among them who had killed a person unintentionally might flee to escape death at the hand of the avenger of blood, until the killer could appear before the community.","These were the cities appointed for all the children of Israel, and for the stranger that sojourneth among them, that whosoever killeth any person at unawares might flee thither, and not die by the hand of the avenger of blood, until he stood before the congregation.","Any of the Israelites or any alien living among them who killed someone accidentally could flee to these designated cities and not be killed by the avenger of blood prior to standing trial before the assembly. JOS","Hae civitates constitutae sunt cunctis filiis Israel et advenis, qui habitant inter eos, ut fugeret ad eas, qui animam nescius percussisset et non moreretur in manu proximi effusum sanguinem vindicare cupientis, donec staret ante populum expositurus causam suam.","אלה היו ערי המועדה לכל בני ישראל ולגר הגר בתוכם לנוס שמה כל מכה נפש בשגגה ולא ימות ביד גאל הדם עד עמדו לפני העדה׃"],["6","21","1","그때에 레위 가문의 우두머리들이 엘아자르 사제와 눈의 아들 여호수아와 이스라엘 자손 지파의 가문 우두머리들에게 다가갔다.","그 때 레위 가문 어른들이 사제 엘르아잘과 눈의 아들 여호수아와 이스라엘 지파 가문의 어른들 앞에 나왔다.","그 때에 레위 사람의 족장들이 제사장 엘르아살과 눈의 아들 여호수아와 이스라엘 자손의 지파 족장들에게 나아와","때에 레위 사람의 족장들이 제사장 엘르아살과 눈의 아들 여호수아와 이스라엘 자손의 지파 족장들에게 나아와","하루는 레위 집안의 어른들이 엘르아살 제사장과 눈의 아들 여호수아와 이스라엘 각 지파의 지도자들에게 나아갔다.","The heads of the Levite families approached Eleazar the priest, Joshua, son of Nun, and the heads of families of the other tribes of the Israelites","Then came near the heads of the fathers of the Levites unto Eleazar the priest, and unto Joshua the son of Nun, and unto the heads of the fathers of the tribes of the children of Israel;","Now the family heads of the Levites approached Eleazar the priest, Joshua son of Nun, and the heads of the other tribal families of Israel","Accesseruntque principes familiarum Levi ad Eleazarum sacerdotem et Iosue filium Nun et ad duces cognationum per singulas tribus filiorum Israel","ויגשו ראשי אבות הלוים אל אלעזר הכהן ואל יהושע בן נון ואל ראשי אבות המטות לבני ישראל׃"],["6","21","2","가나안 땅 실로에서 레위 가문의 우두머리들이 그들에게 말하였다. “우리가 살 성읍과 가축을 키울 목초지를 내주라고, 주님께서 모세를 통하여 명령하셨습니다.”","그들은 가나안 땅 실로에서 이렇게 진정하였다. \"우리가 살 성읍과 가축을 칠 인접 목장 지대를 우리에게도 주라고 야훼께서 모세를 시켜 명령하시지 않았습니까?\"","가나안 땅 실로에서 그들에게 말하여 이르되 여호와께서 모세에게 명령하사 우리가 거주할 성읍들과 우리 가축을 위해 그 목초지들을 우리에게 주라 하셨나이다 하매","가나안 땅 실로에서 그들에게 말하여 가로되 여호와께서 모세로 명하사 우리의 거할 성읍들과 우리의 가축 먹일 그 들을 우리에게 주라 하셨었나이다 하매","그들은 가나안 땅 실로로 이들을 찾아가 이렇게 말하였다. \"여호와께서 모세를 통하여 이미 우리에게 명령하시지 않았습니까? 우리가 살아갈 성읍과 또 가축 떼를 칠 수 있는 목초지까지 우리에게 나누어 주라고 하는 말씀을 여호와께서 하셨지요\"","at Shiloh in the land of Canaan, and said to them, “The LORD commanded, through Moses, that cities be given us to dwell in, with pasture lands for our livestock.”","And they spake unto them at Shiloh in the land of Canaan, saying, The LORD commanded by the hand of Moses to give us cities to dwell in, with the suburbs thereof for our cattle.","at Shiloh in Canaan and said to them, \"The LORD commanded through Moses that you give us towns to live in, with pasturelands for our livestock.\"","locutique sunt ad eos in Silo terrae Chanaan atque dixerunt:  “Dominus praecepit per manum Moysi, ut darentur nobis urbes ad habitandum et suburbana earum ad alenda iumenta “.","וידברו אליהם בשלה בארץ כנען לאמר יהוה צוה ביד משה לתת לנו ערים לשבת ומגרשיהן לבהמתנו׃"],["6","21","3","그래서 이스라엘 자손들은 주님의 분부에 따라, 자기들의 상속 재산 가운데에서 다음의 성읍들과 거기에 딸린 목초지들을 레위인들에게 내주었다.","이스라엘 백성은 야훼의 분부대로 레위 사람들에게 자기들 유산에서 성읍들과 거기에 딸린 목장 지대를 떼어주었다.","이스라엘 자손이 여호와의 명령을 따라 자기의 기업에서 이 성읍들과 그 목초지들을 레위 사람에게 주니라","이스라엘 자손이 여호와의 명을 따라 자기의 기업에서 이 아래 성읍들과 그 들을 레위 사람에게 주니라","그러자 이스라엘 사람들이 레위인들에게 살아갈 성읍과 또 그들의 가축 떼를 기를 목초지를 자기들의 소유 중에서 떼어 주었다. 여호와의 명령대로 따른 것이다.","Out of their own heritage, according to the command of the LORD, the Israelites gave the Levites the following cities with their pasture lands.","And the children of Israel gave unto the Levites out of their inheritance, at the commandment of the LORD, these cities and their suburbs.","So, as the LORD had commanded, the Israelites gave the Levites the following towns and pasturelands out of their own inheritance:","Dederuntque filii Israel Levitis de possessionibus suis, iuxta imperium Domini, civitates illas et suburbana earum.","ויתנו בני ישראל ללוים מנחלתם אל פי יהוה את הערים האלה ואת מגרשיהן׃"],["6","21","4","먼저 크핫 씨족들을 위한 제비가 나왔다. 그래서 레위인들 가운데에서 아론 사제의 자손들은 제비를 뽑아, 유다 지파와 시메온 지파와 벤야민 지파에서 열세 성읍을 받았다.","크핫의 후손에게 갈래를 따라 배당된 몫은 아래와 같다. 레위인 가운데서 아론의 후손 사제들에게는 유다, 시므온, 베냐민 지파에서 열세 성읍이 돌아갔다.","그핫 가족을 위하여 제비를 뽑았는데 레위 사람 중 제사장 아론의 자손들은 유다 지파와 시므온 지파와 베냐민 지파 중에서 제비 뽑은 대로 열세 성읍을 받았고","그핫 가족을 위하여 제비를 뽑았는데 레위 사람중 제사장 아론의 자손들은 유다 지파와 시므온 지파와 베냐민 지파 중에서 제비대로 십 삼 성읍을 얻었고","먼저 제비에 뽑혀 성읍을 지정받게 된 씨족은 그핫이었다. 아론 제사장의 자손들은 유다 지파와 시므온 지파와 베냐민 지파가 차지하고 있던 성읍 가운데서 열세 성읍을 제비 뽑아 차지하였다.","When the first lot among the Levites fell to the clans of the Kohathites, the descendants of Aaron the priest obtained by lot from the tribes of Judah, Simeon, and Benjamin, thirteen cities.","And the lot came out for the families of the Kohathites: and the children of Aaron the priest, which were of the Levites, had by lot out of the tribe of Judah, and out of the tribe of Simeon, and out of the tribe of Benjamin, thirteen cities.","The first lot came out for the Kohathites, clan by clan. The Levites who were descendants of Aaron the priest were allotted thirteen towns from the tribes of Judah, Simeon and Benjamin.","Egressaque est sors in familias Caath: et acceperunt filii Aaron sacerdotis de tribubus Iudae et Simeon et Beniamin civitates tredecim.","ויצא הגורל למשפחת הקהתי ויהי לבני אהרן הכהן מן הלוים ממטה יהודה וממטה השמעני וממטה בנימן בגורל ערים שלש עשרה׃"],["6","21","5","크핫의 나머지 자손들은 제비를 뽑아, 에프라임 지파의 씨족들과 단 지파와 므나쎄 반쪽 지파에서 열 성읍을 받았다.","크핫의 다른 후손에게는 갈래를 따라 에브라임, 단, 므나쎄 지파 서반부에서 열 성읍이 돌아갔다.","그핫 자손들 중에 남은 자는 에브라임 지파의 가족과 단 지파와 므낫세 반 지파 중에서 제비 뽑은 대로 열 성읍을 받았으며","그 남은 그핫 자손들은 에브라임 지파의 가족과 단 지파와 므낫세 반 지파 중에서 제비대로 열 성읍을 얻었으며","나머지 그핫 씨족 사람들은 에브라임 지파와 단 지파와 므낫세 반 지파가 살고 있는 지어 가운데서 열 성읍을 떼어 받았다.","From the clans of the tribe of Ephraim, from the tribe of Dan, and from the half-tribe of Manasseh, the rest of the Kohathites obtained by lot ten cities.","And the rest of the children of Kohath had by lot out of the families of the tribe of Ephraim, and out of the tribe of Dan, and out of the half tribe of Manasseh, ten cities.","The rest of Kohath's descendants were allotted ten towns from the clans of the tribes of Ephraim, Dan and half of Manasseh.","Et reliqui filiorum Caath, id est Levitae, acceperunt de tribubus Ephraim et Dan et dimidia tribu Manasse civitates decem.","ולבני קהת הנותרים ממשפחת מטה אפרים וממטה דן ומחצי מטה מנשה בגורל ערים עשר׃"],["6","21","6","게르손의 자손들은 제비를 뽑아, 이사카르 지파의 씨족들과 아세르 지파와 납탈리 지파와 바산에 있는 므나쎄 반쪽 지파에서 열세 성읍을 받았다.","게르손 후손에게는 갈래를 따라 이싸갈, 아셀, 납달리, 바산에 있는 므나쎄 지파 동반부에서 열세 성읍이 돌아갔다.","게르손 자손들은 잇사갈 지파의 가족들과 아셀 지파와 납달리 지파와 바산에 있는 므낫세 반 지파 중에서 제비 뽑은 대로 열세 성읍을 받았더라","게르손 자손들은 잇사갈 지파의 가족들과 아셀 지파와 납달리 지파와 바산에 있는 므낫세 반 지파 중에서 제비대로 십 삼 성읍을 얻었더라","게르손 자손들은 잇사갈 지파와 아셀 지파와 납달리 지파와 바산에 있는 므낫세 반 지파가 살고 있는 지어 가운데서 제비를 뽑아 열세 성읍을 떼어 받았다.","From the clans of the tribe of Issachar, from the tribe of Asher, from the tribe of Naphtali, and from the half-tribe of Manasseh, the Gershonites obtained by lot thirteen cities.","And the children of Gershon had by lot out of the families of the tribe of Issachar, and out of the tribe of Asher, and out of the tribe of Naphtali, and out of the half tribe of Manasseh in Bashan, thirteen cities.","The descendants of Gershon were allotted thirteen towns from the clans of the tribes of Issachar, Asher, Naphtali and the half-tribe of Manasseh in Bashan.","Porro filiis Gerson egressa est sors, ut acciperent de tribubus Issachar et Aser et Nephthali dimidiaque tribu Manasse in Basan civitates numero tredecim.","ולבני גרשון ממשפחות מטה יששכר וממטה אשר וממטה נפתלי ומחצי מטה מנשה בבשן בגורל ערים שלש עשרה׃"],["6","21","7","므라리의 자손들은 씨족별로 르우벤 지파와 가드 지파와 즈불룬 지파에서 열두 성읍을 받았다.","므라리 후손에게는 갈래를 따라 르우벤, 가드, 즈불룬 지파에서 열두 성읍이 돌아갔다.","므라리 자손들은 그 가족대로 르우벤 지파와 갓 지파와 스불론 지파 중에서 열두 성읍을 받았더라","므라리 자손들은 그 가족대로 르우벤 지파와 갓 지파와 스불론 지파중에서 십 이 성읍을 얻었더라","므라리 자손들은 르우벤 지파와 갓 지파와 스불론 지파가 살고 있는 지역 가운데서 열두 성읍을 떼어 받았다. 이들은 각각 그 씨족에 따라 제비 뽑아 나눈 성읍들을 분배받았다.","From the tribes of Reuben, Gad, and Zebulun, the clans of the Merarites obtained twelve cities.","The children of Merari by their families had out of the tribe of Reuben, and out of the tribe of Gad, and out of the tribe of Zebulun, twelve cities.","The descendants of Merari, clan by clan, received twelve towns from the tribes of Reuben, Gad and Zebulun.","Et filiis Merari per cognationes suas de tribubus Ruben et Gad et Zabulon urbes duodecim.","לבני מררי למשפחתם ממטה ראובן וממטה גד וממטה זבולן ערים שתים עשרה׃"],["6","21","8","이스라엘 자손들은 주님께서 모세를 통하여 명령하신 대로, 제비를 뽑아 이 성읍들과 거기에 딸린 목초지들을 레위인들에게 내주었다.","이스라엘 백성은 야훼께서 모세를 시켜 분부하신 대로 추첨으로 이 성읍들과 거기 딸린 목장 지대를 레위 사람들에게 떼어주었다.","여호와께서 모세에게 명령하신 대로 이스라엘 자손이 제비 뽑아 레위 사람에게 준 성읍들과 그 목초지들이 이러하니라","여호와께서 모세로 명하신대로 이스라엘 자손이 제비 뽑아 레위 사람에게 준 성읍들과 그 들이 이러하니라","이스라엘 사람들은 여호와께서 모세를 통하여 명령하신 대로 제비를 뽑아 레위 사람들이 살아갈 성읍과 또 그들이 가축을 칠 목초지를 떼어 주었다.","These cities with their pasture lands the Israelites gave by lot to the Levites, as the LORD had commanded through Moses.","And the children of Israel gave by lot unto the Levites these cities with their suburbs, as the LORD commanded by the hand of Moses.","So the Israelites allotted to the Levites these towns and their pasturelands, as the LORD had commanded through Moses.","Dederuntque filii Israel Levitis civitates illas et suburbana earum, sicut praecepit Dominus per manum Moysi, singulis sorte tribuentes.","ויתנו בני ישראל ללוים את הערים האלה ואת מגרשיהן כאשר צוה יהוה ביד משה בגורל׃"],["6","21","9","유다 자손 지파와 시메온 자손 지파에서, 다음과 같은 이름으로 불리는 성읍들을 내주었는데,","유다 지파와 시므온 지파에게서 떼어준 성읍들의 이름은 아래와 같다.","유다 자손의 지파와 시므온 자손의 지파 중에서는 이 아래에 기명한 성읍들을 주었는데","유다 자손의 지파와 시므온 자손의 지파 중에서는 이 아래 기명한 성읍들을 주었는데","다음은 유다 지파와 시므온 지파의 성읍 가운데서 그핫 씨족 사람들에게 돌아간 성읍이다. 그핫 사람들은 레위인들 가운데서도 아론의 자손들이기 때문에 다른 사람들보다도 먼저 제비 뽑아 성읍을 나누어 주기로 한 것이다. 각 성읍을 이름별로 나열하면 다음과 같다.","From the tribes of the Judahites and Simeonites they gave the following cities","And they gave out of the tribe of the children of Judah, and out of the tribe of the children of Simeon, these cities which are here mentioned by name.","From the tribes of Judah and Simeon they allotted the following towns by name","De tribubus filiorum Iudae et Simeon dederunt civitates, quarum ista sunt nomina,","ויתנו ממטה בני יהודה וממטה בני שמעון את הערים האלה אשר יקרא אתהן בשם׃"],["6","21","10","그것이 레위의 자손들 가운데에서 크핫 씨족들에게 속한 아론 자손들의 차지가 되었다. 제비가 그들에게 먼저 떨어졌기 때문이다.","레위 후손 가운데서 아론의 후손 크핫 갈래에게 첫 몫이 나왔기 때문에 이 성읍들이 그들의 차지가 된 것이다.","레위 자손 중 그핫 가족들에 속한 아론 자손이 첫째로 제비 뽑혔으므로","레위 자손 중 그핫 가족들에 속한 아론 자손이 첫째로 제비 뽑혔으므로","(9절에 포함되어 있음)","and assigned them to the descendants of Aaron in the Kohathite clan of the Levites, since the first lot fell to them:","Which the children of Aaron, being of the families of the Kohathites, who were of the children of Levi, had: for theirs was the first lot.","(these towns were assigned to the descendants of Aaron who were from the Kohathite clans of the Levites, because the first lot fell to them):","filiis Aaron ex familiis Caath levitici generis - prima enim sors illis egressa est C:","ויהי לבני אהרן ממשפחות הקהתי מבני לוי כי להם היה הגורל ראישנה׃"],["6","21","11","그래서 유다 산악 지방에 있으면서 헤브론이라고도 하는 키르얏 아르바와 그 주변에 있는 목초지를 내주었다. 아르바는 아낙의 아버지다.","그래서 유다 산악 지대에 있는 헤브론이라고도 하는 키럇아르바와 거기에 딸린 목장 지대를 그들에게 주었다. 아르바는 아나킴의 조상이었다.","아낙의 아버지 아르바의 성읍 유다 산지 기럇 아르바 곧 헤브론과 그 주위의 목초지를 그들에게 주었고","아낙의 아비 아르바의 성읍 유다 산지 기럇 아르바 곧 헤브론과 그 사면 들을 그들에게 주었고","먼저 기럇아르바가 그들 몫으로 떨어졌다. 아르바는 거인족인 아낙 사람들의 조상이다. 기럇아르바는 \"아르바의 마을\"이라는 뜻으로 지금은 헤브론이라 불린다. 헤브론은 유다 산악지대에 자리잡고 있다. 이 헤브론뿐만 아니라 헤브론을 둘러 감싸고 있는 목초지까지 그핫 씨족 사람들에게 주었다.","first, Kiriath-arba (Arba was the father of Anak), that is, Hebron, in the mountain region of Judah, with the adjacent pasture lands,","And they gave them the city of Arba the father of Anak, which city is Hebron, in the hill country of Judah, with the suburbs thereof round about it.","They gave them Kiriath Arba (that is, Hebron), with its surrounding pastureland, in the hill country of Judah. (Arba was the forefather of Anak.)","Cariatharbe (id est civitas Arbe), patris Enac, quae vocatur Hebron, in monte Iudae et suburbana eius per circuitum.","ויתנו להם את קרית ארבע אבי הענוק היא חברון בהר יהודה ואת מגרשה סביבתיה׃"],["6","21","12","그러나 그 성읍에 딸린 들과 촌락들은 여푼네의 아들 칼렙에게 그의 소유로 내주었다.","그러나 그 성읍에 딸린 밭과 천막촌들은 여분네의 아들 갈렙의 소유지로 주었다.","그 성읍의 밭과 그 촌락들은 여분네의 아들 갈렙에게 주어 소유가 되게 하였더라","오직 그 성읍의 밭과 촌락은 여분네의 아들 갈렙에게 주어 소유가 되게 하였더라","그렇지만 헤브론에 딸려 있는 밭과 그 마을들은 이미 여분네의 아들 갈렙에게 소유지로 나누어 주었다.","although the open country and villages belonging to the city had been given to Caleb, son of Jephunneh, as his holding.","But the fields of the city, and the villages thereof, gave they to Caleb the son of Jephunneh for his possession.","But the fields and villages around the city they had given to Caleb son of Jephunneh as his possession.","Agros vero et villas eius dederant Chaleb filio Iephonne ad possidendum.","ואת שדה העיר ואת חצריה נתנו לכלב בן יפנה באחזתו׃"],["6","21","13","아론 사제의 자손들에게는 살인자의 도피 성읍 헤브론과 거기에 딸린 목초지, 리브나와 거기에 딸린 목초지,","이렇게 아론 사제 후손에게 살인자가 피할 도피성 헤브론, 리브나,","제사장 아론의 자손에게 준 것은 살인자의 도피성 헤브론과 그 목초지이요 또 립나와 그 목초지와","제사장 아론 자손에게 준 것은 살인자의 도피성 헤브론과 그 들이요 또 립나와 그 들과","아론 제사장의 자손들에게는 살인자의 도피성 헤브론과 여기에 딸려 있는 목초지를 주었다. 뿐만 아니라 립나와 여기에 딸려 있는 목초지와","Thus to the descendants of Aaron the priest were given the city of refuge for homicides at Hebron, with its pasture lands; also, Libnah with its pasture lands,","Thus they gave to the children of Aaron the priest Hebron with her suburbs, to be a city of refuge for the slayer; and Libnah with her suburbs,","So to the descendants of Aaron the priest they gave Hebron (a city of refuge for one accused of murder), Libnah,","Dederunt ergo filiis Aaron sacerdotis Hebron confugii civitatem ac suburbana eius et Lobnam cum suburbanis suis","ולבני אהרן הכהן נתנו את עיר מקלט הרצח את חברון ואת מגרשה ואת לבנה ואת מגרשה׃"],["6","21","14","야티르와 거기에 딸린 목초지, 에스트모아와 거기에 딸린 목초지,","야디르, 에스드모아,","얏딜과 그 목초지와 에스드모아와 그 목초지와","얏딜과 그 들과 에스드모아와 그 들과","얏딜과 여기에 딸려 있는 목초지와 에스드모아와 여기에 딸려 있는 목초지와","Jattir with its pasture lands, Eshtemoa with its pasture lands,","And Jattir with her suburbs, and Eshtemoa with her suburbs,","Jattir, Eshtemoa,","et Iether et Esthemo","ואת יתר ואת מגרשה ואת אשתמע ואת מגרשה׃"],["6","21","15","홀론과 거기에 딸린 목초지, 드비르와 거기에 딸린 목초지,","홀론, 드빌,","홀론과 그 목초지와 드빌과 그 목초지와","홀론과 그 들과 드빌과 그 들과","홀론과 여기에 딸려 있는 목초지와 드빌과 여기에 딸려 있는 목초지와","Holon with its pasture lands, Debir with its pasture lands,","And Holon with her suburbs, and Debir with her suburbs,","Holon, Debir,","et Helon et Dabir","ואת חלן ואת מגרשה ואת דבר ואת מגרשה׃"],["6","21","16","아인과 거기에 딸린 목초지, 유타와 거기에 딸린 목초지, 벳 세메스와 거기에 딸린 목초지, 이렇게 아홉 성읍을 그 두 지파에서 내주었다.","아산, 유타, 벳세메스 아홉 성읍과 거기에 딸린 목장 지대를 그 두 지파에서 떼어주었다.","아인과 그 목초지와 윳다와 그 목초지와 벧 세메스와 그 목초지이니 이 두 지파에서 아홉 성읍을 냈고","아인과 그 들과 윳다와 그 들과 벧 세메스와 그 들이니 이 두 지파에서 아홉 성읍을 내었고","아인과 여기에 딸려 있는 목초지와 윳다와 여기에 딸려 있는 목초지와 벧세메스와 여기에 딸려 있는 목초지까지 모두 아홉 성읍으로 유다 지파와 시므온 지파가 차지하고 있던 땅에서 이 성읍들을 추려 내어 아론의 자손들에게 떼어 주었다.","Ain with its pasture lands, Juttah with its pasture lands, and Beth-shemesh with its pasture lands: nine cities from these two tribes.","And Ain with her suburbs, and Juttah with her suburbs, and Bethshemesh with her suburbs; nine cities out of those two tribes.","Ain, Juttah and Beth Shemesh, together with their pasturelands--nine towns from these two tribes.","et Ain et Iutta et Bethsames cum suburbanis suis: civitates novem de tribubus illis duabus.","ואת עין ואת מגרשה ואת יטה ואת מגרשה את בית שמש ואת מגרשה ערים תשע מאת שני השבטים האלה׃"],["6","21","17","또 벤야민 지파에서는 기브온과 거기에 딸린 목초지, 게바와 거기에 딸린 목초지,","베냐민 지파에서는 기브온, 게바,","또 베냐민 지파 중에서는 기브온과 그 목초지와 게바와 그 목초지와","또 베냐민 지파 중에서는 기브온과 그 들과 게바와 그 들과","베냐민 지파가 차지하고 있던 땅에서는 기브온과 여기에 딸려 있는 목초지와 게바와 여기에 딸려 있는 목초지와","From the tribe of Benjamin they obtained Gibeon with its pasture lands, Geba with its pasture lands,","And out of the tribe of Benjamin, Gibeon with her suburbs, Geba with her suburbs,","And from the tribe of Benjamin they gave them Gibeon, Geba,","De tribu autem Beniamin Gabaon et Gabaa","וממטה בנימן את גבעון ואת מגרשה את גבע ואת מגרשה׃"],["6","21","18","아나톳과 거기에 딸린 목초지, 알몬과 거기에 딸린 목초지, 이렇게 네 성읍을 내주었다.","아나돗, 알몬 네 성읍과 거기에 딸린 목장 지대를 떼어주었다.","아나돗과 그 목초지와 알몬과 그 목초지 곧 네 성읍을 냈으니","아나돗과 그 들과 알몬과 그 들 곧 네 성읍을 내었으니","아나돗과 여기에 딸려 있는 목초지와 알몬과 여기에 딸려 있는 목초지, 이렇게 네 성읍과 각 성읍에 딸려 있는 목초지까지 추려 내어 주었다.","Anathoth with its pasture lands, and Almon with its pasture lands: four cities.","Anathoth with her suburbs, and Almon with her suburbs; four cities.","Anathoth and Almon, together with their pasturelands--four towns.","et Anathoth et Almath cum suburbanis suis: civitates quattuor.","את ענתות ואת מגרשה ואת עלמון ואת מגרשה ערים ארבע׃"],["6","21","19","그래서 아론의 자손 사제들의 성읍은, 모두 열세 성읍과 거기에 딸린 목초지들이다.","이렇게 모두 열세 성읍과 거기에 딸린 목장 지대가 아론의 후손 사제들에게 돌아갔다.","제사장 아론 자손의 성읍은 모두 열세 성읍과 그 목초지들이었더라","제사장 아론 자손의 성읍이 모두 십 삼 성읍과 그 들이었더라","따라서 유다 지파와 시므온 지파와 베냐민 지파가 차지하고 있던 땅에서 모두 열세 성읍을 떼어 내어 각 성읍에 딸려 있는 목초지와 함께 아론의 자손인 제사장들에게 나누어 주었다.","These cities which with their pasture lands belonged to the priestly descendants of Aaron, were thirteen in all.","All the cities of the children of Aaron, the priests, were thirteen cities with their suburbs.","All the towns for the priests, the descendants of Aaron, were thirteen, together with their pasturelands.","Omnes simul civitates filiorum Aaron sacerdotis tredecim cum suburbanis suis.","כל ערי בני אהרן הכהנים שלש עשרה ערים ומגרשיהן׃"],["6","21","20","크핫의 나머지 자손들, 곧 레위인 크핫 자손의 씨족들은 제비를 뽑아 에프라임 지파에서 성읍들을 받았다.","레위인들 가운데서 나머지 크핫 후손 갈래들에게는 에브라임 지파의 성읍들이 몫으로 돌아갔다.","레위 사람인 그핫 자손 중에 남은 자들의 가족들 곧 그핫 자손에게는 제비 뽑아 에브라임 지파 중에서 그 성읍들을 주었으니","그 남은 레위 사람 그핫 자손의 가족 곧 그핫 자손에게는 제비 뽑아 에브라임 지파 중에서 그 성읍들을 주었으니","레위인들인 그핫 씨족 사람들 가운데서 나머지 집안 사람들은 제비 뽑은 결과 에브라임 지파가 차지하고 있던 땅에서 성읍을 추려 내어 그들 몫으로 차지하게 되었다.","The rest of the Kohathite clans among the Levites obtained by lot, from the tribe of Ephraim, four cities.","And the families of the children of Kohath, the Levites which remained of the children of Kohath, even they had the cities of their lot out of the tribe of Ephraim.","The rest of the Kohathite clans of the Levites were allotted towns from the tribe of Ephraim:","Reliquis vero ex familiis filiorum Caath Levitis haec est data possessio:","ולמשפחות בני קהת הלוים הנותרים מבני קהת ויהי ערי גורלם ממטה אפרים׃"],["6","21","21","그래서 그들에게 에프라임 산악 지방에 있는 살인자의 도피 성읍 스켐과 거기에 딸린 목초지, 게제르와 거기에 딸린 목초지,","그들에게는 에브라임 산악 지대에 있는 도피성 세겜, 게젤,","곧 살인자의 도피성 에브라임 산지 세겜과 그 목초지이요 또 게셀과 그 목초지와","곧 살인자의 도피성 에브라임 산지 세겜과 그 들이요 또 게셀과 그 들과","이들에게는 살인자의 도피성 세겜과 여기에 딸려 있는 목초지를 떼어 주었다. 세겜은 에브라임 산악지대에 자리잡고 있었다. 뿐만 아니라 게셀과 여기에 딸려 있는 목초지와","They were assigned, with its pasture lands, the city of refuge for homicides at Shechem in the mountain region of Ephraim; also Gezer with its pasture lands,","For they gave them Shechem with her suburbs in mount Ephraim, to be a city of refuge for the slayer; and Gezer with her suburbs,","In the hill country of Ephraim they were given Shechem (a city of refuge for one accused of murder) and Gezer,","de tribu Ephraim urbs confugii Sichem cum suburbanis suis in monte Ephraim et Gazer","ויתנו להם את עיר מקלט הרצח את שכם ואת מגרשה בהר אפרים ואת גזר ואת מגרשה׃"],["6","21","22","킵차임과 거기에 딸린 목초지, 벳 호론과 거기에 딸린 목초지, 이렇게 네 성읍을 내주었다.","킵사임, 벳호론 네 성읍과 거기에 딸린 목장 지대를 떼어주었다.","깁사임과 그 목초지와 벧호론과 그 목초지이니 네 성읍이요","깁사임과 그 들과 벧 호론과 그 들이니 네 성읍이요","깁사임과 여기에 딸려 있는 목초지와 벧호론과 여기에 딸려 있는 목초지까지 모두 네 성읍을 그들 몫으로 골라 주었다.","Kibzaim with its pasture lands, and Beth-horon with its pasture lands.","And Kibzaim with her suburbs, and Bethhoron with her suburbs; four cities.","Kibzaim and Beth Horon, together with their pasturelands--four towns.","et Cibsaim et Bethoron cum suburbanis suis: civitates quattuor.","ואת קבצים ואת מגרשה ואת בית חורן ואת מגרשה ערים ארבע׃"],["6","21","23","또 단 지파에서는 엘트케와 거기에 딸린 목초지, 기브톤과 거기에 딸린 목초지,","단 지파에서는 엘드케, 깁돈,","또 단 지파 중에서 준 것은 엘드게와 그 목초지와 깁브돈과 그 목초지와","또 단 지파 중에서 준것은 엘드게와 그 들과 깁브돈과 그 들과","단 지파가 차지하고 있던 땅에서는 엘드게와 여기에 딸려 있는 목초지와 깁브돈과 여기에 딸려 있는 목초지와","From the tribe of Dan they obtained Elteke with its pasture lands, Gibbethon with its pasture lands,","And out of the tribe of Dan, Eltekeh with her suburbs, Gibbethon with her suburbs,","Also from the tribe of Dan they received Eltekeh, Gibbethon,","De tribu quoque Dan Elthece et Gebbethon","וממטה דן את אלתקא ואת מגרשה את גבתון ואת מגרשה׃"],["6","21","24","아얄론과 거기에 딸린 목초지, 갓 림몬과 거기에 딸린 목초지, 이렇게 네 성읍을 내주었다.","아얄론, 갓림몬 네 성읍과 거기에 딸린 목장 지대를 떼어주었다.","아얄론과 그 목초지와 가드 림몬과 그 목초지이니 네 성읍이요","아얄론과 그 들과 가드 림몬과 그 들이니 네 성읍이요","아얄론과 여기에 딸려 있는 목초지와 가드림몬과 여기에 딸려 있는 목초지까지 모두 네 성읍을 그들 몫으로 골라 주었다.","Aijalon with its pasture lands, and Gath-rimmon with its pasture lands: four cities.","Aijalon with her suburbs, Gathrimmon with her suburbs; four cities.","Aijalon and Gath Rimmon, together with their pasturelands--four towns.","et Aialon et Gethremmon cum suburbanis suis: civitates quattuor.","את אילון ואת מגרשה את גת רמון ואת מגרשה ערים ארבע׃"],["6","21","25","므나쎄 반쪽 지파에서는 타아낙과 거기에 딸린 목초지, 갓 림몬과 거기에 딸린 목초지, 이렇게 두 성읍을 내주었다.","므나쎄 지파 서반부에서는 다아낙, 이블르암 두 성읍과 거기에 딸린 목장 지대를 떼어주었다.","또 므낫세 반 지파 중에서 준 것은 다아낙과 그 목초지와 가드 림몬과 그 목초지이니 두 성읍이라","또 므낫세 반 지파 중에서 준것은 다아낙과 그 들과 가드 림몬과 그 들이니 두 성읍이라","므낫세 반 지파가 차지하고 있던 땅에서는 다아낙과 여기에 딸려 있는 목초지와 가드림몬과 여기에 딸려 있는 목초지까지 두 성읍을 그들 몫으로 골라 주었다.","From the half-tribe of Manasseh, Taanach with its pasture lands, and Gath-rimmon with its pasture lands: two cities.","And out of the half tribe of Manasseh, Tanach with her suburbs, and Gathrimmon with her suburbs; two cities.","From half the tribe of Manasseh they received Taanach and Gath Rimmon, together with their pasturelands--two towns.","Porro de dimidia tribu Manasse Thanach et Gethremmon cum suburbanis suis: civitates duae.","וממחצית מטה מנשה את תענך ואת מגרשה ואת גת רמון ואת מגרשה ערים שתים׃"],["6","21","26","그래서 크핫 자손의 나머지 씨족들에게는, 모두 열 성읍과 거기에 딸린 목초지들이 돌아갔다.","이렇게 나머지 크핫 후손에게는 갈래를 따라 모두 열 성읍과 거기에 딸린 목장 지대가 돌아갔다.","그핫 자손의 남은 가족들을 위한 성읍들은 모두 열 성읍과 그 목초지들이었더라","그핫 자손의 남은 가족의 성읍이 모두 열과 그 들이었더라","나머지 그핫 씨족 사람들에게는 이렇게 열 성읍과 각 성읍에 딸려 있는 목초지를 모두 그들 몫으로 나누어 주었다.","These cities which with their pasture lands belonged to the rest of the Kohathite clans were ten in all.","All the cities were ten with their suburbs for the families of the children of Kohath that remained.","All these ten towns and their pasturelands were given to the rest of the Kohathite clans.","Omnes civitates decem et suburbana earum datae sunt filiis Caath inferioris gradus.","כל ערים עשר ומגרשיהן למשפחות בני קהת הנותרים׃"],["6","21","27","레위인 씨족들 가운데에서 게르손의 자손들에게는, 므나쎄 반쪽 지파에서 살인자의 도피 성읍 바산의 골란과 거기에 딸린 목초지, 브에스트라와 거기에 딸린 목초지, 이렇게 두 성읍을 내주었다.","레위인 갈래 가운데서 게르손 후손에게는 바산에 있는 도피성 골란, 아스다롯 두 성읍과 거기에 딸린 목장 지대를 므나쎄 지파 동반부에서 떼어주었다.","레위 가족의 게르손 자손에게는 므낫세 반 지파 중에서 살인자의 도피성 바산 골란과 그 목초지를 주었고 또 브에스드라와 그 목초지를 주었으니 두 성읍이요","레위 가족의 게르손 자손들에게는 므낫세 반지파 중에서 살인자의 도피성 바산 골란과 그 들을 주었고 또 브에스드라와 그 들을 주었으니 두 성읍이요","또 레위인들 가운데에서 게르손 자손들에게는 다음과 같은 성읍을 골라주었다. 므낫세 반 지파가 차지하고 있던 땅에서는 살인자의 도피성 골란을 골라 주었다. 골란은 바산에 있는 성읍이다. 골란에 딸려 있는 목초지도 그들에게 주었다. 뿐만 아니라 브에스드라와 여기에 딸려 있는 목초지도 그들에게 주었다. 따라서 므낫세 반 지파의 땅에서는 두 성읍을 골라 준 것이다.","The Gershonite clan of the Levites received from the half-tribe of Manasseh the city of refuge for homicides at Golan in Bashan, with its pasture lands; and also Beth-Astharoth with its pasture lands: two cities.","And unto the children of Gershon, of the families of the Levites, out of the other half tribe of Manasseh they gave Golan in Bashan with her suburbs, to be a city of refuge for the slayer; and Beeshterah with her suburbs; two cities.","The Levite clans of the Gershonites were given: from the half-tribe of Manasseh, Golan in Bashan (a city of refuge for one accused of murder) and Be Eshtarah, together with their pasturelands--two towns;","Filiis quoque Gerson levitici generis dederunt de dimidia tribu Manasse confugii civitatem Golan in Basan et Astharoth cum suburbanis suis: civitates duas.","ולבני גרשון ממשפחת הלוים מחצי מטה מנשה את עיר מקלט הרצח את גלון בבשן ואת מגרשה ואת בעשתרה ואת מגרשה ערים שתים׃"],["6","21","28","이사카르 지파에서는 키스욘과 거기에 딸린 목초지, 다브랏과 거기에 딸린 목초지,","이싸갈 지파에서는 키스욘, 다브랏,","잇사갈 지파 중에서는 기시온과 그 목초지와 다브랏과 그 목초지와","잇사갈 지파 중에서는 기시온과 그 들과 다브랏과 그 들과","잇사갈 지파가 차지하고 있던 땅에서는 기시온과 여기에 딸려 있는 성읍과 다브랏과 여기에 딸려 있는 성읍과","From the tribe of Issachar they obtained Kishion with its pasture lands, Daberath with its pasture lands,","And out of the tribe of Issachar, Kishon with her suburbs, Dabareh with her suburbs,","from the tribe of Issachar, Kishion, Daberath,","Porro de tribu Issachar Cesion et Dabereth","וממטה יששכר את קשיון ואת מגרשה את דברת ואת מגרשה׃"],["6","21","29","야르뭇과 거기에 딸린 목초지, 엔 간님과 거기에 딸린 목초지, 이렇게 네 성읍을 내주었다.","야르뭇, 엔간님 네 성읍과 거기에 딸린 목장 지대를 떼어주었다.","야르뭇과 그 목초지와 엔 간님과 그 목초지를 주었으니 네 성읍이요","야르뭇과 그 들과 언 간님과 그 들을 주었으니 네 성읍이요","야르뭇과 여기에 딸려 있는 성읍과 언간님과 여기에 딸려 있는 성읍까지 네 성읍을 그들 몫으로 골라 주었다.","Jarmuth with its pasture lands, and En-gannim with its pasture lands: four cities.","Jarmuth with her suburbs, Engannim with her suburbs; four cities.","Jarmuth and En Gannim, together with their pasturelands--four towns;","et Iaramoth et Engannim cum suburbanis suis: civitates quattuor.","את ירמות ואת מגרשה את עין גנים ואת מגרשה ערים ארבע׃"],["6","21","30","아세르 지파에서는 미스알과 거기에 딸린 목초지, 압돈과 거기에 딸린 목초지,","아셀 지파에서는 미스알, 압돈,","아셀 지파 중에서는 미살과 그 목초지와 압돈과 그 목초지와","아셀 지파 중에서는 미살과 그 들과 압돈과 그 들과","아셀 지파가 살고 있던 땅에서는 미살과 여기에 딸려 있는 목초지와 압돈과 여기에 딸려 있는 목초지와","From the tribe of Asher, Mishal with its pasture lands, Abdon with its pasture lands,","And out of the tribe of Asher, Mishal with her suburbs, Abdon with her suburbs,","from the tribe of Asher, Mishal, Abdon,","De tribu autem Aser Masal et Abdon","וממטה אשר את משאל ואת מגרשה את עבדון ואת מגרשה׃"],["6","21","31","헬캇과 거기에 딸린 목초지, 르홉과 거기에 딸린 목초지, 이렇게 네 성읍을 내주었다.","헬캇, 르홉 네 성읍과 거기에 딸린 목장 지대를 떼어주었다.","헬갓과 그 목초지와 르홉과 그 목초지를 주었으니 네 성읍이요","헬갓과 그 들과 르홉과 그 들을 주었으니 네 성읍이요","헬갓과 여기에 딸려 있는 목초지와 르홉과 여기에 딸려 있는 목초지까지 네 성읍을 그들 몫으로 골라 주었다.","Helkath with its pasture lands, and Rehob with its pasture lands: four cities.","Helkath with her suburbs, and Rehob with her suburbs; four cities.","Helkath and Rehob, together with their pasturelands--four towns;","et Helcath et Rohob cum suburbanis suis: civitates quattuor.","את חלקת ואת מגרשה ואת רחב ואת מגרשה ערים ארבע׃"],["6","21","32","납탈리 지파에서는 살인자의 도피 성읍 갈릴래아의 케데스와 거기에 딸린 목초지, 함못 도르와 거기에 딸린 목초지, 카르탄과 거기에 딸린 목초지, 이렇게 세 성읍을 내주었다.","납달리 지파에서는 갈릴리에 있는 살인자의 도피성 케데스, 함못도르, 카르단 세 성읍과 거기에 딸린 목장 지대를 떼어주었다.","납달리 지파 중에서는 살인자의 도피성 갈릴리 게데스와 그 목초지를 주었고 또 함못 돌과 그 목초지와 가르단과 그 목초지를 주었으니 세 성읍이라","납달리 지파 중에서는 살인자의 도피성 갈릴리 게데스와 그 들을 주었고 또 함못 돌과 그 들과 가르단과 그 들을 주었으니 세 성읍이라","납달리 지파가 살고 있던 땅에서는 살인자의 도피성 갈릴리 게데스와 여기에 딸려 있는 목초지를 골라 주었다. 뿐만 아니라 함못 돌과 여기에 딸려 있는 목초지와 가르단과 여기에 딸려 있는 목초지까지 세 성읍을 골라 주었다.","From the tribe of Naphtali, the city of refuge for homicides at Kedesh in Galilee, with its pasture lands; also Hammath with its pasture lands, and Kartan with its pasture lands: three cities.","And out of the tribe of Naphtali, Kedesh in Galilee with her suburbs, to be a city of refuge for the slayer; and Hammothdor with her suburbs, and Kartan with her suburbs; three cities.","from the tribe of Naphtali, Kedesh in Galilee (a city of refuge for one accused of murder), Hammoth Dor and Kartan, together with their pasturelands--three towns.","De tribu quoque Nephthali civitas confugii Cedes in Galilaea et Ammothdor et Carthan cum suburbanis suis: civitates tres.","וממטה נפתלי את עיר מקלט הרצח את קדש בגליל ואת מגרשה ואת חמת דאר ואת מגרשה ואת קרתן ואת מגרשה ערים שלש׃"],["6","21","33","그래서 게르손인들이 씨족별로 받은 성읍은, 모두 열세 성읍과 거기에 딸린 목초지들이다.","이렇게 게르손 사람들에게는 갈래를 따라 모두 열세 성읍과 거기에 딸린 목장 지대가 돌아갔다.","게르손 사람이 그 가족대로 받은 성읍은 모두 열세 성읍과 그 목초지들이었더라","게르손 사람이 그 가족대로 얻은 성읍이 모두 열 세 성읍과 그 들이었더라","게르손 자손들이 그들 몫으로 받은 성읍은 이렇게 모두 열세 성읍과 각 성읍에 딸려 있는 목초지이다.","The cities which belonged to the Gershonite clans, with their pasture lands, were thirteen in all.","All the cities of the Gershonites according to their families were thirteen cities with their suburbs.","All the towns of the Gershonite clans were thirteen, together with their pasturelands.","Omnes urbes familiarum Gerson tredecim cum suburbanis suis.","כל ערי הגרשני למשפחתם שלש עשרה עיר ומגרשיהן׃"],["6","21","34","레위인들 가운데에서 남은 므라리 자손의 씨족들에게는 즈불룬 지파에서 요크느암과 거기에 딸린 목초지, 카르타와 거기에 딸린 목초지,","레위 사람 가운데 남은 므라리 후손 갈래에게는 즈불룬 지파에서 욕느암, 카르다,","그 남은 레위 사람 므라리 자손의 가족들에게 준 것은 스불론 지파 중에서 욕느암과 그 목초지와 가르다와 그 목초지와","그 남은 레위 사람 므라리 자손의 가족들에게 준 것은 스불론 지파 중에서 욕느암과 그 들과 가르다와 그 들과","또 레위인들 가운데에서 므라리 씨족 사람들이 차지한 성읍은 다음과 같다. 스불론 지파가 차지하고 있던 땅에서는 욕느암과 여기에 딸려 있는 목초지와 가르다와 여기에 딸려 있는 목초지와","The Merarite clans, the last of the Levites, received, from the tribe of Zebulun, Jokneam with its pasture lands, Kartah with its pasture lands,","And unto the families of the children of Merari, the rest of the Levites, out of the tribe of Zebulun, Jokneam with her suburbs, and Kartah with her suburbs,","The Merarite clans (the rest of the Levites) were given: from the tribe of Zebulun, Jokneam, Kartah,","Filiis autem Merari Levitis inferioris gradus per familias suas data est de tribu Zabulon Iecnaam et Cartha","ולמשפחות בני מררי הלוים הנותרים מאת מטה זבולן את יקנעם ואת מגרשה את קרתה ואת מגרשה׃"],["6","21","35","딤나와 거기에 딸린 목초지, 나할랄과 거기에 딸린 목초지, 이렇게 네 성읍을 내주었다.","림몬, 나할랄 네 성읍과 거기에 딸린 목장 지대를 떼어주었다.","딤나와 그 목초지와 나할랄과 그 목초지이니 네 성읍이요","딤나와 그 들과 나할랄과 그 들이니 네 성읍이요","딤나와 여기에 딸려 있는 목초지와 나할랄과 이에 딸려 있는 목초지까지 네 성읍을 골라 주었다.","Dimnah with its pasture lands, and Nahalal with its pasture lands: four cities.","Dimnah with her suburbs, Nahalal with her suburbs; four cities.","Dimnah and Nahalal, together with their pasturelands--four towns;","et Remmon et Naalol: civitates quattuor cum suburbanis suis.","את דמנה ואת מגרשה את נהלל ואת מגרשה ערים ארבע׃"],["6","21","36","르우벤 지파에서는 베체르와 거기에 딸린 목초지, 야하츠와 거기에 딸린 목초지,","요르단 강 건너편 예리고 동쪽 르우벤 지파에서는 고원 사막 지대에 있는 도피성 베셀, 야하스,","르우벤 지파 중에서 준 것은 베셀과 그 목초지와 야하스와 그 목초지와","르우벤 지파 중에서 준 것은 베셀과 그 들과 야하스와 그 들과","르우벤 지파가 차지하고 있던 땅에서는 베셀과 여기에 딸려 있는 목초지와 야하스와 여기에 딸려 있는 목초지와","Also, across the Jordan, from the tribe of Reuben, the city of refuge for homicides at Bezer with its pasture lands, Jahaz with its pasture lands,","And out of the tribe of Reuben, Bezer with her suburbs, and Jahazah with her suburbs,","from the tribe of Reuben, Bezer, Jahaz,","De tribu Ruben ultra Iordanem contra Iericho civitas refugii Bosor in solitudine planitiei et Iasa","וממטה ראובן את בצר ואת מגרשה ואת יהצה ואת מגרשה׃"],["6","21","37","크데못과 거기에 딸린 목초지, 메파앗과 거기에 딸린 목초지, 이렇게 네 성읍을 내주었다.","크데못, 메바앗 네 성읍과 거기에 딸린 목장 지대를 떼어주었다.","그데못과 그 목초지와 므바앗과 그 목초지이니 네 성읍이요","그데못과 그 들과 므바앗과 그 들이니 네 성읍이요","그데못과 여기에 딸려 있는 목초지와 므바앗과 여기에 딸려 있는 목초지까지 네 성읍을 골라 주었다.","Kedemoth with its pasture lands, and Mephaath with its pasture lands: four cities.","Kedemoth with her suburbs, and Mephaath with her suburbs; four cities.","Kedemoth and Mephaath, together with their pasturelands--four towns;","et Cademoth et Mephaath: civitates quattuor cum suburbanis suis.","את קדמות ואת מגרשה ואת מיפעת ואת מגרשה ערים ארבע׃"],["6","21","38","가드 지파에서는 살인자의 도피 성읍 라못 길앗과 거기에 딸린 목초지, 마하나임과 거기에 딸린 목초지,","가드 지파에서는 도피성 라못길르앗, 마하나임,","갓 지파 중에서 준 것은 살인자의 도피성 길르앗 라못과 그 목초지이요 또 마하나임과 그 목초지와","갓 지파 중에서 준 것은 살인자의 도피성 길르앗 라못과 그 들이요 또 마하나임과 그 들과","갓 지파가 차지하고 있던 땅에선 살인자의 도피성 라못과 여기에 딸려 있는 목초지를 골라 주었다. 라못은 길르앗에 있는 성읍이다. 뿐만 아니라 마하나임과 여기에 딸려 있는 목초지와","From the tribe of Gad, the city of refuge for homicides at Ramoth in Gilead with its pasture lands, Mahanaim with its pasture lands,","And out of the tribe of Gad, Ramoth in Gilead with her suburbs, to be a city of refuge for the slayer; and Mahanaim with her suburbs,","from the tribe of Gad, Ramoth in Gilead (a city of refuge for one accused of murder), Mahanaim,","Et de tribu Gad civitas confugii Ramoth in Galaad et Mahanaim","וממטה גד את עיר מקלט הרצח את רמת בגלעד ואת מגרשה ואת מחנים ואת מגרשה׃"],["6","21","39","헤스본과 거기에 딸린 목초지, 야제르와 거기에 딸린 목초지, 이렇게 모두 네 성읍을 내주었다.","헤스본, 야젤 네 성읍과 거기에 딸린 목장 지대를 떼어주었다.","헤스본과 그 목초지와 야셀과 그 목초지이니 모두 네 성읍이라","헤스본과 그 들과 야셀과 그 들이니 모두 네 성읍이라","헤스본과 여기에 딸려 있는 목초지와 야셀과 여기에 딸려 있는 목초지까지 네 성읍을 골라 주었다.","Heshbon with its pasture lands, and Jazer with its pasture lands: four cities in all.","Heshbon with her suburbs, Jazer with her suburbs; four cities in all.","Heshbon and Jazer, together with their pasturelands--four towns in all.","et Hesebon et Iazer: civitates quattuor cum suburbanis suis.","את חשבון ואת מגרשה את יעזר ואת מגרשה כל ערים ארבע׃"],["6","21","40","그래서 레위 씨족들 가운데에서 남은 므라리의 자손들이 씨족별로 제비를 뽑아서 받은 성읍은 모두 열두 성읍이다.","이렇게 나머지 레위인들의 갈래 가운데 므라리 갈래 후손에게는 모두 열두 성읍이 몫으로 돌아갔다.","이는 레위 가족의 남은 자 곧 므라리 자손이 그들의 가족대로 받은 성읍이니 그들이 제비 뽑아 얻은 성읍이 열두 성읍이었더라","이는 레위 가족의 남은 자 곧 므라리 자손이 그 가족대로 얻은 성읍이니 그 제비 뽑아 얻은 성읍이 십 이 성읍이었더라","레위인 가운데에서 므라리 씨족 사람들이 제비를 뽑아 그들 몫으로 돌아간 성읍은 이렇게 열두 성읍이었다.","The cities allotted to the Merarite clans, the last of the Levites, were therefore twelve in all.","So all the cities for the children of Merari by their families, which were remaining of the families of the Levites, were by their lot twelve cities.","All the towns allotted to the Merarite clans, who were the rest of the Levites, were twelve.","Omnes urbes filiorum Merari per familias reliquas de cognationibus Levitarum duodecim.","כל הערים לבני מררי למשפחתם הנותרים ממשפחות הלוים ויהי גורלם ערים שתים עשרה׃"],["6","21","41","이스라엘 자손들의 소유지 가운데에서 레위인들에게 내준 성읍은, 모두 마흔여덟 성읍과 거기에 딸린 목초지들이다.","이렇게 이스라엘 백성이 차지한 영토 가운데서 레위인들에게 떼어준 성읍은 목장 지대까지 붙여서 모두 마흔여덟 곳이었다.","레위 사람들이 이스라엘 자손의 기업 중에서 받은 성읍은 모두 마흔여덟 성읍이요 또 그 목초지들이라","레위 사람의 이스라엘 자손의 기업 중에서 얻은 성읍이 모두 사십 팔 성읍이요 또 그 들이라","이스라엘 사람들이 소유한 땅 가운데서 레위인들이 그들 몫으로 차지한 성읍은 이렇게 모두 마흔여덟 성읍과 각 성읍에 딸려 있는 목초지였다.","Thus the total number of cities within the territory of the Israelites which, with their pasture lands, belonged to the Levites, was forty-eight.","All the cities of the Levites within the possession of the children of Israel were forty and eight cities with their suburbs.","The towns of the Levites in the territory held by the Israelites were forty-eight in all, together with their pasturelands.","Itaque universae civitates Levitarum in medio possessionis filiorum Israel fuerunt quadraginta octo","כל ערי הלוים בתוך אחזת בני ישראל ערים ארבעים ושמנה ומגרשיהן׃"],["6","21","42","성읍마다 그 주변에 목초지가 딸려 있었다. 그 성읍들이 모두 그러하였다.","이 성읍들은 각각 목장 지대가 그 주위에 딸려 있었다. 이상의 성읍들이 다 그러했다.","이 각 성읍의 주위에 목초지가 있었고 모든 성읍이 다 그러하였더라","이 각 성읍의 사면에 들이 있었고 모든 성읍이 다 그러하였더라","앞서 각 성읍에 목초지가 꼭 딸려 있다고 언급하였듯이 레위인들이 차지한 성읍마다 그 주위에 이와같은 목초지가 꼭 딸려 있었다. 모든 성읍이 다 그러하였다.","With each and every one of these cities went the pasture lands round about it.","These cities were every one with their suburbs round about them: thus were all these cities.","Each of these towns had pasturelands surrounding it; this was true for all these towns.","cum suburbanis suis, singulae cum suburbanis suis in circuitu.","תהיינה הערים האלה עיר עיר ומגרשיה סביבתיה כן לכל הערים האלה׃"],["6","21","43","주님께서는 이렇게 이스라엘 백성의 조상들에게 주시겠다고 맹세하신 모든 땅을 그들에게 주셨다. 그래서 그들은 이 땅을 차지하여 살게 되었다.","이렇게 야훼께서 그들의 조상에게 주겠다고 맹세한 모든 땅을 주셨으므로 이스라엘 백성은 그 땅을 차지하고 정착하였다.","여호와께서 이스라엘의 조상들에게 맹세하사 주리라 하신 온 땅을 이와 같이 이스라엘에게 다 주셨으므로 그들이 그것을 차지하여 거기에 거주하였으니","여호와께서 이스라엘의 열조에게 맹세하사 주마 하신 온 땅을 이와 같이 이스라엘에게 다 주셨으므로 그들이 그것을 얻어 거기 거하였으며","여호와께서는 이렇게 이스라엘에게 온 땅을 주셨다. 그 조상들에게 주시겠다고 이미 맹세하신 그대로였다. 이스라엘은 그 땅을 차지하고 살았다.","And so the LORD gave Israel the entire land he had sworn to their ancestors he would give them. Once they had taken possession of it, and dwelt in it,","And the LORD gave unto Israel all the land which he sware to give unto their fathers; and they possessed it, and dwelt therein.","So the LORD gave Israel all the land he had sworn to give their forefathers, and they took possession of it and settled there.","Deditque Dominus Israeli omnem terram, quam traditurum se patribus eorum iuraverat, et possederunt illam atque habitaverunt in ea.","ויתן יהוה לישראל את כל הארץ אשר נשבע לתת לאבותם וירשוה וישבו בה׃"],["6","21","44","주님께서는 그들의 조상들에게 맹세하신 대로, 그들을 사방으로부터 평온하게 해 주셨다. 모든 원수 가운데에서 그들에게 대항하는 자는 아무도 없었다. 주님께서 모든 원수를 그들의 손에 넘겨주셨던 것이다.","야훼께서는 그들의 조상들에게 맹세하신 대로 사방에 평화를 주셨다. 원수들 가운데 아무도 감히 그들을 적대해 일어서는 자가 없었다. 야훼께서 그들의 손에 원수들을 부치셨던 것이다.","여호와께서 그들의 주위에 안식을 주셨으되 그 조상들에게 맹세하신 대로 하셨으므로 그들의 모든 원수들 중에 그들과 맞선 자가 하나도 없었으니 이는 여호와께서 그들의 모든 원수들을 그들의 손에 넘겨 주셨음이니라","여호와께서 그들의 사방에 안식을 주셨으되 그 열조에게 맹세하신대로 하셨으므로 그 모든 대적이 그들을 당한 자가 하나도 없었으니 이는 여호와께서 그들의 모든 대적을 그들의 손에 붙이셨음이라","뿐만 아니라 여호와께서는 조상들에게 맹세하신 대로 이스라엘이 살고 있는 땅에서 평화롭게 지낼 수 있도록 하셨다. 주변의 어느 원수들도 이스라엘을 대적하여 맞설 수가 없었다. 여호와께서 이스라엘 앞에서 원수들이 꼼짝못하게 하셨기 때문이다. 원수들이 힘을 쓸 수 없었다. 여호와께서 조상들에게 이미 맹세하신 대로였다.","the LORD gave them peace on every side, just as he had promised their ancestors. Not one of their enemies could withstand them; the LORD gave all their enemies into their power.","And the LORD gave them rest round about, according to all that he sware unto their fathers: and there stood not a man of all their enemies before them; the LORD delivered all their enemies into their hand.","The LORD gave them rest on every side, just as he had sworn to their forefathers. Not one of their enemies withstood them; the LORD handed all their enemies over to them.","Deditque Dominus eis requiem secundum omnia, quae iuraverat patribus eorum, nullusque eis hostium resistere ausus est, sed cunctos in eorum dicionem redegit.","וינח יהוה להם מסביב ככל אשר נשבע לאבותם ולא עמד איש בפניהם מכל איביהם את כל איביהם נתן יהוה בידם׃"],["6","21","45","이리하여 주님께서 이스라엘 집안에 하신 그 모든 좋은 말씀이, 하나도 빠지지 않고 다 이루어졌다.","야훼께서 이스라엘 가문에 약속해 주신 온갖 좋은 일은 하나도 그대로 안 된 일이 없이 다 이루어졌다.","여호와께서 이스라엘 족속에게 말씀하신 선한 말씀이 하나도 남음이 없이 다 응하였더라","여호와께서 이스라엘 족속에게 말씀하신 선한 일이 하나도 남음이 없이 다 응하였더라","여호와께서 이스라엘 집안 식구들에게 하신 약속은 하나도 이루어지지 않은 일이 없었다. 모두 이루어졌다. 여호와께서 그 약속을 지키셨던 것이다.","Not a single word of the blessing that the LORD had promised to the house of Israel failed; it all came true.","There failed not ought of any good thing which the LORD had spoken unto the house of Israel; all came to pass.","Not one of all the LORD'S good promises to the house of Israel failed; every one was fulfilled.","Ne unum quidem verbum bonum, quod locutus est ad domum Israel, irritum fuit, sed rebus expleta sunt omnia.","לא נפל דבר מכל הדבר הטוב אשר דבר יהוה אל בית ישראל הכל בא׃"],["6","22","1","그때에 여호수아가 르우벤인들과 가드인들, 그리고 므나쎄 반쪽 지파를 불러 놓고,","이렇게 하고 나서 여호수아는 르우벤과 가드와 므나쎄 지파 절반을 불러놓고","그 때에 여호수아가 르우벤 사람과 갓 사람과 므낫세 반 지파를 불러서","그 때에 여호수아가 르우벤 사람과 갓 사람과 므낫세 반 지파를 불러서","그때 여호수아가 요단강 동쪽에 사는 르우벤 지파와 갓 지파와 므낫세 반 지파 사람들을 불러 일렀다. \"너희는 여호와의 종 모세께서 지키라고 너희에게 명령하신 것을 어김없이 잘 지켰다. 또한 내가 너희에게 명령한 것도 거역하지 않고 잘 따라 주었다.","At that time Joshua summoned the Reubenites, the Gadites, and the half-tribe of Manasseh","Then Joshua called the Reubenites, and the Gadites, and the half tribe of Manasseh,","Then Joshua summoned the Reubenites, the Gadites and the half-tribe of Manasseh","Tunc vocavit Iosue Rubenitas et Gaditas et dimidiam tribum Manasse","אז יקרא יהושע לראובני ולגדי ולחצי מטה מנשה׃"],["6","22","2","그들에게 말하였다. “너희는 주님의 종 모세께서 너희에게 명령하신 것을 모두 지켰다. 그리고 내가 너희에게 명령한 대로 내 말도 잘 들었다.","일렀다. \"너희는 야훼의 종 모세에게서 받은 명령을 지켰다. 그리고 내가 명령한 대로 내 말도 다 들었다.","그들에게 이르되 여호와의 종 모세가 너희에게 명령한 것을 너희가 다 지키며 또 내가 너희에게 명령한 모든 일에 너희가 내 말을 순종하여","그들에게 이르되 여호와의 종 모세가 너희에게 명한 것을 너희가 다 지키며 또 내가 너희에게 명한 모든 일에 내 말을 너희가 청종하여","(1절에 포함되어 있음)","and said to them: “You have observed all that Moses, the servant of the LORD, commanded you, and have listened to my voice in everything I commanded you.","And said unto them, Ye have kept all that Moses the servant of the LORD commanded you, and have obeyed my voice in all that I commanded you:","and said to them, \"You have done all that Moses the servant of the LORD commanded, and you have obeyed me in everything I commanded.","dixitque ad eos:  “Fecistis omnia, quae vobis praecepit Moyses famulus Domini; mihi quoque in omnibus, quae praecepi vobis, oboedistis","ויאמר אליהם אתם שמרתם את כל אשר צוה אתכם משה עבד יהוה ותשמעו בקולי לכל אשר צויתי אתכם׃"],["6","22","3","너희는 오늘날까지 이처럼 오랫동안 너희 형제들을 저버리지 않고, 주 너희 하느님의 계명을 성심껏 지켰다.","너희는 지나간 긴 세월을 이날까지 자기 겨레를 저버리지 않고 야훼께 받은 분부를 성심껏 실천하였다.","오늘까지 날이 오래도록 너희가 너희 형제를 떠나지 아니하고 오직 너희의 하나님 여호와께서 명령하신 그 책임을 지키도다","오늘날까지 날이 오래도록 너희가 너희 형제를 떠나지 아니하고 오직 너희 하나님 여호와의 명하신 그 책임을 지키도다","뿐만 아니라 오늘날까지 오랜 세월을 지내는 가운데서도 너희 형제들을 배반하지 않았다. 그리고 우리 하나님 여호와께서 가르치신 것도 빠뜨리지 않고 잘 실천하였다.","For many years now, even until today, you have not abandoned your allies, but have taken care to observe the commands of the LORD, your God.","Ye have not left your brethren these many days unto this day, but have kept the charge of the commandment of the LORD your God.","For a long time now--to this very day--you have not deserted your brothers but have carried out the mission the LORD your God gave you.","nec reliquistis fratres vestros hoc longo tempore usque in praesentem diem custodientes imperium Domini Dei vestri.","לא עזבתם את אחיכם זה ימים רבים עד היום הזה ושמרתם את משמרת מצות יהוה אלהיכם׃"],["6","22","4","이제 주 너희 하느님께서는 친히 이르신 대로 너희 형제들을 평온하게 해 주셨다. 그러니 주님의 종 모세께서 요르단 건너편에서 주신 너희 소유지로, 너희 천막으로 돌아가거라.","마침내 너희 하느님 야훼께서는 약속대로 너희 겨레들에게 안식을 주셨다. 그러니 너희는 이제 너희 천막으로 돌아가거라. 야훼의 종 모세에게서 받은 요르단 강 건너편에 있는 너희의 소유지로 가거라.","이제는 너희의 하나님 여호와께서 이미 말씀하신 대로 너희 형제에게 안식을 주셨으니 그런즉 이제 너희는 여호와의 종 모세가 요단 저쪽에서 너희에게 준 소유지로 가서 너희의 장막으로 돌아가되","이제는 너희 하나님 여호와께서 이미 말씀하신대로 너희 형제에게 안식을 주셨으니 그런즉 이제 너희는 여호와의 종 모세가 요단 저편에서 너희에게 준 소유지로 가서 너희의 장막으로 돌아가되","그랬기에 우리 하나님 여호와께서 이미 약속하셨던 것처럼 너희 형제 이스라엘 식구들이 이렇게 평화로이 살 수 있도록 하신 것 아니겠느냐? 그러니 이제는 너희 집으로 돌아가거라. 요단강 건너 동쪽에서 여호와의 종 모세께서 너희에게 나누어 준 그 땅으로 돌아가거라. 너희 소유가 있는 곳으로 돌아가거라.","Now that the LORD, your God, has settled your allies as he promised them, you may return to your tents, to your own land, which Moses, the servant of the LORD, gave you, across the Jordan.","And now the LORD your God hath given rest unto your brethren, as he promised them: therefore now return ye, and get you unto your tents, and unto the land of your possession, which Moses the servant of the LORD gave you on the other side Jordan.","Now that the LORD your God has given your brothers rest as he promised, return to your homes in the land that Moses the servant of the LORD gave you on the other side of the Jordan.","Quia igitur dedit Dominus Deus vester fratribus vestris quietem ac pacem, sicut eis pollicitus est, revertimini nunc et ite in tabernacula vestra et in terram possessionis, quam tradidit vobis Moyses famulus Domini trans Iordanem;","ועתה הניח יהוה אלהיכם לאחיכם כאשר דבר להם ועתה פנו ולכו לכם לאהליכם אל ארץ אחזתכם אשר נתן לכם משה עבד יהוה בעבר הירדן׃"],["6","22","5","주님의 종 모세께서 너희에게 명령하신 계명과 율법을 명심하여 잘 지켜, 주 너희 하느님을 사랑하고 그분의 모든 길을 따라 걸으며, 그분의 계명을 지키고 그분께만 매달리면서, 마음을 다하고 목숨을 다하여 그분을 섬겨라.”","다만 야훼의 종 모세가 내린 계명과 법만은 있는 힘을 다하여 성심껏 지켜야 한다. 너희의 하느님 야훼를 사랑하며 그가 일러주신 길을 따라 살아야 한다. 그의 명령을 지키고 그에게만 충성을 바쳐야 한다. 마음을 다 기울이고 정성을 다 쏟아 그를 섬겨야 한다.\"","오직 여호와의 종 모세가 너희에게 명령한 명령과 율법을 반드시 행하여 너희의 하나님 여호와를 사랑하고 그의 모든 길로 행하며 그의 계명을 지켜 그에게 친근히 하고 너희의 마음을 다하며 성품을 다하여 그를 섬길지니라 하고","크게 삼가 여호와의 종 모세가 너희에게 명한 명령과 율법을 행하여 너희 하나님 여호와를 사랑하고 그 모든 길로 행하며 그 계명을 지켜 그에게 친근히 하고 너희의 마음을 다하며 성품을 다하여 그를 섬길찌니라 하고","그렇지만 돌아가더라도 꼭 명심해야 할 일이 있다. 여호와의 종 모세께서 명령하신 것과 가르쳐 주신 것은 꼭 실천하여라. 꼭 따라야 한다. 우리 하나님 여호와를 사랑하여라. 그분이 가시는 길만을 꼭 따라가거라. 어떤 곳이든 그 길을 좇으라. 그분의 명령을 실천하여라. 그 명령을 부여잡고 살아라. 온 마음을 다하여 온 정성을 다하여 그 명령을 지켜야 한다.\"","But be very careful to observe the commandment and the law which Moses, the servant of the LORD, commanded you: love the LORD, your God, follow him in all his ways, keep his commandments, hold fast to him, and serve him with your whole heart and your whole self.”","But take diligent heed to do the commandment and the law, which Moses the servant of the LORD charged you, to love the LORD your God, and to walk in all his ways, and to keep his commandments, and to cleave unto him, and to serve him with all your heart and with all your soul.","But be very careful to keep the commandment and the law that Moses the servant of the LORD gave you: to love the LORD your God, to walk in all his ways, to obey his commands, to hold fast to him and to serve him with all your heart and all your soul.\"","ita dumtaxat ut custodiatis attente et opere compleatis mandatum et legem, quam praecepit vobis Moyses servus Domini, ut diligatis Dominum Deum vestrum et ambuletis in omnibus viis eius et observetis mandata illius adhaereatisque ei ac serviatis in omni corde et in omni anima vestra “.","רק שמרו מאד לעשות את המצוה ואת התורה אשר צוה אתכם משה עבד יהוה לאהבה את יהוה אלהיכם וללכת בכל דרכיו ולשמר מצותיו ולדבקה בו ולעבדו בכל לבבכם ובכל נפשכם׃"],["6","22","6","여호수아가 그들을 축복하고 보내니 그들이 자기들의 천막으로 돌아갔다.","그들은 여호수아가 빌어주는 복을 받고 그의 배웅을 받으며 자기들의 천막으로 돌아갔다.","여호수아가 그들에게 축복하여 보내매 그들이 자기 장막으로 갔더라","여호수아가 그들에게 축복하여 보내매 그들이 자기 장막으로 갔더라","여호수아는 이렇게 당부하고 나서 그들에게 복을 빌어 주고 길을 떠나 보냈다. 요단강 건너 동쪽에 사는 지파 식구들은 그들이 사는 곳으로 갔다.","Joshua then blessed them and sent them away, and they went to their tents.","So Joshua blessed them, and sent them away: and they went unto their tents.","Then Joshua blessed them and sent them away, and they went to their homes.","Benedixitque eis Iosue et dimisit eos, qui reversi sunt in tabernacula sua.","ויברכם יהושע וישלחם וילכו אל אהליהם׃"],["6","22","7","므나쎄 반쪽 지파는 이미 모세에게서 바산에 있는 땅을 받았고, 나머지 반쪽 지파는 여호수아에게서 그들의 형제들과 함께 요르단 건너편 서쪽에 있는 땅을 받았다. 여호수아는 그들도 그들의 천막으로 보내면서 축복하였다.","므나쎄 반쪽 지파는 모세에게서 바산에 있는 땅을 받았고 나머지 반쪽 지파는 여호수아에게서 같은 겨레들과 함께 요르단 강 서쪽에 있는 땅을 받았다. 여호수아는 그들을 그들의 천막으로 보내면서 복을 빌어주고","므낫세 반 지파에게는 모세가 바산에서 기업을 주었고 그 남은 반 지파에게는 여호수아가 요단 이쪽 서쪽에서 그들의 형제들과 함께 기업을 준지라 여호수아가 그들을 그들의 장막으로 돌려보낼 때에 그들에게 축복하고","므낫세 반 지파에게는 모세가 바산에서 기업을 주었고 기타 반 지파에게는 여호수아가 요단 이편 서편에서 그 형제 중에서 기업을 준지라 여호수아가 그들을 그 장막으로 돌려보낼 때에 그들에게 축복하고","므낫세 반 지파에게 모세는 이미 바산에 있는 땅을 그들 몫으로 나누어 주었고, 또 나머지 반 지파에게는 여호수아가 요단강 건너 서쪽에 있는 땅을 다른 지파들과 함께 그들 몫으로 차지하게 하였다. 여호수아는 그들에게 복을 빌어 주고 떠나 보내면서 이렇게 당부하였다.","(For, to half of the tribe of Manasseh Moses had assigned land in Bashan; and to the other half Joshua had given a portion along with their allies west of the Jordan.) When Joshua sent them away to their tents and blessed them,","Now to the one half of the tribe of Manasseh Moses had given possession in Bashan: but unto the other half thereof gave Joshua among their brethren on this side Jordan westward. And when Joshua sent them away also unto their tents, then he blessed them,","(To the half-tribe of Manasseh Moses had given land in Bashan, and to the other half of the tribe Joshua gave land on the west side of the Jordan with their brothers.) When Joshua sent them home, he blessed them,","Dimidiae autem tribui Manasse possessionem Moyses dederat in Basan; et idcirco mediae, quae superfuit, dedit Iosue sortem inter ceteros fratres suos trans Iordanem ad occidentalem eius plagam. Cumque dimitteret eos in tabernacula sua et benedixisset illis,","ולחצי שבט המנשה נתן משה בבשן ולחציו נתן יהושע עם אחיהם מעבר הירדן ימה וגם כי שלחם יהושע אל אהליהם ויברכם׃"],["6","22","8","그리고 그들에게 말하였다. “많은 재산과 이 많은 가축, 은과 금과 구리와 철, 또 이토록 많은 옷을 가지고 너희 천막으로 돌아가거라. 너희 원수들에게서 빼앗은 전리품을 형제들과 함께 나누어라.”","일렀다. \"너희의 재물을 한껏 가지고 너희의 천막으로 돌아가거라. 한껏 많은 짐승떼를 이끌고 금, 은, 동, 철과 옷을 한껏 많이 가지고 가거라. 원수들에게서 빼앗은 전리품을 너희 겨레들과 나누어가지고 가거라.\"","말하여 이르되 너희는 많은 재산과 심히 많은 가축과 은과 금과 구리와 쇠와 심히 많은 의복을 가지고 너희의 장막으로 돌아가서 너희의 원수들에게서 탈취한 것을 너희의 형제와 나눌지니라 하매","일러 가로되 너희는 많은 재산과 심히 많은 가축과 은, 금, 동, 철과 심히 많은 의복을 가지고 너희의 장막으로 돌아가서 너희의 대적에게서 탈취한 것을 너희의 형제와 나눌찌니라 하매","\"원수들과 싸움하여 빼앗은 물건이 많지 않느냐? 그러니 그 전리품들을 마음껏 가져가거라. 가축 떼도 많이 끌고 가거라. 금이나 은이나 구리나 쇠도 마음껏 가져가거라. 가져다가 나누어라. 너희 지파 식구들과 함께 나누어라.\"","he said, “Now that you are returning to your own tents with great wealth, with abundant livestock, with silver, gold, bronze and iron, and with a very large supply of clothing, divide these spoils of your enemies with your allies there.”","And he spake unto them, saying, Return with much riches unto your tents, and with very much cattle, with silver, and with gold, and with brass, and with iron, and with very much raiment: divide the spoil of your enemies with your brethren.","saying, \"Return to your homes with your great wealth--with large herds of livestock, with silver, gold, bronze and iron, and a great quantity of clothing--and divide with your brothers the plunder from your enemies.\"","dixit ad eos:  “Cum multis divitiis revertimini ad sedes vestras, cum argento et auro, aere ac ferro et veste multiplici; dividite praedam hostium cum fratribus vestris “.","ויאמר אליהם לאמר בנכסים רבים שובו אל אהליכם ובמקנה רב מאד בכסף ובזהב ובנחשת ובברזל ובשלמות הרבה מאד חלקו שלל איביכם עם אחיכם׃"],["6","22","9","르우벤의 자손들과 가드의 자손들, 그리고 므나쎄 반쪽 지파는 가나안 땅에 있는 실로에서 이스라엘 자손들을 떠나, 모세를 통하여 내리신 주님의 분부에 따라 소유하게 된 자기들의 소유지 길앗 땅으로 돌아갔다.","르우벤 후손과 가드 후손과 므나쎄 지파 절반은 가나안 땅 실로에서 이스라엘 백성과 헤어져 모세가 일러준 야훼의 분부를 따라 차지한 그들의 소유지인 길르앗으로 돌아갔다.","르우벤 자손과 갓 자손과 므낫세 반 지파가 가나안 땅 실로에서 이스라엘 자손을 떠나 여호와께서 모세에게 명령하신 대로 받은 땅 곧 그들의 소유지 길르앗으로 가니라","르우벤 자손과 갓 자손과 므낫세 반 지파가 가나안 땅 실로에서 이스라엘 자손을 떠나 여호와께서 모세로 명하신대로 얻은 땅 곧 그 소유지 길르앗으로 가니라","그래서 르우벤 지파와 갓 지파와 므낫세 반 지파 사람들은 가나안 땅에 있는 실로에서 이스라엘 식구들과 헤어져 길르앗 땅으로 되돌아왔다. 길르앗 땅은 여호와께서 모세를 통하여 몸소 그들이 대를 물려 차지하게 하라고 말씀하셨던 곳이다.","So the Reubenites, the Gadites, and the half-tribe of Manasseh left the other Israelites at Shiloh in the land of Canaan and returned to the land of Gilead, their own land, which they had received according to the LORD’s command through Moses.","And the children of Reuben and the children of Gad and the half tribe of Manasseh returned, and departed from the children of Israel out of Shiloh, which is in the land of Canaan, to go unto the country of Gilead, to the land of their possession, whereof they were possessed, according to the word of the LORD by the hand of Moses.","So the Reubenites, the Gadites and the half-tribe of Manasseh left the Israelites at Shiloh in Canaan to return to Gilead, their own land, which they had acquired in accordance with the command of the LORD through Moses.","Reversique sunt et abierunt filii Ruben et filii Gad et dimidia tribus Manasse a filiis Israel de Silo, quae sita est in Chanaan, ut intrarent Galaad terram possessionis suae, quam obtinuerant iuxta imperium Domini in manu Moysi.","וישבו וילכו בני ראובן ובני גד וחצי שבט המנשה מאת בני ישראל משלה אשר בארץ כנען ללכת אל ארץ הגלעד אל ארץ אחזתם אשר נאחזו בה על פי יהוה ביד משה׃"],["6","22","10","가나안 땅에 있는 요르단의 글릴롯에 다다른 르우벤의 자손들과 가드의 자손들, 그리고 므나쎄 반쪽 지파는 그곳 요르단 강 가에 보기에도 커다란 제단을 쌓았다.","그들은 가나안 땅에 있는 요르단 지대에 이르렀다. 거기 요르단 강 가에다 르우벤 후손과 가드 후손과 므나쎄 반쪽 지파는 보기에도 어마어마한 제단을 쌓았다.","르우벤 자손과 갓 자손과 므낫세 반 지파가 가나안 땅 요단 언덕 가에 이르자 거기서 요단 가에 제단을 쌓았는데 보기에 큰 제단이었더라","르우벤 자손과 므낫세 반 지파가 가나안 땅 요단 언덕 가에 이르자 거기서 요단 가에 단을 쌓았는데 볼만한 큰 단이었더라","르우벤 지파와 갓 지파와 므낫세 반 지파 사람들은 길을 떠나 가나안 땅 요단강 언덕에 있는 글릴롯에 다다르자 그곳 강가에 엄청나게 큰 제단을 쌓아 올렸다.","When the Reubenites, the Gadites, and the half-tribe of Manasseh came to the region of the Jordan in the land of Canaan, they built an altar there at the Jordan, an impressively large altar.","And when they came unto the borders of Jordan, that are in the land of Canaan, the children of Reuben and the children of Gad and the half tribe of Manasseh built there an altar by Jordan, a great altar to see to.","When they came to Geliloth near the Jordan in the land of Canaan, the Reubenites, the Gadites and the half-tribe of Manasseh built an imposing altar there by the Jordan.","Cumque venissent ad circulos Iordanis in terra Chanaan, aedificaverunt iuxta Iordanem altare ingens aspectu.","ויבאו אל גלילות הירדן אשר בארץ כנען ויבנו בני ראובן ובני גד וחצי שבט המנשה שם מזבח על הירדן מזבח גדול למראה׃"],["6","22","11","그리하여 이스라엘 자손들은, “보라, 르우벤의 자손들과 가드의 자손들, 그리고 므나쎄 반쪽 지파가 가나안 땅 경계선, 요르단의 글릴롯, 곧 이스라엘 자손들 쪽에 제단을 쌓았다.” 하는 말을 들었다.","르우벤 후손과 가드 후손과 므나쎄 반쪽 지파가 가나안 땅 맞은편 요르단 지대, 이스라엘 백성이 있는 곳의 건너편에 제단을 쌓았다는 말이 이스라엘 백성에게 전하여졌다.","이스라엘 자손이 들은즉 이르기를 르우벤 자손과 갓 자손과 므낫세 반 지파가 가나안 땅의 맨 앞쪽 요단 언덕 가 이스라엘 자손에게 속한 쪽에 제단을 쌓았다 하는지라","이스라엘 자손이 들은즉 이르기를 르우벤 자손과 갓 자손과 므낫세 반지파가 가나안 땅의 맨 앞편 요단 언덕 가 이스라엘 자손에게 속한 편에 단을 쌓았다 하는지라","그러자 이스라엘 사람들에게 \"르우벤 지파와 갓 지파와 므낫세 반 지파 사람들이 우리들에게 배당된 가나안 땅 요단강 언덕에 있는 글릴롯에, 우리에게 배당된 땅 입구에 제단을 쌓아 올렸다는구려\" 하는 소문이 들려 왔다.","The other Israelites heard the report: “The Reubenites, the Gadites, and the half-tribe of Manasseh have built an altar” in the region of the Jordan facing the land of Canaan, across from the Israelites.","And the children of Israel heard say, Behold, the children of Reuben and the children of Gad and the half tribe of Manasseh have built an altar over against the land of Canaan, in the borders of Jordan, at the passage of the children of Israel.","And when the Israelites heard that they had built the altar on the border of Canaan at Geliloth near the Jordan on the Israelite side,","Cum audissent filii Israel aedificasse filios Ruben et Gad et dimidiam tribum Manasse altare e regione terrae Chanaan ad Iordanis circulos ex adverso filiorum Israel,","וישמעו בני ישראל לאמר הנה בנו בני ראובן ובני גד וחצי שבט המנשה את המזבח אל מול ארץ כנען אל גלילות הירדן אל עבר בני ישראל׃"],["6","22","12","이스라엘 자손들은 이 말을 듣고, 온 공동체가 그들과 싸우러 올라가려고 실로에 모였다.","그래서 이스라엘 백성 온 회중은 그들을 치러 올라가려고 실로에 모였다.","이스라엘 자손이 이를 듣자 곧 이스라엘 자손의 온 회중이 실로에 모여서 그들과 싸우러 가려 하니라","이스라엘 자손이 이를 듣자 곧 이스라엘 자손의 온 회중이 실로에 모여서 그들과 싸우러 가려하니라","이스라엘 사람들이 이 소문을 듣고는 온 공동체를 실로로 모이라고 하였다 강 건너 동쪽에 사는 지파 사람들과 싸움을 벌이려는 속셈이었다.","When the Israelites heard this, they assembled at Shiloh, as the entire Israelite community to take military action against them.","And when the children of Israel heard of it, the whole congregation of the children of Israel gathered themselves together at Shiloh, to go up to war against them.","the whole assembly of Israel gathered at Shiloh to go to war against them.","convenerunt omnes in Silo, ut ascenderent et dimicarent contra eos.","וישמעו בני ישראל ויקהלו כל עדת בני ישראל שלה לעלות עליהם לצבא׃"],["6","22","13","이스라엘 자손들은 길앗 땅으로 르우벤의 자손들과 가드의 자손들, 그리고 므나쎄 반쪽 지파에게 엘아자르 사제의 아들 피느하스를 보냈다.","이스라엘 백성은 엘르아잘의 아들 비느하스 사제를 길르앗으로 파송하여 르우벤 후손과 가드 후손과 므나쎄 반쪽 지파를 만나게 하였다.","이스라엘 자손이 제사장 엘르아살의 아들 비느하스를 길르앗 땅으로 보내어 르우벤 자손과 갓 자손과 므낫세 반 지파를 보게 하되","이스라엘 자손이 제사장 엘르아살의 아들 비느하스를 길르앗 땅으로 보내어 르우벤 자손과 갓 자손과 므낫세 반 지파를 보게 하되","이스라엘 사람들은 엘르아살 제사장의 아들 비느하스를 르우벤 지파와 갓 지파와 므낫세 반 지파 사람들이 사는 길르앗 땅으로 보냈다.","The Israelites sent Phinehas, son of Eleazar the priest, to the Reubenites, the Gadites, and the half-tribe of Manasseh in the land of Gilead,","And the children of Israel sent unto the children of Reuben, and to the children of Gad, and to the half tribe of Manasseh, into the land of Gilead, Phinehas the son of Eleazar the priest,","So the Israelites sent Phinehas son of Eleazar, the priest, to the land of Gilead--to Reuben, Gad and the half-tribe of Manasseh.","Et interim miserunt ad illos in terram Galaad Phinees filium Eleazari sacerdotem","וישלחו בני ישראל אל בני ראובן ואל בני גד ואל חצי שבט מנשה אל ארץ הגלעד את פינחס בן אלעזר הכהן׃"],["6","22","14","이스라엘 모든 지파에서 집안마다 수장 한 사람씩, 열 명의 수장이 그와 함께 갔다. 그들은 저마다 이스라엘 부족의 집안을 대표하는 우두머리였다.","이스라엘 각 지파의 가문에서 한 사람씩 선출된 대표 열 명이 동행하였다. 그들은 모두 각 가문의 어른으로서 이스라엘 군단 사령관들이었다.","이스라엘 각 지파에서 한 지도자씩 열 지도자들을 그와 함께 하게 하니 그들은 각기 그들의 조상들의 가문의 수령으로서 이스라엘 중에서 천부장들이라","이스라엘 각 지파에서 한 방백씩 열 방백을 그와 함께 하게 하니 그들은 각기 이스라엘 천만인 중 족속의 두령이라","비느하스와 함께 간 사람들은 10명의 군지휘관들이었다. 이들 지휘관들은 이스라엘 각 지파의 우두머리들이었다. 대대로 내려오는 각 지파 집안의 어른들이 군지휘관을 맡고 있었다. 이스라엘 각 군부대 단위의 지휘관을 맡고 있는 이들은 비느하스와 함께","and with him ten leaders, one from each tribe of Israel, each one the head of an ancestral house among the clans of Israel.","And with him ten princes, of each chief house a prince throughout all the tribes of Israel; and each one was an head of the house of their fathers among the thousands of Israel.","With him they sent ten of the chief men, one for each of the tribes of Israel, each the head of a family division among the Israelite clans.","et decem principes cum eo, singulos de tribubus, unusquisque erat caput familiae in cognationibus Israel.","ועשרה נשאים עמו נשיא אחד נשיא אחד לבית אב לכל מטות ישראל ואיש ראש בית אבותם המה לאלפי ישראל׃"],["6","22","15","그들은 길앗 땅으로 르우벤의 자손들과 가드의 자손들, 그리고 므나쎄 반쪽 지파에게 가서 말하였다.","그들은 길르앗 지방으로 가서 르우벤 후손과 가드 후손과 므나쎄 반쪽 지파를 만나 말하였다.","그들이 길르앗 땅에 이르러 르우벤 자손과 갓 자손과 므낫세 반 지파에게 나아가서 그들에게 말하여 이르되","그들이 길르앗 땅에 이르러 르우벤 자손과 갓 자손과 므낫세 반 지파에게 나아가서 그들에게 말하여 가로되","르우벤 지파와 갓 지파와 므낫세 반 지파 사람들을 길르앗 땅으로 찾아가 말을 꺼냈다.","When these came to the Reubenites, the Gadites, and the half-tribe of Manasseh in the land of Gilead, they said to them:","And they came unto the children of Reuben, and to the children of Gad, and to the half tribe of Manasseh, unto the land of Gilead, and they spake with them, saying,","When they went to Gilead--to Reuben, Gad and the half-tribe of Manasseh--they said to them:","Qui venerunt ad filios Ruben et Gad et dimidiam tribum Manasse in terram Galaad dixeruntque ad eos:","ויבאו אל בני ראובן ואל בני גד ואל חצי שבט מנשה אל ארץ הגלעד וידברו אתם לאמר׃"],["6","22","16","“주님의 온 공동체가 이렇게 말하였소. ‘그대들이 이스라엘의 하느님을 배신하여, 오늘 이처럼 주님을 따르지 않고 돌아서서 제단을 쌓아 주님께 거역하다니, 어찌 이런 배신을 할 수 있단 말이오?","\"이는 야훼의 온 회중이 보내는 말이오. '그대들이 이스라엘의 하느님을 배신하고 오늘에 와서 야훼께 등을 돌리다니, 그리하여 야훼께 반역하여 제단을 쌓다니, 어찌 이런 배신 행위를 할 수 있단 말이오?","여호와의 온 회중이 말하기를 너희가 어찌하여 이스라엘 하나님께 범죄하여 오늘 여호와를 따르는 데서 돌아서서 너희를 위하여 제단을 쌓아 너희가 오늘 여호와께 거역하고자 하느냐","여호와의 온 회중이 말하기를 너희가 어찌하여 이스라엘 하나님께 범죄하여 오늘날 여호와를 좇는데서 떠나서 자기를 위하여 단을 쌓아 여호와를 거역하고자 하느냐","\"여호와를 섬기고 받들며 사는 온 공동체 식구들이 이렇게 말하고 있소! 당신들은 어째서 이다지도 여호와를 거역하고 있단 말이오? 이스라엘이 모두 받들어 모시는 여호와 하나님을 그렇게도 우습게 여기고 함부로 행동할 수 있소? 여호와를 그렇게도 쉽게 저버릴 수 있소? 당신들만 좋으면 그만이란 말이오? 제단을 그렇게 마음대로 쌓아올리다니 말이오.","“Thus says the whole community of the LORD: What act of treachery is this you have committed against the God of Israel? This day you have turned from following the LORD; by building an altar of your own you have rebelled against the LORD this day.","Thus saith the whole congregation of the LORD, What trespass is this that ye have committed against the God of Israel, to turn away this day from following the LORD, in that ye have builded you an altar, that ye might rebel this day against the LORD?","\"The whole assembly of the LORD says: 'How could you break faith with the God of Israel like this? How could you turn away from the LORD and build yourselves an altar in rebellion against him now?","Haec mandat omnis coetus Domini: Quae est ista transgressio? Cur reliquistis Dominum, Deum Israel, aedificantes vobis altare sacrilegum et a cultu illius recedentes?","כה אמרו כל עדת יהוה מה המעל הזה אשר מעלתם באלהי ישראל לשוב היום מאחרי יהוה בבנותכם לכם מזבח למרדכם היום ביהוה׃"],["6","22","17","프오르에서 지은 죄만으로는 부족하단 말이오? 그 때문에 주님의 공동체에 재난이 내렸고, 우리는 오늘날까지 그 죄를 씻지 못하고 있지 않소?","브올에서 지은 죄만으로는 아직 부족하단 말이오? 그 때문에 야훼의 회중에 벌이 내렸고 이날까지도 그 죄를 벗지 못하고 있는 것이 아니오?","브올의 죄악으로 말미암아 여호와의 회중에 재앙이 내렸으나 오늘까지 우리가 그 죄에서 정결함을 받지 못하였거늘 그 죄악이 우리에게 부족하여서","브올의 죄악으로 인하여 여호와의 회중에 재앙이 내렸으나 오늘날까지 우리가 그 죄에서 정결함을 얻지 못하였거늘 그 죄악이 우리에게 부족하여서","브올에서 우리가 어떤 잘못을 저질렀소? 벌써 잊었단 말이오? 그래, 그리도 잘못을 저지르고 나서 또 무엇이 부족하여 그런 짓을 서슴없이 해치우고 있소? 그때도 우리 허물 때문에 여호와께서 염병을 우리에게 내리지 않으셨소. 우리가 그 허물을 다 벗어 버리기나 하였으면 이런 말을 하지도 않겠소.","Is the iniquity of Peor not enough, by which we made ourselves impure, even to this day, and a plague came upon the community of the LORD?","Is the iniquity of Peor too little for us, from which we are not cleansed until this day, although there was a plague in the congregation of the LORD,","Was not the sin of Peor enough for us? Up to this very day we have not cleansed ourselves from that sin, even though a plague fell on the community of the LORD!","An parum vobis est peccatum Phegor, et usque in praesentem diem macula huius sceleris in nobis permanet, et facta est plaga in coetu Domini?","המעט לנו את עון פעור אשר לא הטהרנו ממנו עד היום הזה ויהי הנגף בעדת יהוה׃"],["6","22","18","그런데 그대들은 오늘 주님을 따르지 않고 돌아섰소. 그대들이 오늘 주님께 거역하였으니, 내일은 주님께서 온 이스라엘 공동체에 진노하실 것이오.","그대들은 오늘에 와서 야훼께 등을 돌렸소. 그대들이 오늘 야훼께 반역하였으니 내일이라도 온 이스라엘 회중에게 그의 분노가 내릴 것이오.","오늘 너희가 돌이켜 여호와를 따르지 아니하려고 하느냐 너희가 오늘 여호와를 배역하면 내일은 그가 이스라엘 온 회중에게 진노하시리라","오늘날 너희가 돌이켜 여호와를 좇지 않고자 하느냐 너희가 오늘날 여호와를 배역하면 내일은 그가 이스라엘 온 회중에게 진노하시리라","아니, 당신들이 여호와께 지금 등돌리겠다는 말이오? 아예 그분을 뵙지 않겠다는 뜻이오? 당신들이 지금이라도 그분의 뜻을 따르지 않는다면 내일 당장 여호와께서 온 이스라엘 공동체 식구들에게 분통을 터뜨리실 것이오.","If today you turn away from following the LORD, and rebel against the LORD, tomorrow he will be angry with the whole community of Israel!","But that ye must turn away this day from following the LORD? and it will be, seeing ye rebel to day against the LORD, that to morrow he will be wroth with the whole congregation of Israel.","And are you now turning away from the LORD? \"'If you rebel against the LORD today, tomorrow he will be angry with the whole community of Israel.","Et vos hodie reliquistis Dominum, et factum est ut rebellaretis contra Dominum; et cras in universum coetum Israel eius ira desaeviet.","ואתם תשבו היום מאחרי יהוה והיה אתם תמרדו היום ביהוה ומחר אל כל עדת ישראל יקצף׃"]]