[["29","39","1","그때에 발아단의 아들인 바빌론 임금 므로닥 발아단이, 히즈키야가 병들었다가 나았다는 소식을 듣고 그에게 편지와 예물을 보냈다.","그 무렵, 바빌론의 왕 발라단의 아들 므로닥발라단이 히즈키야가 병들었다가 나았다는 소식을 듣고 사절단을 보내어 편지와 예물을 전하였다.","그 때에 발라단의 아들 바벨론 왕 므로닥발라단이 히스기야가 병 들었다가 나았다 함을 듣고 히스기야에게 글과 예물을 보낸지라","그 때에 발라단의 아들 바벨론 왕 므로닥발라단이 히스기야가 병 들었다가 나았다 함을 듣고 글과 예물을 보낸지라","그 당시 바벨론의 왕이며 발라단의 아들인 므로닥발라단이 히스기야가 중병에 걸렸다가 나았다는 소식을 듣고 축하하는 편지와 많은 선물을 보냈다.","At that time Merodach-baladan, son of Baladan, king of Babylon, sent letters and gifts to Hezekiah, when he heard that he had been sick and had recovered.","At that time Merodachbaladan, the son of Baladan, king of Babylon, sent letters and a present to Hezekiah: for he had heard that he had been sick, and was recovered.","At that time Merodach-Baladan son of Baladan king of Babylon sent Hezekiah letters and a gift, because he had heard of his illness and recovery.","In tempore illo misit Merodachbaladan filius Baladan rex Babylonis litteras et munera ad Ezechiam; audierat enim quod aegrotasset et convaluisset.","בעת ההיא שלח מרדך בלאדן בן בלאדן מלך בבל ספרים ומנחה אל חזקיהו וישמע כי חלה ויחזק׃"],["29","39","2","히즈키야는 그들을 반가이 맞아들이고, 그들에게 자기의 보물 창고와 은과 금, 향료와 고급 기름, 병기고 전체와 창고 안에 있는 것을 다 보여 주었다. 히즈키야가 자기 궁궐과 나라 안에 있는 것 가운데 그들에게 보여 주지 않은 것은 하나도 없었다.","히즈키야는 그 사절단을 환대하고 자기의 보물 창고 안에 있는 금, 은, 향료, 향유, 병기, 기타 모든 귀중품을 보여주었다. 히즈키야는 그의 왕궁과 나라 안에 있는 모든 것을 남김없이 보여주었다.","히스기야가 사자들로 말미암아 기뻐하여 그들에게 보물 창고 곧 은금과 향료와 보배로운 기름과 모든 무기고에 있는 것을 다 보여 주었으니 히스기야가 궁중의 소유와 전 국내의 소유를 보이지 아니한 것이 없는지라","히스기야가 사자를 인하여 기뻐하여 그에게 궁중 1)보물 곧 은금과 향료와 보배로운 기름과 모든 2)무기고와 보물고에 있는 것을 다 보였으니 궁중의 소유와 전 국내의 소유를 보이지 아니한 것이 없은지라 향품과보옥고","히스기야가 바벨론의 사절단을 기쁘게 맞이하고 왕궁과 나라 안에 있는 금과 은과 향료와 값비싼 온갖 기름과 무기와 군대와 곡식 창고 등 모든 것을 그들에게 보여주었다. 그가 온 나라에서 그들에게 보여주지 않은 것은 하나도 없었다.","Hezekiah was pleased at their coming, and then showed the messengers his treasury, the silver and gold, the spices and perfumed oil, his whole armory, and everything in his storerooms; there was nothing in his house or in all his realm that Hezekiah did not show them.","And Hezekiah was glad of them, and shewed them the house of his precious things, the silver, and the gold, and the spices, and the precious ointment, and all the house of his armour, and all that was found in his treasures: there was nothing in his house, nor in all his dominion, that Hezekiah shewed them not.","Hezekiah received the envoys gladly and showed them what was in his storehouses--the silver, the gold, the spices, the fine oil, his entire armory and everything found among his treasures. There was nothing in his palace or in all his kingdom that Hezekiah did not show them.","Laetatus est autem super eis Ezechias et ostendit eis cellam thesauri sui et argentum et aurum et aromata et oleum optimum et omnes apothecas supellectilis suae et universa, quae inventa sunt in thesauris eius. Nihil fuit, quod non ostenderet eis Ezechias in domo sua et in omni potestate sua.","וישמח עליהם חזקיהו ויראם את בית נכתה את הכסף ואת הזהב ואת הבשמים ואת השמן הטוב ואת כל בית כליו ואת כל אשר נמצא באצרתיו לא היה דבר אשר לא הראם חזקיהו בביתו ובכל ממשלתו׃"],["29","39","3","그때에 이사야 예언자가 히즈키야 임금에게 와서 물었다. “이 사람들이 무슨 말을 하였습니까? 어디에서 왔습니까?” 히즈키야가 대답하였다. “먼 나라에서 나를 찾아온 사람들이오. 바빌론에서 왔소.”","예언자 이사야가 히즈키야 왕에게 와서 물었다. \"이 사람들이 무슨 말을 했으며 어디에서 온 사람들입니까?\" 히즈키야가 대답하였다. \"그들은 먼 나라 바빌론에서 온 사람들이오.\"","이에 선지자 이사야가 히스기야 왕에게 나아와 묻되 그 사람들이 무슨 말을 하였으며 어디서 왕에게 왔나이까 하니 히스기야가 이르되 그들이 원방 곧 바벨론에서 내게 왔나이다 하니라","이에 선지자 이사야가 히스기야왕에게 나아와 묻되 그 사람들이 무슨 말을 하였으며 어디서 왕에게 왔나이까 히스기야가 가로되 그들이 원방 곧 바벨론에서 내게 왔나이다","이때에 이사야 예언자가 히스기야왕에게 와서 물었다. \"이 사람들이 무슨 일로 왔습니까? 무슨 말을 하던가요? 그들이 어디서 왔습니까?\" 왕이 대답하였다. \"그들은 멀리 바벨론에서 온 사람들이오\"","Then Isaiah the prophet came to King Hezekiah and asked him, “What did these men say to you? Where did they come from?” Hezekiah replied, “They came to me from a distant land, from Babylon.”","Then came Isaiah the prophet unto king Hezekiah, and said unto him, What said these men? and from whence came they unto thee? And Hezekiah said, They are come from a far country unto me, even from Babylon.","Then Isaiah the prophet went to King Hezekiah and asked, \"What did those men say, and where did they come from?\" \"From a distant land,\" Hezekiah replied. \"They came to me from Babylon.\"","Introivit autem Isaias propheta ad Ezechiam regem et dixit ei:  “Quid dixerunt viri isti et unde venerunt ad te? “. Et dixit Ezechias:  “De terra longinqua venerunt ad me, de Babylone “.","ויבא ישעיהו הנביא אל המלך חזקיהו ויאמר אליו מה אמרו האנשים האלה ומאין יבאו אליך ויאמר חזקיהו מארץ רחוקה באו אלי מבבל׃"],["29","39","4","이사야가 다시 물었다. “그들이 임금님의 궁궐에서 무엇을 보았습니까?” 히즈키야가 대답하였다. “내 궁궐 안에 있는 것을 다 보았소. 내 창고 안에 있는 것 가운데 내가 그들에게 보여 주지 않은 것은 하나도 없소.”","그러자 이사야가 다시 물었다. \"그들이 왕의 궁전에서 무엇을 보았습니까?\" 히즈키야가 대답하였다. \"그들은 나의 궁 안에 있는 모든 것을 다 보았소. 또 나의 보물 창고 안에 있는 귀중품들을 그들은 모두 보았소.\"","이사야가 이르되 그들이 왕의 궁전에서 무엇을 보았나이까 하니 히스기야가 대답하되 그들이 내 궁전에 있는 것을 다 보았나이다 내 창고에 있는 것으로 보이지 아니한 보물이 하나도 없나이다 하니라","이사야가 가로되 그들이 왕의 궁전에서 무엇을 보았나이까 히스기야가 대답하되 그들이 내 궁전에 있는 것을 다 보았나이다 내 보물은 보이지 아니한 것이 하나도 없나이다","\"그들이 왕궁에서 무엇을 보았습니까?\" 하고 이사야가 묻자 \"내가 궁중의 모든 보물과 이 나라의 모든 창고를 그들에게 보여주었소\"하고 왕이 대답하였다.","He asked, “What did they see in your house?” Hezekiah answered, “They saw everything in my house. There is nothing in my storerooms that I did not show them.”","Then said he, What have they seen in thine house? And Hezekiah answered, All that is in mine house have they seen: there is nothing among my treasures that I have not shewed them.","The prophet asked, \"What did they see in your palace?\" \"They saw everything in my palace,\" Hezekiah said. \"There is nothing among my treasures that I did not show them.\"","Et dixit:  “Quid viderunt in domo tua? “. Et dixit Ezechias:  “Omnia, quae in domo mea sunt, viderunt; non fuit res, quam non ostenderim eis in thesauris meis “.","ויאמר מה ראו בביתך ויאמר חזקיהו את כל אשר בביתי ראו לא היה דבר אשר לא הראיתים באוצרתי׃"],["29","39","5","그러자 이사야가 히즈키야에게 말하였다. “만군의 주님의 말씀을 들으십시오.","이 말을 듣고 이사야가 히즈키야에게 말하였다. \"만군의 야훼께서 하시는 말씀을 들으십시오.","이사야가 히스기야에게 이르되 왕은 만군의 여호와의 말씀을 들으소서","이사야가 히스기야에게 이르되 왕은 만군의 여호와의 말씀을 들으소서","그러자 이사야가 예언의 말씀을 전하였다. \"온 세계의 주인이신 여호와께서 왕에게 하시는 말씀을 들으십시오.","Then Isaiah said to Hezekiah, “Hear the word of the LORD of hosts:","Then said Isaiah to Hezekiah, Hear the word of the LORD of hosts:","Then Isaiah said to Hezekiah, \"Hear the word of the LORD Almighty:","Et dixit Isaias ad Ezechiam:  “Audi verbum Domini exercituum:","ויאמר ישעיהו אל חזקיהו שמע דבר יהוה צבאות׃"],["29","39","6","‘보라, 네 궁궐 안에 있는 모든 것과 네 조상들이 오늘날까지 쌓아 온 것들이 바빌론으로 옮겨져, 하나도 남지 않을 날이 다가오고 있다. 주님이 말한다.","야훼께서 이렇게 말씀하십니다. '네 왕궁에 있는 모든 것, 네 선조들이 오늘날까지 고이 간직하였던 모든 것이 바빌론으로 옮겨져 하나도 남지 않게 될 그 날이 다가오고 있다.","보라 날이 이르리니 네 집에 있는 모든 소유와 네 조상들이 오늘까지 쌓아 둔 것이 모두 바벨론으로 옮긴 바 되고 남을 것이 없으리라 여호와의 말이니라","보라 날이 이르리니 네 집에 있는 모든 소유와 네 열조가 오늘까지 쌓아둔 것이 모두 바벨론으로 옮긴바 되고 남을 것이 없으리라 여호와의 말이니라","\"선왕들이 오늘날까지 쌓아 놓은 이 궁중의 모든 보화들이 바벨론으로 실려 가고 그 가운데에서 하나도 남지 않을 날이 올 것이다.","The time is coming when all that is in your house, everything that your ancestors have stored up until this day, shall be carried off to Babylon; nothing shall be left, says the LORD.","Behold, the days come, that all that is in thine house, and that which thy fathers have laid up in store until this day, shall be carried to Babylon: nothing shall be left, saith the LORD.","The time will surely come when everything in your palace, and all that your fathers have stored up until this day, will be carried off to Babylon. Nothing will be left, says the LORD.","Ecce dies venient, et auferentur omnia, quae in domo tua sunt, et quae thesaurizaverunt patres tui usque ad diem hanc, in Babylonem; non relinquetur quidquam, dicit Dominus.","הנה ימים באים ונשא כל אשר בביתך ואשר אצרו אבתיך עד היום הזה בבל לא יותר דבר אמר יהוה׃"],["29","39","7","너에게서 태어날 아들들 가운데 더러는 끌려가서 바빌론 왕궁의 내시가 될 것이다.’”","너에게서 태어날 너의 친아들 중 더러는 바빌론 왕궁으로 끌려가 내시가 되리라.'\"","또 네게서 태어날 자손 중에서 몇이 사로잡혀 바벨론 왕궁의 환관이 되리라 하셨나이다 하니","또 네게서 날 자손 중에서 몇이 사로잡혀 바벨론 왕궁의 환관이 되리라 하셨나이다","또 네가 낳을 아들들 가운데에서도 바벨론 왕궁으로 끌려가서 내시가 될 아들이 있을 것이다.\"","Some of your own descendants, your progeny, shall be taken and made attendants in the palace of the king of Babylon.”","And of thy sons that shall issue from thee, which thou shalt beget, shall they take away; and they shall be eunuchs in the palace of the king of Babylon.","And some of your descendants, your own flesh and blood who will be born to you, will be taken away, and they will become eunuchs in the palace of the king of Babylon.\"","Et de filiis tuis, qui exibunt de te, quos genueris, tollent, et erunt eunuchi in palatio regis Babylonis “.","ומבניך אשר יצאו ממך אשר תוליד יקחו והיו סריסים בהיכל מלך בבל׃"],["29","39","8","히즈키야가 이사야에게 말하였다. “그대가 전한 주님의 말씀은 지당하오.” 그러면서도 그는 ‘내가 살아 있는 동안은 평화와 안정이 지속되겠지.’ 하고 생각하였다.","히즈키야가 대답하였다. \"그대가 전한 야훼의 말씀은 지당하신 말씀이오.\" 그리고 자기의 목숨이 붙어 있는 동안은 평화와 안정이 계속되리라고 혼자 생각하였다.","히스기야가 이사야에게 이르되 당신이 이른 바 여호와의 말씀이 좋소이다 하고 또 이르되 내 생전에는 평안과 견고함이 있으리로다 하니라","히스기야가 이사야에게 이르되 당신의 이른바 여호와의 말씀이 좋소이다 또 가로되 나의 생전에는 평안과 견고함이 있으리로다 하니라","그러나 히스기야는 자기 생전에라도 평화와 안정을 누리게 되어서 다행이라고 생각하면서 ㄱ) \"당신이 전한 여호와의 말씀대로 되기를 바라오!\" 하고 이사야에게 대답하였다. (ㄱ. 이 예언은 BC 703년경에 선포된 것인데 BC 587년에 그대로 성취되었다)","Hezekiah replied to Isaiah, “The word of the LORD which you have spoken is good.” For he thought, “There will be peace and stability in my lifetime.”","Then said Hezekiah to Isaiah, Good is the word of the LORD which thou hast spoken. He said moreover, For there shall be peace and truth in my days.","\"The word of the LORD you have spoken is good,\" Hezekiah replied. For he thought, \"There will be peace and security in my lifetime.\"","Et dixit Ezechias ad Isaiam:  “Bonum verbum Domini, quod locutus est “. Et dixit:  “Dummodo fiat pax et securitas in diebus meis “.","ויאמר חזקיהו אל ישעיהו טוב דבר יהוה אשר דברת ויאמר כי יהיה שלום ואמת בימי׃"],["29","40","1","위로하여라, 위로하여라, 나의 백성을. ─ 너희의 하느님께서 말씀하신다. ─","\"위로하여라. 나의 백성을 위로하여라.\" 너희의 하느님께서 말씀하신다.","너희의 하나님이 이르시되 너희는 위로하라 내 백성을 위로하라","너희 하나님이 가라사대 너희는 위로하라 내 백성을 위로하라","하나님이 천상에서 회의를 여시고 종들에게 말씀하셨다. \"너희는 내 백성을 위로하고 격려하여라!","Comfort, give comfort to my people, says your God.","Comfort ye, comfort ye my people, saith your God.","Comfort, comfort my people, says your God.","Consolamini, consolamini populum meum, dicit Deus vester.","נחמו נחמו עמי יאמר אלהיכם׃"],["29","40","2","예루살렘에게 다정히 말하여라. 이제 복역 기간이 끝나고 죗값이 치러졌으며 자기의 모든 죄악에 대하여 주님 손에서 갑절의 벌을 받았다고 외쳐라.","\"예루살렘 시민에게 다정스레 일러라. 이제 복역 기간이 끝났다고, 그만하면 벌을 받을 만큼 받았다고, 야훼의 손에서 죄벌을 곱절이나 받았다고 외쳐라.\"","너희는 예루살렘의 마음에 닿도록 말하며 그것에게 외치라 그 노역의 때가 끝났고 그 죄악이 사함을 받았느니라 그의 모든 죄로 말미암아 여호와의 손에서 벌을 배나 받았느니라 할지니라 하시니라","너희는 정다이 예루살렘에 말하며 그것에게 외쳐 고하라 1)그 복역의 때가 끝났고 그 죄악의 사함을 입었느니라 그 모든 죄를 인하여 여호와의 손에서 배나 받았느니라 할찌니라 전쟁의","너희는 예루살렘에서 포로로 잡혀 온 백성들을 찾아가서 이제 안심하라고 일러주어라. 이렇게 선포하여 그들을 위로하여라. \"이제 너희는 죄값을 다 치렀다. 이제는 너희의 죄가 용서되었다. 너희가 여호와께 순종하지 않았으나 이제는 그 벌을 모두 다 받았다. 이제 모두 청산되었다. 너희는 복역기간을 다 채우고 이제 석방되었다!\"","Speak to the heart of Jerusalem, and proclaim to her that her service has ended, that her guilt is expiated, That she has received from the hand of the LORD double for all her sins.","Speak ye comfortably to Jerusalem, and cry unto her, that her warfare is accomplished, that her iniquity is pardoned: for she hath received of the LORD's hand double for all her sins.","Speak tenderly to Jerusalem, and proclaim to her that her hard service has been completed, that her sin has been paid for, that she has received from the LORD'S hand double for all her sins.","Loquimini ad cor Ierusalem et clamate ad eam, quoniam completa est militia eius, expiata est iniquitas illius; suscepit de manu Domini duplicia pro omnibus peccatis suis.","דברו על לב ירושלם וקראו אליה כי מלאה צבאה כי נרצה עונה כי לקחה מיד יהוה כפלים בכל חטאתיה׃"],["29","40","3","한 소리가 외친다. “너희는 광야에 주님의 길을 닦아라. 우리 하느님을 위하여 사막에 길을 곧게 내어라.","한 소리 있어 외친다. \"야훼께서 오신다. 사막에 길을 내어라. 우리의 하느님께서 오신다. 벌판에 큰 길을 훤히 닦아라.","외치는 자의 소리여 이르되 너희는 광야에서 여호와의 길을 예비하라 사막에서 우리 하나님의 대로를 평탄하게 하라","2)외치는 자의 소리여 가로되 너희는 광야에서 여호와의 길을 예비하라 사막에서 우리 하나님의 대로를 평탄케 하라 광야에서 외쳐 가로되 너희는 여호와의 길을 예비하며","천상의 회의에서 여호와의 종들에게 명령하는 소리도 들렸다. \"너희는 여호와께서 예루살렘의 성전으로 가실 길을 광야에 뚫어 놓아라. 거친 사막을 평평하게 다듬어서 우리 하나님이 통과하실 큰길을 닦아놓아라.","A voice proclaims: In the wilderness prepare the way of the LORD! Make straight in the wasteland a highway for our God!","The voice of him that crieth in the wilderness, Prepare ye the way of the LORD, make straight in the desert a highway for our God.","A voice of one calling: \"In the desert prepare the way for the LORD; make straight in the wilderness a highway for our God.","Vox clamantis:  “In deserto parate viam Domini, rectas facite in solitudine semitas Dei nostri.","קול קורא במדבר פנו דרך יהוה ישרו בערבה מסלה לאלהינו׃"],["29","40","4","골짜기는 모두 메워지고 산과 언덕은 모두 낮아져라. 거친 곳은 평지가 되고 험한 곳은 평야가 되어라.","모든 골짜기를 메우고, 산과 언덕을 깎아내려라. 절벽은 평지를 만들고, 비탈진 산골길은 넓혀라.","골짜기마다 돋우어지며 산마다, 언덕마다 낮아지며 고르지 아니한 곳이 평탄하게 되며 험한 곳이 평지가 될 것이요","골짜기마다 돋우어지며 산마다, 작은 산마다 낮아지며 고르지 않은 곳이 평탄케 되며 험한 곳이 평지가 될 것이요","깊은 골짜기마다 흙을 메워서 평지로 돋워 올리고 산과 언덕들을 모두 깎아 내려 낮게 만들어서 결국 높은 곳들이 평평한 곳으로 바뀌고 울퉁불퉁한 산봉우리들이 나온 것마다 드넓은 평원으로 바뀌게 하여라.","Every valley shall be lifted up, every mountain and hill made low; The rugged land shall be a plain, the rough country, a broad valley.","Every valley shall be exalted, and every mountain and hill shall be made low: and the crooked shall be made straight, and the rough places plain:","Every valley shall be raised up, every mountain and hill made low; the rough ground shall become level, the rugged places a plain.","Omnis vallis exaltetur, et omnis mons et collis humilietur; et fiant prava in directa, et aspera in plana:","כל גיא ינשא וכל הר וגבעה ישפלו והיה העקב למישור והרכסים לבקעה׃"],["29","40","5","이에 주님의 영광이 드러나리니 모든 사람이 다 함께 그것을 보리라. 주님께서 친히 이렇게 말씀하셨다.”","야훼의 영광이 나타나리니 모든 사람이 그 영화를 뵈리라. 야훼께서 친히 이렇게 약속하셨다.\"","여호와의 영광이 나타나고 모든 육체가 그것을 함께 보리라 이는 여호와의 입이 말씀하셨느니라","여호와의 영광이 나타나고 모든 육체가 그것을 함께 보리라 대저 여호와의 입이 말씀하셨느니라","그 길로 여호와께서 영광스럽게 오실 것이니 모든 인간이 그분을 바라볼 것이다. 여호와께서 직접 하시는 말씀이다.\"","Then the glory of the LORD shall be revealed, and all flesh shall see it together; for the mouth of the LORD has spoken.","And the glory of the LORD shall be revealed, and all flesh shall see it together: for the mouth of the LORD hath spoken it.","And the glory of the LORD will be revealed, and all mankind together will see it. For the mouth of the LORD has spoken.\"","et revelabitur gloria Domini, et videbit omnis caro pariter quod os Domini locutum est “.","ונגלה כבוד יהוה וראו כל בשר יחדו כי פי יהוה דבר׃"],["29","40","6","한 소리가 말한다. “외쳐라.” “무엇을 외쳐야 합니까?” 하고 내가 물었다. “모든 인간은 풀이요 그 영화는 들의 꽃과 같다.","한 소리 있어 명하신다. \"외쳐라.\" \"무엇을 외칠까요?\" 하고 나는 물었다. \"모든 인생은 한낱 풀포기, 그 영화는 들에 핀 꽃과 같다!","말하는 자의 소리여 이르되 외치라 대답하되 내가 무엇이라 외치리이까 하니 이르되 모든 육체는 풀이요 그의 모든 아름다움은 들의 꽃과 같으니","말하는 자의 소리여 가로되 외치라 대답하되 내가 무엇이라 외치리이까 가로되 모든 육체는 풀이요 그 모든 아름다움은 들의 꽃 같으니","이때에 주님의 천사가 내게 말하였다. \"너는 기서 네 백성에게 전하여라!\" \"내가 가서 뭐라고 전해야 되겠습니까?\" 하고 내가 물었다. \"가서 이렇게 전하여라. \"모든 인간은 풀포기처럼 허무하고 인간의 모든 영화와 권세도 들에 핀 꽃들과 다를 것이 없다.","A voice says, “Proclaim!” I answer, “What shall I proclaim?” “All flesh is grass, and all their loyalty like the flower of the field.","The voice said, Cry. And he said, What shall I cry? All flesh is grass, and all the goodliness thereof is as the flower of the field:","A voice says, \"Cry out.\" And I said, \"What shall I cry?\" \"All men are like grass, and all their glory is like the flowers of the field.","Vox dicentis:  “Clama! “. Et dixi:  “Quid clamabo? “. Omnis caro fenum, et omnis gloria eius quasi flos agri;","קול אמר קרא ואמר מה אקרא כל הבשר חציר וכל חסדו כציץ השדה׃"],["29","40","7","주님의 입김이 그 위로 불어오면 풀은 마르고 꽃은 시든다. 진정 이 백성은 풀에 지나지 않는다.","풀은 시들고 꽃은 진다, 스쳐가는 야훼의 입김에. 백성이란 실로 풀과 같은 존재이다.","풀은 마르고 꽃이 시듦은 여호와의 기운이 그 위에 붊이라 이 백성은 실로 풀이로다","풀은 마르고 꽃은 시듦은 여호와의 기운이 그 위에 붊이라 이 백성은 실로 풀이로다","여호와의 뜨거운 입김이 한번 스쳐 가면 풀이 마르고 꽃이 시든다. 풀과 꽃에는 주님의 권능에 대항할 힘이 없기 때문이다. 과연 이스라엘 백성은 한포기의 풀이다.","The grass withers, the flower wilts, when the breath of the LORD blows upon it.” “Yes, the people is grass!","The grass withereth, the flower fadeth: because the spirit of the LORD bloweth upon it: surely the people is grass.","The grass withers and the flowers fall, because the breath of the LORD blows on them. Surely the people are grass.","exsiccatum est fenum, et cecidit flos, quia spiritus Domini sufflavit in eo. Vere fenum est populus.","יבש חציר נבל ציץ כי רוח יהוה נשבה בו אכן חציר העם׃"],["29","40","8","풀은 마르고 꽃은 시들지만 우리 하느님의 말씀은 영원히 서 있으리라.”","풀은 시들고 꽃은 지지만 우리 하느님의 말씀은 영원히 서 있으리라.\"","풀은 마르고 꽃은 시드나 우리 하나님의 말씀은 영원히 서리라 하라","풀은 마르고 꽃은 시드나 우리 하나님의 말씀은 영영히 서리라 하라","풀은 마르고 꽃은 시들지만 우리 하나님의 말씀은 언제까지나 효력을 발생하고 그대로 이루어진다.\"","The grass withers, the flower wilts, but the word of our God stands forever.”","The grass withereth, the flower fadeth: but the word of our God shall stand for ever.","The grass withers and the flowers fall, but the word of our God stands forever.\"","Exsiccatum est fenum, et cecidit flos; verbum autem Dei nostri manet in aeternum.","יבש חציר נבל ציץ ודבר אלהינו יקום לעולם׃"],["29","40","9","기쁜 소식을 전하는 시온아 높은 산으로 올라가라. 기쁜 소식을 전하는 예루살렘아 너의 목소리를 한껏 높여라. 두려워 말고 소리를 높여라. 유다의 성읍들에게 “너희의 하느님께서 여기에 계시다.” 하고 말하여라.","너, 시온아. 높은 산에 올라 기쁜 소식을 전하여라. 너, 예루살렘아. 힘껏 외쳐 기쁜 소식을 전하여라. 두려워하지 말고 소리를 질러라. 유다의 모든 도시에 알려라. 너희의 하느님께서 저기 오신다.","아름다운 소식을 시온에 전하는 자여 너는 높은 산에 오르라 아름다운 소식을 예루살렘에 전하는 자여 너는 힘써 소리를 높이라 두려워하지 말고 소리를 높여 유다의 성읍들에게 이르기를 너희의 하나님을 보라 하라","아름다운 소식을 3)시온에 전하는 자여 너는 높은 산에 오르라 아름다운 소식을 4)예루살렘에 전하는 자여 너는 힘써 소리를 높이라 두려워 말고 소리를 높여 유다의 성읍들에 이르기를 너희 하나님을 보라 하라 전하는 시온이여 너는전하는 예루살렘이여 너는","예언자가 기쁜 소식을 전하였다. \"시온성에 기쁜 소식을 전하는 사람은 누구나 높은 산으로 올라가서 승리의 소식을 전하여라! 고향에서든지 바벨론에서든지 조금도 두려워하지 말고 예루살렘과 유다의 모든 성읍을 향하여 이 기쁜 소식을 전하여라. \"보라, 너희의 하나님 여호와께서 다시 예루살렘으로 오신다.","Go up onto a high mountain, Zion, herald of good news! Cry out at the top of your voice, Jerusalem, herald of good news! Cry out, do not fear! Say to the cities of Judah: Here is your God!","O Zion, that bringest good tidings, get thee up into the high mountain; O Jerusalem, that bringest good tidings, lift up thy voice with strength; lift it up, be not afraid; say unto the cities of Judah, Behold your God!","You who bring good tidings to Zion, go up on a high mountain. You who bring good tidings to Jerusalem, lift up your voice with a shout, lift it up, do not be afraid; say to the towns of Judah, \"Here is your God!\"","Super montem excelsum ascende, tu, quae evangelizas Sion; exalta in fortitudine vocem tuam, quae evangelizas Ierusalem; exalta, noli timere; dic civitatibus Iudae:  “Ecce Deus vester,","על הר גבה עלי לך מבשרת ציון הרימי בכח קולך מבשרת ירושלם הרימי אל תיראי אמרי לערי יהודה הנה אלהיכם׃"],["29","40","10","보라, 주 하느님께서 권능을 떨치며 오신다. 당신의 팔로 왕권을 행사하신다. 보라, 그분의 상급이 그분과 함께 오고 그분의 보상이 그분 앞에 서서 온다.","주 야훼께서 저기 권능을 떨치시며 오신다. 팔을 휘둘러 정복하시고 승리하신 보람으로 찾은 백성을 데리고  오신다. 수고하신 값으로 얻은 백성을 앞세우고 오신다.","보라 주 여호와께서 장차 강한 자로 임하실 것이요 친히 그의 팔로 다스리실 것이라 보라 상급이 그에게 있고 보응이 그의 앞에 있으며","보라 주 여호와께서 장차 강한 자로 임하실 것이요 친히 그 팔로 다스리실 것이라 보라 상급이 그에게 있고 보응이 그 앞에 있으며","보라, 주 여호와께서 승리의 깃발을 휘날리며 입성하시고 그 팔로 직접 다스리신다. 보라. 주께서 원수들의 손에서 자기 백성을 해방시켜 데리고 오신다. 원수를 갚고 자기 백성을 되찾아 앞세워 오신다.","Here comes with power the Lord GOD, who rules by his strong arm; Here is his reward with him, his recompense before him.","Behold, the Lord GOD will come with strong hand, and his arm shall rule for him: behold, his reward is with him, and his work before him.","See, the Sovereign LORD comes with power, and his arm rules for him. See, his reward is with him, and his recompense accompanies him.","ecce Dominus Deus in virtute venit, et brachium eius dominatur: ecce merces eius cum eo, et praemium illius coram illo.","הנה אדני יהוה בחזק יבוא וזרעו משלה לו הנה שכרו אתו ופעלתו לפניו׃"],["29","40","11","그분께서는 목자처럼 당신의 가축들을 먹이시고 새끼 양들을 팔로 모아 품에 안으시며 젖 먹이는 어미 양들을 조심스럽게 이끄신다.","목자처럼 당신의 양떼에게 풀을 뜯기시며, 새끼 양들을 두 팔로 안아 가슴에 품으시고 젖먹이 딸린 어미 양을 곱게 몰고 오신다.","그는 목자 같이 양 떼를 먹이시며 어린 양을 그 팔로 모아 품에 안으시며 젖먹이는 암컷들을 온순히 인도하시리로다","그는 목자 같이 양무리를 먹이시며 어린 양을 그 팔로 모아 품에 안으시며 젖먹이는 암컷들을 온순히 인도하시리로다","보라, 목자가 자기 양 떼를 돌보듯이 주께서 자기 백성을 먹이시고 어린 양을 두 팔로 안아 그 품에 안아 주시고 젖 먹는 새끼양들을 조심스럽게 몰고 오신다!\"","Like a shepherd he feeds his flock; in his arms he gathers the lambs, Carrying them in his bosom, leading the ewes with care.","He shall feed his flock like a shepherd: he shall gather the lambs with his arm, and carry them in his bosom, and shall gently lead those that are with young.","He tends his flock like a shepherd: He gathers the lambs in his arms and carries them close to his heart; he gently leads those that have young.","Sicut pastor gregem suum pascit, in brachio suo congregat agnos et in sinu suo levat; fetas ipse portat “.","כרעה עדרו ירעה בזרעו יקבץ טלאים ובחיקו ישא עלות ינהל׃"],["29","40","12","누가 손바닥으로 바닷물을 되었고 장뼘으로 하늘을 재었으며 되로 땅의 먼지를 되었느냐? 누가 산들을 저울로 달고 언덕들을 천칭으로 달았느냐?","누가 바닷물을 손바닥으로 되었느냐? 하늘을 장뼘으로 재었느냐? 땅의 모든 흙을 말로 되었느냐? 산을 저울로 달고 언덕을 천칭으로 달았느냐?","누가 손바닥으로 바닷물을 헤아렸으며 뼘으로 하늘을 쟀으며 땅의 티끌을 되에 담아 보았으며 접시 저울로 산들을, 막대 저울로 언덕들을 달아 보았으랴","누가 손바닥으로 바다 물을 헤아렸으며 뼘으로 하늘을 재었으며 땅의 티끌을 되에 담아 보았으며 명칭으로 산들을, 간칭으로 작은 산들을 달아 보았으랴","바벨론에서 여호와 신앙을 잃고 절망 상태에서 살아가는 유다인 포로민들에게 예언자가 이렇게 선포하였다. \"누가 손바닥으로 바닷물을 되어 보고 뼘으로 하늘을 재어 보았습니까? 누가 땅의 흙을 말로 되어 보고 누가 산들을 저울에 달아 보고 언덕들을 저울의 접시에 담아서 달아보았습니까?","Who has measured with his palm the waters, marked off the heavens with a span, held in his fingers the dust of the earth, weighed the mountains in scales and the hills in a balance?","Who hath measured the waters in the hollow of his hand, and meted out heaven with the span, and comprehended the dust of the earth in a measure, and weighed the mountains in scales, and the hills in a balance?","Who has measured the waters in the hollow of his hand, or with the breadth of his hand marked off the heavens? Who has held the dust of the earth in a basket, or weighed the mountains on the scales and the hills in a balance?","Quis mensus est pugillo aquas et caelos palmo disposuit, modio continuit pulverem terrae et libravit in pondere montes et colles in statera?","מי מדד בשעלו מים ושמים בזרת תכן וכל בשלש עפר הארץ ושקל בפלס הרים וגבעות במאזנים׃"],["29","40","13","누가 주님의 영을 지도하였으며 누가 그분의 조언자가 되어 그분을 가르쳤느냐?","누가 야훼의 뜻을 좌우할 수 있었으며 좋은 의견으로 그를 가르칠 수 있었느냐?","누가 여호와의 영을 지도하였으며 그의 모사가 되어 그를 가르쳤으랴","누가 여호와의 신을 5)지도하였으며 그의 모사가 되어 그를 가르쳤으랴 측량","세계의 창조주에게 청사진을 만들어 드린 자가 누구이며 그분에게 조언을 한 사람이 누구입니까?","Who has directed the spirit of the LORD, or instructed him as his counselor?","Who hath directed the Spirit of the LORD, or being his counsellor hath taught him?","Who has understood the mind of the LORD, or instructed him as his counselor?","Quis direxit spiritum Domini? Aut quis consilium suum ostendit illi?","מי תכן את רוח יהוה ואיש עצתו יודיענו׃"],["29","40","14","그분께서 누구와 의논하시어 깨우침을 받으셨고 누가 그분께 올바른 길을 가르쳐 드렸느냐? 누가 그분께 지식을 가르쳤으며 슬기의 길을 깨치시게 하였느냐?","누가 과연 그에게서 자기를 깨우쳐달라고, 올바른 인생길을 가르쳐달라고, 현명한 처세의 길을 가르쳐달라고 부탁을 받았느냐?","그가 누구와 더불어 의논하셨으며 누가 그를 교훈하였으며 그에게 정의의 길로 가르쳤으며 지식을 가르쳤으며 통달의 도를 보여 주었느냐","그가 누구로 더불어 의논하셨으며 누가 그를 교훈하였으며 그에게 공평의 도로 가르쳤으며 지식을 가르쳤으며 통달의 도를 보여 주었느뇨","주께서 누구와 상의를 하시며 새로운 통찰력을 받고자 하셨습니까? 주께서 누구에게 올바른 길을 가르쳐 달라고 하셨으며 지식을 가르쳐 달라고 하셨으며 깨닫는 방법을 알려 달라고 하셨습니까?","Whom did he consult to gain knowledge? Who taught him the path of judgment, or showed him the way of understanding?","With whom took he counsel, and who instructed him, and taught him in the path of judgment, and taught him knowledge, and shewed to him the way of understanding?","Whom did the LORD consult to enlighten him, and who taught him the right way? Who was it that taught him knowledge or showed him the path of understanding?","Cum quo iniit consilium, et instruxit eum et docuit eum semitam iustitiae et erudivit eum scientiam et viam prudentiae ostendit illi?","את מי נועץ ויבינהו וילמדהו בארח משפט וילמדהו דעת ודרך תבונות יודיענו׃"],["29","40","15","보라, 민족들은 두레박에서 떨어지는 물 한 방울 같고 천칭 위의 티끌같이 여겨질 뿐. 진정 그분께서는 섬들도 먼지처럼 들어 올리신다.","보아라, 민족들은 두레박에서 떨어지는 물방울이요, 천칭에 덮인 가는 먼지일 뿐. 섬들도 고운 가루보다 더 무겁지 않다!","보라 그에게는 열방이 통의 한 방울 물과 같고 저울의 작은 티끌 같으며 섬들은 떠오르는 먼지 같으리니","보라 그에게는 열방은 통의 한 방울 물 같고 저울의 적은 티끌 같으며 6)섬들은 떠오르는 먼지 같으니 섬들을 티끌같이 드시나니","보십시오, 주님에게는 세계 만민이 두레박에서 떨어지는 물방울에 불과하고 저울의 접시 위에 앉은 먼지나 마찬가지입니다. 보십시오, 주님에게는 섬들도 모래알과 같이 가벼운 것들입니다.","See, the nations count as a drop in the bucket, as a wisp of cloud on the scales; the coastlands weigh no more than a speck.","Behold, the nations are as a drop of a bucket, and are counted as the small dust of the balance: behold, he taketh up the isles as a very little thing.","Surely the nations are like a drop in a bucket; they are regarded as dust on the scales; he weighs the islands as though they were fine dust.","Ecce gentes quasi stilla situlae et quasi momentum pulveris in statera reputantur; ecce insulae quasi pulvis exiguus.","הן גוים כמר מדלי וכשחק מאזנים נחשבו הן איים כדק יטול׃"],["29","40","16","레바논은 땔감으로도 모자라고 그곳 짐승들은 번제물로도 모자란다.","레바논 산 수풀은 장작으로 쓰기에도 모자라고 거기에서 뛰노는 짐승들도 번제물로 바치기에 모자란다.","레바논은 땔감에도 부족하겠고 그 짐승들은 번제에도 부족할 것이라","레바논 짐승들은 번제 소용에도 부족하겠고 그 삼림은 그 화목 소용에도 부족할 것이라","여호와께 합당한 제물을 드리자면 레바논의 모든 삼림도 장작으로 쓰기에 부족하고 그 산속의 모든 짐승들도 제물로 바치기에 부족합니다.","Lebanon would not suffice for fuel, nor its animals be enough for burnt offerings.","And Lebanon is not sufficient to burn, nor the beasts thereof sufficient for a burnt offering.","Lebanon is not sufficient for altar fires, nor its animals enough for burnt offerings.","Et Libanus non sufficiet ad succendendum, et animalia eius non sufficient ad holocaustum.","ולבנון אין די בער וחיתו אין די עולה׃"],["29","40","17","민족들 모두가 그분 앞에는 없는 것이나 마찬가지 그분께는 아무것도 아니며 헛것으로만 여겨진다.","민족들을 다 모아도 하느님 앞에서는 있으나마나, 허무하여 그 자취도 찾을 수 없다.","그의 앞에는 모든 열방이 아무것도 아니라 그는 그들을 없는 것 같이, 빈 것 같이 여기시느니라","그 앞에는 모든 열방이 아무 것도 아니라 그는 그들을 없는 것 같이, 빈 것 같이 여기시느니라","세계의 강대국들이 모두 여호와 앞에서는 우상들이나 똑같이 허무한 것들입니다. 아무리 권세와 영화를 자랑해도 모두가 자취도 없이 사라질 덧없는 것들입니다.","Before him all the nations are as nought, as nothing and void he counts them.","All nations before him are as nothing; and they are counted to him less than nothing, and vanity.","Before him all the nations are as nothing; they are regarded by him as worthless and less than nothing.","Omnes gentes, quasi non sint, coram eo; quasi nihilum et inane reputantur ab eo.","כל הגוים כאין נגדו מאפס ותהו נחשבו לו׃"],["29","40","18","너희는 하느님을 누구와 비교하겠느냐? 그분을 어떤 형상에 비기겠느냐?","하느님이 누구의 모습이라도 닮았다는 말이냐? 어떤 모습이 그를 닮을 수 있다는 말이냐?","그런즉 너희가 하나님을 누구와 같다 하겠으며 무슨 형상을 그에게 비기겠느냐","그런즉 너희가 하나님을 누구와 같다 하겠으며 무슨 형상에 비기겠느냐","그러면 여러분이 하나님을 누구와 비교할 수가 있으며 이 세상에서 하나님과 비교할 수 있는 것이 무엇이겠습니까?","To whom can you liken God? With what likeness can you confront him?","To whom then will ye liken God? or what likeness will ye compare unto him?","To whom, then, will you compare God? What image will you compare him to?","Cui ergo similem facitis Deum? Aut quam imaginem ponitis ei?","ואל מי תדמיון אל ומה דמות תערכו לו׃"],["29","40","19","우상이냐? 그것은 장인이 쇠를 부어 만들고 도금장이가 금으로 입혔으며 은사슬을 만들어 걸친 것이다.","대장장이가 부어 만든 우상, 은장이가 금박을 입히고 부어 만든 은사슬을 걸친 우상과 같다는 말이냐?제 40 장","우상은 장인이 부어 만들었고 장색이 금으로 입혔고 또 은 사슬을 만든 것이니라","우상은 장인이 부어 만들었고 장색이 금으로 입혔고 또 위하여 은사슬을 만든 것이니라","하나님을 우상과 비교할 수 있겠습니까? 우상은 주물공이 구리를 녹여 부어서 청동상을 만들고 금세공업자가 그 위에 금박을 입히고 은줄로 고정시켜 놓은 물건이 아닙니까?","An idol? An artisan casts it, the smith plates it with gold, fits it with silver chains.","The workman melteth a graven image, and the goldsmith spreadeth it over with gold, and casteth silver chains.","As for an idol, a craftsman casts it, and a goldsmith overlays it with gold and fashions silver chains for it.","Sculptile conflat faber, et aurifex auro figurat illud, et laminis argenteis argentarius.","הפסל נסך חרש וצרף בזהב ירקענו ורתקות כסף צורף׃"],["29","40","20","너무 가난하여 이런 봉헌물을 마련할 수 없는 자는 썩지 않은 나무를 고르고 재주 있는 장인을 찾아내어 흔들리지 않는 우상을 만들게 한다.","손재간 있는 대장장이가 썩지 않는 나무를 구해서 세워주어야 넘어지지 않는 우상과는 다르다.","궁핍한 자는 거제를 드릴 때에 썩지 아니하는 나무를 택하고 지혜로운 장인을 구하여 우상을 만들어 흔들리지 아니하도록 세우느니라","궁핍하여 이런 것을 드리지 못하는 자는 썩지 않는 나무를 택하고 공교한 장인을 구하여 우상을 만들어서 흔들리지 않도록 세우느니라","경제적으로 어려워서 그렇게 값비싼 금속으로 우상을 만들지 못하면 나무로 우상을 만드는 사람도 있습니다. 그런 사람은 잘 썩지 않는 단단한 나무를 구해서 솜씨 좋은 목수에게 신상을 새겨서 흔들리지 않게 세워 달라고 부탁합니다.","Is mulberry wood the offering? A skilled artisan picks out a wood that will not rot, Seeks to set up for himself an idol that will not totter.","He that is so impoverished that he hath no oblation chooseth a tree that will not rot; he seeketh unto him a cunning workman to prepare a graven image, that shall not be moved.","A man too poor to present such an offering selects wood that will not rot. He looks for a skilled craftsman to set up an idol that will not topple.","Nimis pauper, ut offerat lignum imputribile: exquirit sibi sapientem artificem, ut statuat simulacrum, quod non moveatur.","המסכן תרומה עץ לא ירקב יבחר חרש חכם יבקש לו להכין פסל לא ימוט׃"],["29","40","21","너희는 알지 않느냐? 듣지 않았느냐? 처음부터 너희에게 알려지지 않았느냐? 땅의 기초가 세워질 때부터 그것을 깨닫지 않았느냐?","너희는 모르느냐? 듣지 못하였느냐? 한 처음부터 너희 인간에게 알려진 것이 아니냐? 땅의 터가 잡힐 때부터 잘 알고 있던 일이 아니냐?","너희가 알지 못하였느냐 너희가 듣지 못하였느냐 태초부터 너희에게 전하지 아니하였느냐 땅의 기초가 창조될 때부터 너희가 깨닫지 못하였느냐","너희가 알지 못하였느냐 너희가 듣지 못하였느냐 태초부터 너희에게 전하지 아니하였느냐 땅의 기초가 창조될 때부터 너희가 깨닫지 못하였느냐","도대체 여러분은 깨닫지 못합니까? 여러분은 항상 듣지 않았습니까? 어려서부터 배우지 않았습니까? 세상을 지으신 분이 누구인지를 여러분은 깨달아 알지 못합니까?","Do you not know? Have you not heard? Was it not told you from the beginning? Have you not understood from the founding of the earth?","Have ye not known? have ye not heard? hath it not been told you from the beginning? have ye not understood from the foundations of the earth?","Do you not know? Have you not heard? Has it not been told you from the beginning? Have you not understood since the earth was founded?","Numquid non scitis? Numquid non audistis? Numquid non annuntiatum est vobis ab initio? Numquid non intellexistis fundamenta terrae?","הלוא תדעו הלוא תשמעו הלוא הגד מראש לכם הלוא הבינתם מוסדות הארץ׃"],["29","40","22","그분께서는 땅 위 궁창에 좌정하여 계시고 땅의 주민들은 메뚜기 떼와 같다. 그분께서는 하늘을 엷은 휘장처럼 펴시고 거기에 사시려고 천막처럼 쳐 놓으셨다.","지구의 대기권 위에 앉아 계시는 이, 그의 앞에서 세상 주민은 메뚜기 같지 않느냐? 그는 이 하늘을 엷은 포목인 양 펴시고 사람 사는 천막인 양 쳐놓으셨다.","그는 땅 위 궁창에 앉으시나니 땅에 사는 사람들은 메뚜기 같으니라 그가 하늘을 차일 같이 펴셨으며 거주할 천막 같이 치셨고","그는 땅 위 궁창에 앉으시나니 땅의 거민들은 메뚜기 같으니라 그가 하늘을 차일 같이 펴셨으며 거할 천막 같이 베푸셨고","하나님은 높은 하늘에 있는 보좌 위에 앉아 계셔서 땅에 사는 세상 사람들이 그분에게는 메뚜기들처럼 작게 보입니다. 그분이 하늘을 손수건처럼 펼쳐 놓으시고 사람이 쳐놓는 천막처럼 하늘을 팽팽하게 당겨 놓으셨습니다.","The one who is enthroned above the vault of the earth, its inhabitants like grasshoppers, Who stretches out the heavens like a veil and spreads them out like a tent to dwell in,","It is he that sitteth upon the circle of the earth, and the inhabitants thereof are as grasshoppers; that stretcheth out the heavens as a curtain, and spreadeth them out as a tent to dwell in:","He sits enthroned above the circle of the earth, and its people are like grasshoppers. He stretches out the heavens like a canopy, and spreads them out like a tent to live in.","Qui sedet super gyrum terrae, et habitatores eius sunt quasi locustae; qui extendit sicut velum caelos et expandit eos sicut tabernaculum ad inhabitandum;","הישב על חוג הארץ וישביה כחגבים הנוטה כדק שמים וימתחם כאהל לשבת׃"],["29","40","23","그분께서는 지배자들을 없애 버리시고 세상의 통치자들을 허수아비처럼 만들어 버리신다.","고위층 인사들을 없애버리시고 위정자들을 그 자취도 남겨두지 아니하신다.","귀인들을 폐하시며 세상의 사사들을 헛되게 하시나니","귀인들을 폐하시며 세상의 사사들을 헛되게 하시나니","그분이 이 세상의 지배자들을 쓰러뜨리시고 이 땅의 통치자들을 자취도 없이 쓸어 없애십니다.","Who brings princes to nought and makes the rulers of the earth as nothing.","That bringeth the princes to nothing; he maketh the judges of the earth as vanity.","He brings princes to naught and reduces the rulers of this world to nothing.","qui redigit in nihilum principes, iudices terrae velut inane facit.","הנותן רוזנים לאין שפטי ארץ כתהו עשה׃"],["29","40","24","그들이 심기기가 무섭게 그들의 씨가 뿌려지기가 무섭게 그들의 줄기가 땅에 뿌리를 내리기가 무섭게 그분께서 입김을 부시면 그들은 말라 버리고 폭풍이 그들을 지푸라기인 양 쓸어 가 버린다.","나무를 심기가 무섭게, 씨를 뿌리기가 무섭게, 그루가 땅에 뿌리를 박기가 무섭게, 하느님께서 입김을 부시니 그것들은 말라버리고 불어오는 거센 바람에 검불처럼 날려가고 만다.","그들은 겨우 심기고 겨우 뿌려졌으며 그 줄기가 겨우 땅에 뿌리를 박자 곧 하나님이 입김을 부시니 그들은 말라 회오리바람에 불려 가는 초개 같도다","그들은 겨우 심기웠고 겨우 뿌리웠고 그 줄기가 겨우 땅에 뿌리를 박자 곧 하나님의 부심을 받고 말라 회리바람에 불려가는 초개 같도다","그들은 방금 옮겨 심은 나무나 겨우 싹이 난 씨앗이나 겨우 땅속에서 뿌리를 내놓는 꺾꽂이의 나무 줄기와 같아서 여호와의 뜨거운 입김이 불어오면 금방 말라 버려서 회오리바람에 마른 풀포기처럼 날아가 버리는 것들입니다.","Scarcely are they planted, scarcely sown, scarcely their stem rooted in the earth, When he breathes upon them and they wither, and the stormwind carries them away like straw.","Yea, they shall not be planted; yea, they shall not be sown: yea, their stock shall not take root in the earth: and he shall also blow upon them, and they shall wither, and the whirlwind shall take them away as stubble.","No sooner are they planted, no sooner are they sown, no sooner do they take root in the ground, than he blows on them and they wither, and a whirlwind sweeps them away like chaff.","Et quidem neque plantatus neque satus neque radicatus in terra truncus eorum; repente flavit in eos, et aruerunt, et turbo quasi stipulam aufert eos.","אף בל נטעו אף בל זרעו אף בל שרש בארץ גזעם וגם נשף בהם ויבשו וסערה כקש תשאם׃"],["29","40","25","“너희는 나를 누구와 비교하겠느냐? 나를 누구와 같다고 하겠느냐?” 거룩하신 분께서 말씀하신다.","\"내가 누구의 모습이라도 닮았다는 말이냐? 내가 누구와 같다는 말이냐?\" 거룩하신 이께서 말씀하신다.","거룩하신 이가 이르시되 그런즉 너희가 나를 누구에게 비교하여 나를 그와 동등하게 하겠느냐 하시니라","거룩하신 자가 가라사대 그런즉 너희가 나를 누구에게 비기며 나로 그와 동등이 되게 하겠느냐 하시느니라","거룩하신 하나님께서 이렇게 말씀하셨습니다. \"너희가 나를 누구와 비교하여 나와 똑같은 이를 찾을 수 있느냐?\"","To whom can you liken me as an equal? says the Holy One.","To whom then will ye liken me, or shall I be equal? saith the Holy One.","\"To whom will you compare me? Or who is my equal?\" says the Holy One."," “Et cui assimilabitis me, quasi aequalis ei sim ego? “, dicit Sanctus.","ואל מי תדמיוני ואשוה יאמר קדוש׃"],["29","40","26","너희는 눈을 높이 들고 보아라. 누가 저 별들을 창조하였느냐? 그 군대를 수대로 다 불러내시고 그들 모두의 이름을 부르시는 분이시다. 그분께서는 능력이 크시고 권능이 막강하시어 하나도 빠지는 일이 없다.","눈을 들어 하늘을 쳐다보아라. 누가 저 별들을 창조하였느냐? 그 군대를 불러내시어 하나하나 이름을 불러 점호하시는 이는 그분이시다. 힘이 세고 기력이 장사이신 그분의 부르심에 누가 빠질 수 있으랴?","너희는 눈을 높이 들어 누가 이 모든 것을 창조하였나 보라 주께서는 수효대로 만상을 이끌어 내시고 그들의 모든 이름을 부르시나니 그의 권세가 크고 그의 능력이 강하므로 하나도 빠짐이 없느니라","너희는 눈을 높이 들어 누가 이 모든 것을 창조하였나 보라 주께서는 수효대로 만상을 이끌어 내시고 각각 그 이름을 부르시나니 그의 권세가 크고 그의 능력이 강하므로 하나도 빠짐이 없느니라","여러분 밤하늘을 한번 자세히 보십시오. 그토록 많은 별들을 누가 지으셨습니까? 여호와께서 그토록 많은 별들을 군대처럼 배치해 놓으시고 하나하나 이름을 불러 항상 점호하십니다. 권능이 무한하시고 힘이 강하신 그분은 어느 별 하나도 빠뜨리는 것이 없습니다.\"","Lift up your eyes on high and see who created these: He leads out their army and numbers them, calling them all by name. By his great might and the strength of his power not one of them is missing!","Lift up your eyes on high, and behold who hath created these things, that bringeth out their host by number: he calleth them all by names by the greatness of his might, for that he is strong in power; not one faileth.","Lift your eyes and look to the heavens: Who created all these? He who brings out the starry host one by one, and calls them each by name. Because of his great power and mighty strength, not one of them is missing.","Levate in excelsum oculos vestros et videte: Quis creavit haec? Qui educit in numero militiam eorum et omnes ex nomine vocat; prae multitudine fortitudinis et roboris virtutisque eius neque unum deest.","שאו מרום עיניכם וראו מי ברא אלה המוציא במספר צבאם לכלם בשם יקרא מרב אונים ואמיץ כח איש לא נעדר׃"],["29","40","27","야곱아, 네가 어찌 이런 말을 하느냐? 이스라엘아, 네가 어찌 이렇게 이야기하느냐? “나의 길은 주님께 숨겨져 있고 나의 권리는 나의 하느님께서 못 보신 채 없어져 버린다.”","야곱아, 네가 어찌 이런 말을 하느냐? 이스라엘아, 네가 어찌 이런 주장을 펴느냐? \"야훼께서는 나의 고생길 같은 것은 관심도 두지 않으신다. 하느님께서는 내 권리 따위, 알은 체도 않으신다.\"","야곱아 어찌하여 네가 말하며 이스라엘아 네가 이르기를 내 길은 여호와께 숨겨졌으며 내 송사는 내 하나님에게서 벗어난다 하느냐","야곱아 네가 어찌하여 말하며 이스라엘아 네가 어찌하여 이르기를 내 7)사정은 여호와께 숨겨졌으며 8)원통한 것은 내 하나님에게서 수리하심을 받지 못한다 하느냐 히, 길히, 송사","포로생활에서 지친 이스라엘 백성에게 위로하고 격려하는 예언자가 결론적으로 참고 견딜 수 있는 힘을 주시는 주님을 앙망하도록 선포하였다. \"우리는 야곱의 후손들입니다. 그런데 \"여호와께서 우리를 돌보아 주시지 않는다.\"고 탄식들을 합니다. 그러나 야곱의 후손들이 이렇게 탄식해서야 되겠습니까? \"우리가 온갖 고난을 다 당해도 우리의 하나님이 우리를 버려 두신다.\" 하고 이스라엘 백성이 절망적인 말을 해야만 되겠습니까?","Why, O Jacob, do you say, and declare, O Israel, “My way is hidden from the LORD, and my right is disregarded by my God”?","Why sayest thou, O Jacob, and speakest, O Israel, My way is hid from the LORD, and my judgment is passed over from my God?","Why do you say, O Jacob, and complain, O Israel, \"My way is hidden from the LORD; my cause is disregarded by my God\"?","Quare dicis, Iacob, et loqueris, Israel:  “Abscondita est via mea a Domino, et a Deo meo iudicium meum transit? “.","למה תאמר יעקב ותדבר ישראל נסתרה דרכי מיהוה ומאלהי משפטי יעבור׃"],["29","40","28","너는 알지 않느냐? 너는 듣지 않았느냐? 주님은 영원하신 하느님 땅 끝까지 창조하신 분이시다. 그분께서는 피곤한 줄도 지칠 줄도 모르시고 그분의 슬기는 헤아릴 길이 없다.","너희는 모르느냐? 듣지 못하였느냐? 야훼께서는 영원하신 하느님, 땅의 끝까지 창조하신 분이시다. 힘이 솟구쳐 피곤을 모르시고, 슬기가 무궁하신 분이시다.","너는 알지 못하였느냐 듣지 못하였느냐 영원하신 하나님 여호와, 땅 끝까지 창조하신 이는 피곤하지 않으시며 곤비하지 않으시며 명철이 한이 없으시며","너는 알지 못하였느냐 듣지 못하였느냐 영원하신 하나님 여호와, 땅 끝까지 창조하신 자는 피곤치 아니하시며 곤비치 아니하시며 명철이 한이 없으시며","여러분은 깨닫지도 못하고 듣지도 못하셨습니까? 우리의 하나님 여호와는 온 세상을 지으신 분이요 영원히 이 세상을 통치하시는 분입니다. 우리 주님은 피곤하거나 힘이 빠지는 일도 없으시며 그분의 지혜는 끝없이 깊고 넓어서 우리 인간이 헤아려 알 수가 없습니다.","Do you not know? Have you not heard? The LORD is God from of old, creator of the ends of the earth. He does not faint or grow weary, and his knowledge is beyond scrutiny.","Hast thou not known? hast thou not heard, that the everlasting God, the LORD, the Creator of the ends of the earth, fainteth not, neither is weary? there is no searching of his understanding.","Do you not know? Have you not heard? The LORD is the everlasting God, the Creator of the ends of the earth. He will not grow tired or weary, and his understanding no one can fathom.","Numquid nescis? Aut non audisti? Deus sempiternus Dominus, qui creavit terminos terrae; non deficiet neque laborabit, nec est investigatio sapientiae eius.","הלוא ידעת אם לא שמעת אלהי עולם יהוה בורא קצות הארץ לא ייעף ולא ייגע אין חקר לתבונתו׃"],["29","40","29","그분께서는 피곤한 이에게 힘을 주시고 기운이 없는 이에게 기력을 북돋아 주신다.","힘이 빠진 사람에게 힘을 주시고 기진한 사람에게 기력을 주시는 분이시다.","피곤한 자에게는 능력을 주시며 무능한 자에게는 힘을 더하시나니","피곤한 자에게는 능력을 주시며 무능한 자에게는 힘을 더하시나니","그는 지친 사람들에게 힘을 주시고 약한 이들을 강하게 하시는 분입니다.","He gives power to the faint, abundant strength to the weak.","He giveth power to the faint; and to them that have no might he increaseth strength.","He gives strength to the weary and increases the power of the weak.","Qui dat lasso virtutem et invalido robur multiplicat.","נתן ליעף כח ולאין אונים עצמה ירבה׃"],["29","40","30","젊은이들도 피곤하여 지치고 청년들도 비틀거리기 마련이지만","청년들도 힘이 빠져 허덕이겠고 장정들도 비틀거리겠지만","소년이라도 피곤하며 곤비하며 장정이라도 넘어지며 쓰러지되","소년이라도 피곤하며 곤비하며 장정이라도 넘어지며 자빠지되","젊은이들도 지쳐서 피곤해지고 용사들도 비틀거리고 넘어지지만","Though young men faint and grow weary, and youths stagger and fall,","Even the youths shall faint and be weary, and the young men shall utterly fall:","Even youths grow tired and weary, and young men stumble and fall;","Deficient pueri et laborabunt, et iuvenes lapsu labentur;","ויעפו נערים ויגעו ובחורים כשול יכשלו׃"],["29","40","31","주님께 바라는 이들은 새 힘을 얻고 독수리처럼 날개 치며 올라간다. 그들은 뛰어도 지칠 줄 모르고 걸어도 피곤한 줄 모른다.","야훼를 믿고 바라는 사람은 새 힘이 솟아나리라. 날개쳐 솟아오르는 독수리처럼 아무리 뛰어도 고단하지 아니하고 아무리 걸어도 지치지 아니하리라.","오직 여호와를 앙망하는 자는 새 힘을 얻으리니 독수리가 날개치며 올라감 같을 것이요 달음박질하여도 곤비하지 아니하겠고 걸어가도 피곤하지 아니하리로다","오직 여호와를 앙망하는 자는 새 힘을 얻으리니 독수리의 날개치며 올라감 같을 것이요 달음박질하여도 곤비치 아니하겠고 걸어가도 피곤치 아니하리로다","오랫동안 여호와를 믿고 기다리는 사람은 언제나 다시 새 힘을 얻어서 마치 강풍을 타고 창공으로 치솟아오르는 독수리처럼 그들도 하나님의 영에게 이끌려 올라갈 것입니다. 그들은 뛰고 달려도 피곤한 줄을 모르며 아무리 먼 길을 걸어도 쓰러지지 않을 것입니다.\"","They that hope in the LORD will renew their strength, they will soar on eagles’ wings; They will run and not grow weary, walk and not grow faint.","But they that wait upon the LORD shall renew their strength; they shall mount up with wings as eagles; they shall run, and not be weary; and they shall walk, and not faint.","but those who hope in the LORD will renew their strength. They will soar on wings like eagles; they will run and not grow weary, they will walk and not be faint. ISA","qui autem sperant in Domino, mutabunt fortitudinem, assument pennas sicut aquilae, current et non laborabunt, ambulabunt et non deficient.","וקוי יהוה יחליפו כח יעלו אבר כנשרים ירוצו ולא ייגעו ילכו ולא ייעפו׃"],["29","41","1","섬들아, 조용히 내 말을 들어라. 겨레들은 새 힘을 얻어라. 가까이 와서 말하여라. 우리 함께 재판하러 나아가자.","바닷가에 사는 주민들아, 조용히 내 말을 들어라. 너희 부족들아, 나의 논고를 끝까지 들어라. 내 말이 끝나거든 썩 나와서 할 말을 하여라. 어디 법정에서 대결해 보자.","섬들아 내 앞에 잠잠하라 민족들아 힘을 새롭게 하라 가까이 나아오라 그리고 말하라 우리가 서로 재판 자리에 가까이 나아가자","섬들아 내 앞에 잠잠하라 민족들아 힘을 새롭게 하라 가까이 나아오라 그리하고 말하라 우리가 가까이 하여 서로 변론하자","여호와께서 말씀하셨다. \"너희 섬과 해변에 사는 주민들아, 조용히 내 말을 들어라! 온 세상의 백성들아, 있는 힘을 다 쏟아보아라! 세상의 모든 신들아, 너희는 나와서 내게 대답하여라! 내가 너희들과 판결을 낼 일이 있다. 내가 너희와 따져 볼 일이 있다.","Keep silence before me, O coastlands; let the nations renew their strength. Let them draw near and speak; let us come together for judgment.","Keep silence before me, O islands; and let the people renew their strength: let them come near; then let them speak: let us come near together to judgment.","\"Be silent before me, you islands! Let the nations renew their strength! Let them come forward and speak; let us meet together at the place of judgment.","Taceant ante me insulae, et gentes renovent fortitudinem; accedant et tunc loquantur, simul ad iudicium propinquemus.","החרישו אלי איים ולאמים יחליפו כח יגשו אז ידברו יחדו למשפט נקרבה׃"],["29","41","2","발길이 닿는 곳마다 승리를 불러오는 이를 누가 동방에서 일으키셨느냐? 그분께서 그에게 민족들을 넘겨주시어 그가 임금들을 굴복시킨다. 그는 자기 칼로 그들을 먼지처럼 만들고 자기 활로 그들을 지푸라기처럼 날려 버린다.","가는 곳마다 승리를 거두는 자를 동방에서 일으킨 것이 누구냐? 그에게 민족들을 넘겨주고 제왕들을 굴복시킨 것이 누구냐? 그 칼에 모두가 가루처럼 부서지고, 그 활에 모두가 검불처럼 흩어진다.","누가 동방에서 사람을 일깨워서 공의로 그를 불러 자기 발 앞에 이르게 하였느냐 열국을 그의 앞에 넘겨 주며 그가 왕들을 다스리게 하되 그들이 그의 칼에 티끌 같게, 그의 활에 불리는 초개 같게 하매","누가 동방에서 사람을 일으키며 의로 불러서 자기 발 앞에 이르게 하였느뇨 열국으로 그 앞에 굴복케 하며 그로 왕들을 치리하게 하되 그들로 그의 칼에 티끌 같게, 그의 활에 불리는 초개 같게 하매","동방에서 바사 왕 고레스를 일으킨 자가 누구냐? 그가 가는 곳마다 승리하도록 돕는 자가 누구냐? 세계 만민을 멸망시키고 세상의 왕들을 자기의 발 앞에서 무릎 꿇게 하고 그들을 칼로 쳐서 티끌처럼 만들고 그들을 활로 쏘아 바람에 날리는 검불처럼 흩어 버린 자를 누가 일으켰느냐?","Who has stirred up from the East the champion of justice, and summoned him to be his attendant? To him he delivers nations and subdues kings; With his sword he reduces them to dust, with his bow, to driven straw.","Who raised up the righteous man from the east, called him to his foot, gave the nations before him, and made him rule over kings? he gave them as the dust to his sword, and as driven stubble to his bow.","\"Who has stirred up one from the east, calling him in righteousness to his service? He hands nations over to him and subdues kings before him. He turns them to dust with his sword, to windblown chaff with his bow.","Quis suscitavit ab oriente eum,  cuius gressum sequitur iustitia? Dabit in conspectu eius gentes et subiciet ei reges, quos reddet quasi pulverem gladius eius, sicut stipulam vento raptam arcus eius.","מי העיר ממזרח צדק יקראהו לרגלו יתן לפניו גוים ומלכים ירד יתן כעפר חרבו כקש נדף קשתו׃"],["29","41","3","그가 그들을 뒤쫓으며 거침없이 나아가는데 미처 발이 땅에 닿지도 않는다.","평화의 행군 앞에 적군은 쫓기니, 그의 발은 흙에 닿을 짬도 없다.","그가 그들을 쫓아가서 그의 발로 가 보지 못한 길을 안전히 지났나니","그가 그들을 쫓아서 그 발로 가 보지 못한 길을 안전히 지났나니","직접 먼 길을 다니면서 싸우지 않고서도 적들을 멀리 쫓아내어 승리하는 그 왕을 누가 일으켰느냐?","He pursues them, passing on without loss, by a path his feet scarcely touch.","He pursued them, and passed safely; even by the way that he had not gone with his feet.","He pursues them and moves on unscathed, by a path his feet have not traveled before.","Persequetur eos, transibit in pace; semita sub pedibus eius non apparebit.","ירדפם יעבור שלום ארח ברגליו לא יבוא׃"],["29","41","4","누가 이를 이루고 실행하였느냐? 처음부터 세대들을 불러일으킨 이 나 주님이 시작이고 마지막에도 나는 변함이 없으리라.","이런 일을 한 것이 누구냐? 한 처음부터 시대마다 사람을 불러일으킨 것이 누구냐? 나 야훼가 이 일을 시작하였다. 마지막 세대에까지 이 일을 끌어나갈 것도 바로 나다.","이 일을 누가 행하였느냐 누가 이루었느냐 누가 처음부터 만대를 불러내었느냐 나 여호와라 처음에도 나요 나중 있을 자에게도 내가 곧 그니라","이 일을 누가 행하였느냐 누가 이루었느냐 누가 태초부터 만대를 명정하였느냐 나 여호와라 태초에도 나요 나중 있을 자에게도 내가 곧 그니라","이런 일을 직접 수행하고 성취한 자가 누구였느냐? 태초부터 모든 인간을 이 세상으로 불러내는 자가 아니냐? 나 여호와가 역사를 지배하며 모든 사람을 내 마음대로 사용한다. 나는 맨 먼저 있는 자요 맨 나중의 사람들과도 함께 있는 자이다. 내가 이스라엘을 구원하기 위하여 고레스를 일으킨 자이다.\"","Who has performed these deeds? Who has called forth the generations from the beginning? I, the LORD, am the first, and at the last I am he.","Who hath wrought and done it, calling the generations from the beginning? I the LORD, the first, and with the last; I am he.","Who has done this and carried it through, calling forth the generations from the beginning? I, the LORD--with the first of them and with the last--I am he.\"","Quis operatus est et fecit, vocans generationes ab exordio? Ego Dominus, primus et cum novissimis ego sum.","מי פעל ועשה קרא הדרות מראש אני יהוה ראשון ואת אחרנים אני הוא׃"],["29","41","5","섬들이 보고 두려워하며 땅 끝들이 무서워 떤다. 그들이 다가온다, 그들이 모여 온다.","바닷가에 사는 주민이 이를 보고 두려워하고, 세상 구석구석에 사는 사람들도 벌벌 떨며 다들 모여온다.1) 6-7절은 40:19 다음으로 옮겼다.","섬들이 보고 두려워하며 땅 끝이 무서워 떨며 함께 모여 와서","섬들이 보고 두려워하며 땅 끝이 무서워 떨며 함께 모여 와서","멀리 섬들과 해변의 주민들이 여호와의 일을 보고 무서워서 자기들의 신을 찾아가고 먼 곳의 모든 민족들이 고레스와 그의 하나님을 두려워하며 자기들끼리 모여서 대책을 찾고 있었다.","The coastlands see, and fear; the ends of the earth tremble: they approach, they come on.","The isles saw it, and feared; the ends of the earth were afraid, drew near, and came.","The islands have seen it and fear; the ends of the earth tremble. They approach and come forward;","Viderunt insulae et timuerunt, extrema terrae obstupuerunt, appropinquaverunt et accesserunt.","ראו איים וייראו קצות הארץ יחרדו קרבו ויאתיון׃"],["29","41","6","서로가 서로를 도와주며 자기 동료에게 “힘을 내!” 하고 말한다.","끼리끼리 손발이 맞아 서로 힘을 내라고 격려하며,제 41 장","각기 이웃을 도우며 그 형제에게 이르기를 너는 힘을 내라 하고","각기 이웃을 도우며 그 형제에게 이르기를 너는 담대하라 하고","그들이 서로 돕고 격려하며 살길을 찾아보았다.","Each one helps his neighbor, one says to the other, “Courage!”","They helped every one his neighbour; and every one said to his brother, Be of good courage.","each helps the other and says to his brother, \"Be strong!\"","Unusquisque proximo suo auxiliabitur et fratri suo dicet:  “Confortare “.","איש את רעהו יעזרו ולאחיו יאמר חזק׃"],["29","41","7","장인은 도금장이를 격려하고 망치로 쇠를 고르는 자는 모루를 치는 자를 격려하며 땜질이 잘되었다고 말하면서 흔들리지 않게 그것을 못으로 고정시킨다.","대장장이는 은장이를 부채질하여 \"잘한다.\" 하고 마치질하는 자는 모루에 대고 두드리는 자를 칭찬하여 \"그 쇠 참 잘 붙였다.\" 하며 움직이지 못하게 못을 단단히 박은 우상과는 다르다!  제 41 장","목공은 금장색을 격려하며 망치로 고르게 하는 자는 메질꾼을 격려하며 이르되 땜질이 잘 된다 하니 그가 못을 단단히 박아 우상을 흔들리지 아니하게 하는도다","목공은 금장색을 장려하며 마치로 고르게 하는 자는 메질군을 장려하며 가로되 땜이 잘 된다 하며 못을 단단히 박아 우상으로 흔들리지 않게 하는도다","그들은 자기들의 우상을 만들어 보호를 받기로 작정하였다. 구리를 녹여 부어서 우상을 만들고 금세공업자는 금을 망치로 두들겨서 납작하게 만들어 우상의 온몸에 단단히 입혀 놓았다. 맨 나중에는 튼튼한 판자 위에 우상을 세워 놓고 흔들리지 않도록 못을 박아서 고정시켜 놓았다. 그러나 끊임없이 움직이는 세계 역사의 주관자인 여호와 앞에서 그토록 움직일 줄 모르는 우상들이 어떻게 그들을 보호해 줄 수가 있겠느냐?","The woodworker encourages the goldsmith, the one who beats with the hammer, him who strikes on the anvil, Saying of the soldering, “It is good!” then fastening it with nails so it will not totter.","So the carpenter encouraged the goldsmith, and he that smootheth with the hammer him that smote the anvil, saying, It is ready for the sodering: and he fastened it with nails, that it should not be moved.","The craftsman encourages the goldsmith, and he who smooths with the hammer spurs on him who strikes the anvil. He says of the welding, \"It is good.\" He nails down the idol so it will not topple.","Confortabit faber aurificem, percutiens malleo eum, qui cudit, dicens de glutino:  “Bonum est “; et roborat eum clavis, ut non moveatur.","ויחזק חרש את צרף מחליק פטיש את הולם פעם אמר לדבק טוב הוא ויחזקהו במסמרים לא ימוט׃"],["29","41","8","그러나 너 이스라엘, 나의 종아 내가 선택한 야곱아 나의 벗 아브라함의 후손들아!","\"너, 이스라엘, 나의 종, 너, 내가 뽑은 자, 야곱아, 나의 친구 아브라함의 후예야,","그러나 나의 종 너 이스라엘아 내가 택한 야곱아 나의 벗 아브라함의 자손아","그러나 나의 종 너 이스라엘아 나의 택한 야곱아 나의 벗 아브라함의 자손아","포로생활을 하면서 탄식하는 유다인 공동체에게 여호와께서 구원을 선포하셨다. \"야곱의 백성 이스라엘아, 나를 섬기도록 선택된 백성아, 너는 내가 사랑하는 친구 아브라함 후손이다.","But you, Israel, my servant, Jacob, whom I have chosen, offspring of Abraham my friend—","But thou, Israel, art my servant, Jacob whom I have chosen, the seed of Abraham my friend.","\"But you, O Israel, my servant, Jacob, whom I have chosen, you descendants of Abraham my friend,","Tu autem, Israel, serve meus, Iacob, quem elegi, semen Abraham amici mei,","ואתה ישראל עבדי יעקב אשר בחרתיך זרע אברהם אהבי׃"],["29","41","9","내가 너를 땅 끝에서 데려오고 그 가장자리에서 불러와 너에게 말하였다. “너는 나의 종 내가 너를 선택하였고 너를 내치지 않았다.”","나는 너를 땅 끝에서 데려왔다. 먼 곳에서 너를 불러 세우며 일렀다. '너는 나의 종이다. 내가 너를 뽑아 세워놓고 버리겠느냐?'","내가 땅 끝에서부터 너를 붙들며 땅 모퉁이에서부터 너를 부르고 네게 이르기를 너는 나의 종이라 내가 너를 택하고 싫어하여 버리지 아니하였다 하였노라","내가 땅 끝에서부터 너를 붙들며 땅 모퉁이에서부터 너를 부르고 네게 이르기를 너는 나의 종이라 내가 너를 택하고 싫어버리지 아니하였다 하였노라","내가 너를 땅끝에서 데려오고 가장 먼 땅의 모퉁이에서 너를 불러왔다. 그때에 내가 네게 \"이제부터 너는 나를 섬기는 사람이다. 너는 내가 선택한 사람이다\"라고 말하였다. 그와 똑같이 나는 너를 지금도 버리지 않았다.","You whom I have taken from the ends of the earth and summoned from its far-off places, To whom I have said, You are my servant; I chose you, I have not rejected you—","Thou whom I have taken from the ends of the earth, and called thee from the chief men thereof, and said unto thee, Thou art my servant; I have chosen thee, and not cast thee away.","I took you from the ends of the earth, from its farthest corners I called you. I said, 'You are my servant'; I have chosen you and have not rejected you.","quem apprehendi ab extremis terrae, et a longinquis eius vocavi te et dixi tibi:  “Servus meus es tu; elegi te et non abieci te “.","אשר החזקתיך מקצות הארץ ומאציליה קראתיך ואמר לך עבדי אתה בחרתיך ולא מאסתיך׃"],["29","41","10","나 너와 함께 있으니 두려워하지 마라. 내가 너의 하느님이니 겁내지 마라. 내가 너의 힘을 북돋우고 너를 도와주리라. 내 의로운 오른팔로 너를 붙들어 주리라.","두려워하지 마라. 내가 너의 곁에 있다. 걱정하지 마라. 내가 너의 하느님이다. 내가 너의 힘이 되어준다. 내가 도와준다. 정의의 오른팔로 너를 붙들어준다.","두려워하지 말라 내가 너와 함께 함이라 놀라지 말라 나는 네 하나님이 됨이라 내가 너를 굳세게 하리라 참으로 너를 도와 주리라 참으로 나의 의로운 오른손으로 너를 붙들리라","두려워 말라 내가 너와 함께 함이니라 놀라지 말라 나는 네 하나님이 됨이니라 내가 너를 굳세게 하리라 참으로 너를 도와 주리라 참으로 나의 의로운 오른손으로 너를 붙들리라","내가 너와 함께 있으니 두려워 말아라! 내가 네 하나님이니 겁을 내지 말아라! 내가 너를 도와 강하게 하고 내가 오른팔로 너를 붙들어 승리하도록 하겠다.","Do not fear: I am with you; do not be anxious: I am your God. I will strengthen you, I will help you, I will uphold you with my victorious right hand.","Fear thou not; for I am with thee: be not dismayed; for I am thy God: I will strengthen thee; yea, I will help thee; yea, I will uphold thee with the right hand of my righteousness.","So do not fear, for I am with you; do not be dismayed, for I am your God. I will strengthen you and help you; I will uphold you with my righteous right hand.","Ne timeas, quia ego tecum sum; ne declines, quia ego Deus tuus: confortabo te et auxiliabor tibi et sustentabo te dextera iustitiae meae.","אל תירא כי עמך אני אל תשתע כי אני אלהיך אמצתיך אף עזרתיך אף תמכתיך בימין צדקי׃"],["29","41","11","보라, 너에게 격분하는 자들은 모두 부끄러워하며 수치를 당하리라. 너와 다투는 사람들은 아무것도 아닌 자들처럼 되어 멸망하리라.","너에게 서슬이 푸르게 달려들던 자들은 부끄러워 쥐구멍을 찾게 되고, 멸망하여 흔적도 없이 사라지리라.","보라 네게 노하던 자들이 수치와 욕을 당할 것이요 너와 다투는 자들이 아무것도 아닌 것 같이 될 것이며 멸망할 것이라","보라 네게 노하던 자들이 수치와 욕을 당할 것이요 너와 다투는 자들이 아무 것도 아닌 것 같이 될 것이며 멸망할 것이라","보라, 이제까지 너를 괴롭히며 화를 내던 자들이 조롱과 수치를 당할 것이며 너를 못살게 굴던 자들이 멸망해서 아무 것도 아닌 것처럼 될 것이다.","Yes, all shall be put to shame and disgrace who vent their anger against you; Those shall be as nothing and perish who offer resistance.","Behold, all they that were incensed against thee shall be ashamed and confounded: they shall be as nothing; and they that strive with thee shall perish.","\"All who rage against you will surely be ashamed and disgraced; those who oppose you will be as nothing and perish.","Ecce confundentur et erubescent omnes, qui irascuntur adversum te; erunt quasi non sint et peribunt viri, qui contradicunt tibi.","הן יבשו ויכלמו כל הנחרים בך יהיו כאין ויאבדו אנשי ריבך׃"],["29","41","12","너에게 대적하는 사람들을 네가 찾으려 해도 찾아내지 못하리라. 너와 전쟁을 벌이는 자들은 아무것도 아닌 자들처럼, 없어진 자들처럼 되리라.","너와 다투던 자들은 찾아도 보이지 아니하고 너와 싸우던 자들은 어이없이 사라지리라.","네가 찾아도 너와 싸우던 자들을 만나지 못할 것이요 너를 치는 자들은 아무것도 아닌 것 같고 허무한 것 같이 되리니","네가 찾아도 너와 싸우던 자들을 만나지 못할 것이요 너를 치는 자들은 아무 것도 아닌 것 같이, 허무한 것 같이 되리니","항상 네게 덤비던 자들이 영영 사라져서 네가 사방으로 둘러보아도 그들이 다시는 보이지 않을 것이다. 네게 덤비던 원수들이 모두 사라져서 전혀 없는 것처럼 될 것이다.","You shall seek but not find those who strive against you; They shall be as nothing at all who do battle with you.","Thou shalt seek them, and shalt not find them, even them that contended with thee: they that war against thee shall be as nothing, and as a thing of nought.","Though you search for your enemies, you will not find them. Those who wage war against you will be as nothing at all.","Quaeres eos et non invenies viros, qui rixantur tecum; erunt quasi non sint et veluti nihilum, viri bellantes adversum te.","תבקשם ולא תמצאם אנשי מצתך יהיו כאין וכאפס אנשי מלחמתך׃"],["29","41","13","나 주님이 너의 하느님 내가 네 오른손을 붙잡아 주고 있다. 나는 너에게 말한다. “두려워하지 마라. 내가 너를 도와주리라.”","나 야훼가 너의 하느님, 내가 너의 오른손을 붙들어주며 이르지 않았느냐? '두려워하지 마라. 내가 너를 도와준다.'","이는 나 여호와 너의 하나님이 네 오른손을 붙들고 네게 이르기를 두려워하지 말라 내가 너를 도우리라 할 것임이니라","이는 나 여호와 너의 하나님이 네 오른손을 붙들고 네게 이르기를 두려워 말라 내가 너를 도우리라 할 것임이니라","나 여호와가 네 하나님이 되어 네 오른팔을 붙잡고 인도해 주며 이르지 않았느냐? \"내가 직접 너를 도와주겠으니 너는 조금도 두려워하지 말아라!\"","For I am the LORD, your God, who grasp your right hand; It is I who say to you, Do not fear, I will help you.","For I the LORD thy God will hold thy right hand, saying unto thee, Fear not; I will help thee.","For I am the LORD, your God, who takes hold of your right hand and says to you, Do not fear; I will help you.","Quia ego Dominus Deus tuus apprehendens manum tuam dicensque tibi:  “Ne timeas; ego auxiliabor tibi.","כי אני יהוה אלהיך מחזיק ימינך האמר לך אל תירא אני עזרתיך׃"],["29","41","14","두려워하지 마라, 벌레 같은 야곱아 구더기 같은 이스라엘아! 내가 너를 도와주리라. 주님의 말씀이다. 이스라엘의 거룩한 분이 너의 구원자이다.","두려워하지 마라, 벌레 같은 야곱아! 구더기 같은 이스라엘아, 내가 너를 도와주리라. 야훼의 말이다. 이스라엘의 거룩하신 자가 너를 구원하는 이다.","버러지 같은 너 야곱아, 너희 이스라엘 사람들아 두려워하지 말라 나 여호와가 말하노니 내가 너를 도울 것이라 네 구속자는 이스라엘의 거룩한 이이니라","지렁이 같은 너 야곱아, 너희 이스라엘 사람들아 두려워 말라 나 여호와가 말하노니 내가 너를 도울 것이라 네 구속자는 이스라엘의 거룩한 자니라","전능하신 여호와께서 힘없는 포로민들에게 말씀하셨다. \"너 이스라엘, 야곱의 후손아, 너는 조금도 두려워하지 말아라! 네가 비록 밟혀 죽는 벌레처럼 힘도 없고 비천하기도 하지만 어떤 어려움도 다 이길 수 있는 나 여호와가 직접 너를 도와주겠다. 내가 이스라엘의 거룩한 하나님으로서 너를 해방시켜 시온성으로 데려다 놓겠다.","Do not fear, you worm Jacob, you maggot Israel; I will help you—oracle of the LORD; the Holy One of Israel is your redeemer.","Fear not, thou worm Jacob, and ye men of Israel; I will help thee, saith the LORD, and thy redeemer, the Holy One of Israel.","Do not be afraid, O worm Jacob, O little Israel, for I myself will help you,\" declares the LORD, your Redeemer, the Holy One of Israel.","Noli timere, vermis Iacob, homines ex Israel. Ego auxiliabor tibi “, dicit Dominus et redemptor tuus, Sanctus Israel.","אל תיראי תולעת יעקב מתי ישראל אני עזרתיך נאם יהוה וגאלך קדוש ישראל׃"],["29","41","15","보라, 내가 너를 날카로운 타작기로, 날이 많은 새 타작기로 만들리니 너는 산들을 타작하여 잘게 바수고 언덕들을 지푸라기처럼 만들리라.","보아라, 내가 너를 날이 선 새 탈곡기로 만들리니 네가 모든 산을 짓부수어 뭉그러뜨리고 모든 언덕을 가루로 만들리라.","보라 내가 너를 이가 날카로운 새 타작기로 삼으리니 네가 산들을 쳐서 부스러기를 만들 것이며 작은 산들을 겨 같이 만들 것이라","보라 내가 너로 이가 날카로운 새 타작 기계를 삼으리니 네가 산들을 쳐서 부스러기를 만들 것이며 작은 산들로 겨 같게 할 것이라","이스라엘아, 내가 너를 특별히 칼날을 날카롭게 새로 단 탈곡기로 만들겠다. 그러면 네가 산들도 무너뜨려 바수고 언덕들은 지푸라기처럼 짓이겨 놓을 것이다.","I will make of you a threshing sledge, sharp, new, full of teeth, To thresh the mountains and crush them, to make the hills like chaff.","Behold, I will make thee a new sharp threshing instrument having teeth: thou shalt thresh the mountains, and beat them small, and shalt make the hills as chaff.","\"See, I will make you into a threshing sledge, new and sharp, with many teeth. You will thresh the mountains and crush them, and reduce the hills to chaff.","Ecce posui te quasi plaustrum triturans novum, habens rostra serrantia. Triturabis montes et comminues et colles quasi pulverem pones.","הנה שמתיך למורג חרוץ חדש בעל פיפיות תדוש הרים ותדק וגבעות כמץ תשים׃"],["29","41","16","네가 그것들을 까부르면 바람이 쓸어 가고 폭풍이 그것들을 흩날려 버리리라. 그러나 너는 주님 안에서 기뻐 뛰놀고 이스라엘의 거룩한 분 안에서 자랑스러워하리라.","네가 원수들을 까불어 바람에 날리면, 그들은 거센 바람에 날려 흩어지리라. 그러나 너는 야훼 앞에서 기뻐 뛰놀며 이스라엘의 거룩하신 분을 믿고 뽐내리라.","네가 그들을 까부른즉 바람이 그들을 날리겠고 회오리바람이 그들을 흩어 버릴 것이로되 너는 여호와로 말미암아 즐거워하겠고 이스라엘의 거룩한 이로 말미암아 자랑하리라","네가 그들을 까부른즉 바람이 그것을 날리겠고 회리바람이 그것을 흩어버릴 것이로되 너는 여호와로 인하여 즐거워하겠고 이스라엘의 거룩한 자로 인하여 자랑하리라","네가 그들을 키에 담아 까불러 바람에 날리면 거센 바람이 와서 그들을 간곳없이 흩어 놓을 것이다. 그러면 내가 해놓은 일을 보고 네가 기뻐서 환호성을 올릴 것이다. 너를 살려 준 이스라엘의 거룩한 하나님을 네가 찬양할 것이다.\"","When you winnow them, the wind shall carry them off, the storm shall scatter them. But you shall rejoice in the LORD; in the Holy One of Israel you shall glory.","Thou shalt fan them, and the wind shall carry them away, and the whirlwind shall scatter them: and thou shalt rejoice in the LORD, and shalt glory in the Holy One of Israel.","You will winnow them, the wind will pick them up, and a gale will blow them away. But you will rejoice in the LORD and glory in the Holy One of Israel.","Ventilabis eos, et ventus tollet eos, et turbo disperget eos; et tu exsultabis in Domino, in Sancto Israel laetaberis.","תזרם ורוח תשאם וסערה תפיץ אותם ואתה תגיל ביהוה בקדוש ישראל תתהלל׃"],["29","41","17","가련한 이들과 가난한 이들이 물을 찾지만 물이 없어 갈증으로 그들의 혀가 탄다. 나 주님이 그들에게 응답하고 나 이스라엘의 하느님이 그들을 버리지 않으리라.","억눌린 빈민들은 물을 찾아도 얻지 못하여 목말라 혀마저 바싹 타지마는, 나 야훼가 그들의 하소연을 들어주고 나 이스라엘의 하느님이 그들을 버리지 않으리니,","가련하고 가난한 자가 물을 구하되 물이 없어서 갈증으로 그들의 혀가 마를 때에 나 여호와가 그들에게 응답하겠고 나 이스라엘의 하나님이 그들을 버리지 아니할 것이라","가련하고 빈핍한 자가 물을 구하되 물이 없어서 갈증으로 그들의 혀가 마를 때에 나 여호와가 그들에게 응답하겠고 나 이스라엘의 하나님이 그들을 버리지 아니할 것이라","여호와께서 바벨론의 포로민들에게 귀향길을 직접 예비해 주시겠다고 약속하셨다. \"내 백성이 곤경에 빠지면 내가 도와주겠다. 그들이 물을 찾아도 얻지 못하여 혀가 탈 때에는 내가 직접 그들의 호소를 들어주겠다. 나는 이스라엘의 하나님으로 그들을 결코 버리지 않겠다.","The afflicted and the needy seek water in vain, their tongues are parched with thirst. I, the LORD, will answer them; I, the God of Israel, will not forsake them.","When the poor and needy seek water, and there is none, and their tongue faileth for thirst, I the LORD will hear them, I the God of Israel will not forsake them.","\"The poor and needy search for water, but there is none; their tongues are parched with thirst. But I the LORD will answer them; I, the God of Israel, will not forsake them.","Egeni et pauperes quaerunt aquas, et non sunt, lingua eorum siti aruit. Ego, Dominus, exaudiam eos, Deus Israel non derelinquam eos.","העניים והאביונים מבקשים מים ואין לשונם בצמא נשתה אני יהוה אענם אלהי ישראל לא אעזבם׃"],["29","41","18","나는 벌거숭이산들 위에 강물이, 골짜기들 가운데에 샘물이 솟아나게 하리라. 광야를 못으로, 메마른 땅을 수원지로 만들리라.","대머리산에 개울물이 흐르고 골짜기에서 샘이 터지리라. 마른 땅에서 물이 솟아 나와 사막을 늪으로 만들리라.","내가 헐벗은 산에 강을 내며 골짜기 가운데에 샘이 나게 하며 광야가 못이 되게 하며 마른 땅이 샘 근원이 되게 할 것이며","내가 자산에 강을 열며 골짜기 가운데 샘이 나게 하며 광야로 못이 되게 하며 마른 땅으로 샘 근원이 되게 할 것이며","내가 민둥산들 위에서 물줄기가 솟아나오게 하고 골짜기마다 샘물이 터져 나오게 하겠다. 내가 광야를 연못으로 바꾸어 놓고 메마른 땅을 샘물이 치솟는 곳으로 바꾸어 놓겠다. 그러면 광야를 여행하면서도 내 백성이 전혀 목마른 줄을 모를 것이다.","I will open up rivers on the bare heights, and fountains in the broad valleys; I will turn the wilderness into a marshland, and the dry ground into springs of water.","I will open rivers in high places, and fountains in the midst of the valleys: I will make the wilderness a pool of water, and the dry land springs of water.","I will make rivers flow on barren heights, and springs within the valleys. I will turn the desert into pools of water, and the parched ground into springs.","Aperiam in decalvatis collibus flumina et in medio vallium fontes; ponam desertum in stagna aquarum et terram aridam in rivos aquarum.","אפתח על שפיים נהרות ובתוך בקעות מעינות אשים מדבר לאגם מים וארץ ציה למוצאי מים׃"],["29","41","19","나는 광야에 향백나무와 아카시아 도금양나무와 소나무를 갖다 놓고 사막에 방백나무와 사철가막살나무와 젓나무를 함께 심으리라.","사막에 송백과 아카시아와 소귀나무와 올리브 나무를 심고 황무지에 전나무와 느티나무와 회양목을 함께 심으리라.\"","내가 광야에는 백향목과 싯딤 나무와 화석류와 들감람나무를 심고 사막에는 잣나무와 소나무와 황양목을 함께 두리니","내가 광야에는 백향목과 싯딤나무와 화석류와 들 감람나무를 심고 사막에는 잣나무와 소나무와 황양목을 함께 두리니","나는 또 광야에 온갖 나무들이 자라오르게 하여 그들이 항상 그늘 속에서 쉬도록 하겠다. 그러면 잎이 무성한 송백과 아카시아와 소귀나무와 올리브나무, 전나무와 느티나무와 회양목 등이 자라날 것이다.","In the wilderness I will plant the cedar, acacia, myrtle, and olive; In the wasteland I will set the cypress, together with the plane tree and the pine,","I will plant in the wilderness the cedar, the shittah tree, and the myrtle, and the oil tree; I will set in the desert the fir tree, and the pine, and the box tree together:","I will put in the desert the cedar and the acacia, the myrtle and the olive. I will set pines in the wasteland, the fir and the cypress together,","Plantabo in deserto cedrum, acaciam et myrtum et lignum olivae; ponam in solitudine abietem, ulmum et cupressum simul,","אתן במדבר ארז שטה והדס ועץ שמן אשים בערבה ברוש תדהר ותאשור יחדו׃"],["29","41","20","이는 주님께서 그것을 손수 이루시고 이스라엘의 거룩하신 분께서 그것을 창조하셨음을 모든 이가 보아 알고 살펴 깨닫게 하시려는 것이다.","이것은 야훼께서 손수 하신 일, 이스라엘의 거룩하신 이가 이루신 일임을 그들에게 깨우쳐 알리시려고 이 모든 일을 똑똑히 보여주신 것이다.","무리가 보고 여호와의 손이 지으신 바요 이스라엘의 거룩한 이가 이것을 창조하신 바인 줄 알며 함께 헤아리며 깨달으리라","무리가 그것을 보고 여호와의 손이 지은 바요 이스라엘의 거룩한 자가 창조한 바인줄 알며 헤아리며 깨달으리라","내 백성이 이것을 보면 나 여호와가 도와주는 것을 알게 될 것이다. 이것은 모두 이스라엘의 거룩한 하나님이 직접 구원의 길을 예비하고 창조한 줄을 그들이 깨달아 알게 하려는 것이다.\"","That all may see and know, observe and understand, That the hand of the LORD has done this, the Holy One of Israel has created it.","That they may see, and know, and consider, and understand together, that the hand of the LORD hath done this, and the Holy One of Israel hath created it.","so that people may see and know, may consider and understand, that the hand of the LORD has done this, that the Holy One of Israel has created it.","ut videant et sciant et recogitent et intellegant pariter quia manus Domini fecit hoc, et Sanctus Israel creavit illud.","למען יראו וידעו וישימו וישכילו יחדו כי יד יהוה עשתה זאת וקדוש ישראל בראה׃"],["29","41","21","“너희의 소송 거리를 가져오너라.” 주님께서 말씀하신다. “너희의 증거를 제시해 보아라.” 야곱의 임금님께서 말씀하신다.","야훼께서 이르신다. \"떼를 지어 오려거든 오너라.\" 야곱의 왕께서 이르신다. \"너희의 신상들을 모시고 오너라.","나 여호와가 말하노니 너희 우상들은 소송하라 야곱의 왕이 말하노니 너희는 확실한 증거를 보이라","나 여호와가 말하노니 너희 우상들은 소송을 일으키라 야곱의 왕이 말하노니 너희는 확실한 증거를 보이라","이스라엘의 하나님 여호와께서 온 세상의 우상들에게 말씀하신다. \"너희는 소송을 제기해 보아라. 너희가 신이라는 증거를 제시해 보아라.","Present your case, says the LORD; bring forward your arguments, says the King of Jacob.","Produce your cause, saith the LORD; bring forth your strong reasons, saith the King of Jacob.","\"Present your case,\" says the LORD. \"Set forth your arguments,\" says Jacob's King.","Proferte causam vestram, dicit Dominus; afferte, si quid firmum habetis, dixit Rex Iacob.","קרבו ריבכם יאמר יהוה הגישו עצמותיכם יאמר מלך יעקב׃"],["29","41","22","다가와서 우리에게 알려라, 앞으로 무엇이 일어날지를. 예전의 일들이 어떤 것인지 알려라. 그러면 우리가 그것들을 살펴 그 결말을 알게 되리라. 아니면 앞으로 올 일들을 우리에게 말해 보아라.","썩 나서서 말해 보아라. 앞으로 무슨 일이 있을지, 지난날에 무슨 일이 있었는지, 기억해 둘 터이니 말해 보아라. 결말을 알 수 있도록 앞으로 올 일을 미리 말해 보아라.","장차 당할 일을 우리에게 진술하라 또 이전 일이 어떠한 것도 알게 하라 우리가 마음에 두고 그 결말을 알아보리라 혹 앞으로 올 일을 듣게 하며","장차 당할 일을 우리에게 진술하라 또 이전 일의 어떠한 것도 고하라 우리가 연구하여 그 결국을 알리라 혹 장래사를 보이며","너희가 한 일들을 우리에게 자랑해 보아라. 우리가 듣고 배우도록 자세하게 이야기해 보아라. 또 너희가 앞으로 계획한 일들을 미리 이야기해 보아라. 너희가 말한 대로 세계 역사가 흘러 가면 우리도 너희를 신으로 생각하겠다.","Let them draw near and foretell to us what it is that shall happen! What are the things of long ago? Tell us, that we may reflect on them and know their outcome; Or declare to us the things to come,","Let them bring them forth, and shew us what shall happen: let them shew the former things, what they be, that we may consider them, and know the latter end of them; or declare us things for to come.","\"Bring in your idols to tell us what is going to happen. Tell us what the former things were, so that we may consider them and know their final outcome. Or declare to us the things to come,","Accedant et nuntient nobis, quaecumque ventura sunt. Priora, quae fuerunt, nuntiate, ut ponamus cor nostrum et sciamus novissima eorum; et, quae ventura sunt, indicate nobis.","יגישו ויגידו לנו את אשר תקרינה הראשנות מה הנה הגידו ונשימה לבנו ונדעה אחריתן או הבאות השמיענו׃"],["29","41","23","너희가 신이라는 것을 우리가 알 수 있도록 다가올 일들을 알려 보아라. 우리가 함께 겁내며 두려워하도록 좋은 일이든 나쁜 일이든 해 보아라.","장차 될 일을 말해 보아라. 그대들이 신인 줄을 알 수 있도록 좋은 일이든 나쁜 일이든 좀 해보아라. 우리 모두 불안해져 두려워하지 않겠는가!","뒤에 올 일을 알게 하라 그리하면 너희가 신들인 줄 우리가 알리라 또 복을 내리든지 재난을 내리든지 하라 우리가 함께 보고 놀라리라","후래사를 진술하라 너희의 신 됨을 우리가 알리라 또 복을 내리든지 화를 내리라 우리가 함께 보고 놀라리라","너희가 앞으로 일어날 일들을 말해 보아라. 그러면 너희가 신인 줄을 우리가 알 것이다. 좋은 일이든 나쁜 일이든 너희의 말대로 맞기만 한다면 우리가 모두 깜짝 놀라서 너희를 존중할 것이다.","tell what is to be in the future, that we may know that you are gods! Do something, good or evil, that will put us in awe and in fear.","Shew the things that are to come hereafter, that we may know that ye are gods: yea, do good, or do evil, that we may be dismayed, and behold it together.","tell us what the future holds, so we may know that you are gods. Do something, whether good or bad, so that we will be dismayed and filled with fear.","Annuntiate, quae ventura sunt in futurum, ut sciamus quia dii estis vos; bene quoque aut male facite, ut inspiciamus et videamus simul.","הגידו האתיות לאחור ונדעה כי אלהים אתם אף תיטיבו ותרעו ונשתעה ונרא יחדו׃"],["29","41","24","보라, 너희는 아무것도 아니요 너희의 업적 따위는 있지도 않으니 너희를 선택하는 자는 혐오스러울 뿐이다.","참으로 너희는 아무것도 아니다. 너희가 무엇을 하여 자취라도 남기랴! 너희를 택하여 떠받드는 자조차 부정탈까 가까이 못할 존재다.","보라 너희는 아무것도 아니며 너희 일은 허망하며 너희를 택한 자는 가증하니라","과연 너희는 아무 것도 아니며 너희 일은 허망하며 너희를 택한 자는 가증하니라","그러나 너희는 허무한 것들이요 아무 일도 할 수 없는 것들이다. 나와 원수된 사람들만이 너희를 신으로 떠받들고 사랑한다.","Why, you are nothing and your work is nought; to choose you is an abomination!","Behold, ye are of nothing, and your work of nought: an abomination is he that chooseth you.","But you are less than nothing and your works are utterly worthless; he who chooses you is detestable.","Ecce vos estis nihilum, et opus vestrum nihil valet; abominatio est, qui eligit vos.","הן אתם מאין ופעלכם מאפע תועבה יבחר בכם׃"],["29","41","25","내가 북쪽에서 한 사람을 일으키니 그가 왔다. 나는 해 뜨는 곳에서 그를 지명하여 불렀다. 그는 옹기장이가 흙을 밟아 짓이기듯 통치자들을 진흙처럼 짓밟으리라.","내가 그의 마음을 부추겨 북쪽에서 달려오게 하고 해 뜨는 곳에서 그를 지명하여 불러온다. 그는 옹기장이가 흙을 밟아 이기듯 지방영주들을 진흙처럼 밟는다.","내가 한 사람을 일으켜 북방에서 오게 하며 내 이름을 부르는 자를 해 돋는 곳에서 오게 하였나니 그가 이르러 고관들을 석회 같이, 토기장이가 진흙을 밟음 같이 하리니","내가 한 사람을 일으켜 북방에서 오게 하며 내 이름을 부르는 자를 해 돋는 곳에서 오게 하였나니 그가 이르러 방백들을 회삼물 같이, 토기장이의 진흙을 밟음 같이 밟을 것이니","내가 북쪽에서 한 사람을 일으켰고, 그는 이미 왔다. 내가 동쪽에서 그를 내 종으로 세워 놓았다. 그가 세상의 통치자들을 진흙처럼 짓밟았다. 토기장이가 진흙을 밟아 이기듯이 그가 세상의 통치자들을 그렇게 짓밟아 버렸다. 고레스가 북쪽의 메대를 정복하고 일어나서 동쪽의 바사 왕국을 세웠는데","I have stirred up one from the north, and he comes; from the east I summon him by name; He shall trample the rulers down like mud, like a potter treading clay.","I have raised up one from the north, and he shall come: from the rising of the sun shall he call upon my name: and he shall come upon princes as upon morter, and as the potter treadeth clay.","\"I have stirred up one from the north, and he comes--one from the rising sun who calls on my name. He treads on rulers as if they were mortar, as if he were a potter treading the clay.","Suscitavi ab aquilone, et venit ab ortu solis; vocavi eum nomine; et conculcabit potentes quasi lutum et velut plastes calcans humum.","העירותי מצפון ויאת ממזרח שמש יקרא בשמי ויבא סגנים כמו חמר וכמו יוצר ירמס טיט׃"],["29","41","26","누가 처음에 이것을 알려 주어 우리가 알게 되었고 누가 오래전에 알려 주어 우리가 “옳다!” 하고 대답할 수 있게 되었느냐? 알려 준 자가 아무도 없고 들려준 자가 아무도 없으며 너희의 말을 들어 본 자가 아무도 없다.","이런 일이 닥칠 때 곧 알아보도록 미리 일러준 자라도 있었느냐? 그 말이 맞았다고 고개를 끄덕이도록 앞질러 일러준 자라도 있었느냐? 이렇게 일러준 자도 들려준 자도 없었다. 아무도 너희가 말하는 것을 듣지 못하였다.","누가 처음부터 이 일을 알게 하여 우리가 알았느냐 누가 이전부터 알게 하여 우리가 옳다고 말하게 하였느냐 알게 하는 자도 없고 들려 주는 자도 없고 너희 말을 듣는 자도 없도다","누가 처음부터 이 일을 우리에게 고하여 알게 하였느뇨 누가 이전부터 우리에게 고하여 이가 옳다고 말하게 하였느뇨 능히 고하는 자도 없고 보이는 자도 없고 너희 말을 듣는 자도 없도다","그것을 미리부터 말한 자가 누구였느냐? 과연 그 말대로 되었다고 우리가 인정할 만한 것을 너희 우상들이 미리 말하였느냐? 너희 중에는 아무도 그것을 미리 알려준 자도 없고 미리 말한 자도 없다. 이 세상에는 너희들에게 한마디라도 들은 사람이 없다.","Who announced this from the beginning, that we might know; beforehand, that we might say, “True”? Not one of you foretold it, not one spoke; not one heard you say,","Who hath declared from the beginning, that we may know? and beforetime, that we may say, He is righteous? yea, there is none that sheweth, yea, there is none that declareth, yea, there is none that heareth your words.","Who told of this from the beginning, so we could know, or beforehand, so we could say, 'He was right'? No one told of this, no one foretold it, no one heard any words from you.","Quis annuntiavit ab exordio, ut sciamus, et a principio, ut dicamus:  “Iustum est “? Non est neque annuntians neque praedicens neque audiens sermones vestros.","מי הגיד מראש ונדעה ומלפנים ונאמר צדיק אף אין מגיד אף אין משמיע אף אין שמע אמריכם׃"],["29","41","27","나는 먼저 시온에게 “보라, 이들을 보라!” 하였고 이제 예루살렘에 기쁜 소식을 전할 이를 보낸다.","내가 비로소 이 소식을 시온에 알렸다. 내가 예루살렘에 희소식을 전할 자를 보냈다.","내가 비로소 시온에게 너희는 이제 그들을 보라 하였노라 내가 기쁜 소식을 전할 자를 예루살렘에 주리라","내가 비로소 시온에 이르기를 너희는 보라 그들을 보라 하였노라 내가 기쁜 소식 전할 자를 예루살렘에 주리라","내가 맨 먼저 예루살렘 사람들에게 그 소식을 전하였고 나 혼자만이 시온성으로 예언자를 보내어 이 기쁜 해방의 소식을 전하였다.","“The first news for Zion: here they come,” or, “I will give Jerusalem a herald of good news.”","The first shall say to Zion, Behold, behold them: and I will give to Jerusalem one that bringeth good tidings.","I was the first to tell Zion, 'Look, here they are!' I gave to Jerusalem a messenger of good tidings.","Primus ad Sion: Ecce adsunt; et Ierusalem laeta nuntiantem do.","ראשון לציון הנה הנם ולירושלם מבשר אתן׃"],["29","41","28","그러나 내가 둘러보니 아무도 없다. 내가 물었을 때 대답할 수 있는 조언자가 그들 가운데에는 아무도 없다.","그들 가운데는 그럴 만한 자가 하나도 없었다. 그럴듯한 의견을 내놓을 자 없었다. 물어보아도 대꾸할 자 없었다.","내가 본즉 한 사람도 없으며 내가 물어도 그들 가운데에 한 말도 대답할 조언자가 없도다","내가 본즉 한 사람도 없으며 내가 물어도 그들 가운데 한 말도 능히 대답할 모사가 없도다","내가 우상들을 둘러보아도 그런 소식을 미리 전한 신이 하나도 없으며, 내게 그런 조언을 한 신도 전혀 없었다. 내가 우상들에게 무엇을 물어 보아도 그들은 한마디 대답도 하지 못하였다.","When I look, there is not one, not one of them to give counsel, to make an answer when I question them.","For I beheld, and there was no man; even among them, and there was no counsellor, that, when I asked of them, could answer a word.","I look but there is no one--no one among them to give counsel, no one to give answer when I ask them.","Et vidi, et nemo erat, ex istis nullus consiliator, ut, si eos interrogarem, responderent verbum.","וארא ואין איש ומאלה ואין יועץ ואשאלם וישיבו דבר׃"],["29","41","29","보라, 그들은 모두 아무것도 아니요 그들의 행적은 있지도 않으며 그들이 부어 만든 상들은 바람이요 헛것일 뿐이다.","참으로 그것들은 모두 허수아비다. 자취를 남긴 일 하나 하지 못한다. 그들의 우상들은 바람이요 허공이다.","보라 그들은 다 헛되며 그들의 행사는 허무하며 그들이 부어 만든 우상들은 바람이요 공허한 것뿐이니라","과연 1)그들의 모든 행사는 공허하며 허무하며 그들의 부어만든 우상은 바람이요 허탄한 것 뿐이니라그들은 다 헛되며 그들의 행사는  공허하며","참으로 우상들은 헛된 것이요 사람에게 재앙을 끼치는 해로운 것들이다. 그들이 하는 일은 아무 것도 없고 쇠를 녹이고 나무를 깍아서 만든 우상들은 바람처럼 공허한 것이요 아무 쓸모가 없는 것들이다.\"","Ah, all of them are nothing, their works are nought, their idols, empty wind!","Behold, they are all vanity; their works are nothing: their molten images are wind and confusion.","See, they are all false! Their deeds amount to nothing; their images are but wind and confusion.","Ecce omnes iniquitas, vana opera eorum; ventus et inane simulacra eorum.","הן כלם און אפס מעשיהם רוח ותהו נסכיהם׃"],["29","42","1","여기에 나의 종이 있다. 그는 내가 붙들어 주는 이, 내가 선택한 이, 내 마음에 드는 이다. 내가 그에게 나의 영을 주었으니 그는 민족들에게 공정을 펴리라.","여기에 나의 종이 있다. 그는 내가 믿어주는 자, 마음에 들어 뽑아 세운 나의 종이다. 그는 나의 영을 받아 뭇 민족에게 바른 인생길을 펴주리라.","내가 붙드는 나의 종, 내 마음에 기뻐하는 자 곧 내가 택한 사람을 보라 내가 나의 영을 그에게 주었은즉 그가 이방에 정의를 베풀리라","내가 붙드는 나의 종, 내 마음에 기뻐하는 나의 택한 사람을 보라 내가 나의 신을 그에게 주었은즉 그가 이방에 공의를 베풀리라","여호와께서 말씀하셨다. \"여기에 내 종이 있다. 내가 그의 뒤에 있어서 항상 그를 붙들어 준다. 그는 내가 선택한 사람이요 내 마음에 꼭 맞는 자이다. 내가 그에게 내 영을 내려 주었으니 그가 세상의 만민에게 옳게 사는 방법을 전파해 줄 것이다.","Here is my servant whom I uphold, my chosen one with whom I am pleased. Upon him I have put my spirit; he shall bring forth justice to the nations.","Behold my servant, whom I uphold; mine elect, in whom my soul delighteth; I have put my spirit upon him: he shall bring forth judgment to the Gentiles.","\"Here is my servant, whom I uphold, my chosen one in whom I delight; I will put my Spirit on him and he will bring justice to the nations.","Ecce servus meus, suscipiam eum; electus meus, complacet sibi in illo anima mea; dedi spiritum meum super eum, iudicium gentibus proferet.","הן עבדי אתמך בו בחירי רצתה נפשי נתתי רוחי עליו משפט לגוים יוציא׃"],["29","42","2","그는 외치지도 않고 목소리를 높이지도 않으며 그 소리가 거리에서 들리게 하지도 않으리라.","그는 소리치거나 고함을 지르지 않아 밖에서 그의 소리가 들리지 않는다.","그는 외치지 아니하며 목소리를 높이지 아니하며 그 소리를 거리에 들리게 하지 아니하며","그는 외치지 아니하며 목소리를 높이지 아니하며 그 소리로 거리에 들리게 아니하며","그는 소리를 지르지도 않고 소동을 일으키지도 않고 길거리에서 큰소리로 선전하지도 않을 것이다.","He will not cry out, nor shout, nor make his voice heard in the street.","He shall not cry, nor lift up, nor cause his voice to be heard in the street.","He will not shout or cry out, or raise his voice in the streets.","Non clamabit neque vociferabitur, nec audietur vox eius foris.","לא יצעק ולא ישא ולא ישמיע בחוץ קולו׃"],["29","42","3","그는 부러진 갈대를 꺾지 않고 꺼져 가는 심지를 끄지 않으리라. 그는 성실하게 공정을 펴리라.","갈대가 부러졌다 하여 잘라버리지 아니하고, 심지가 깜박거린다 하여 등불을 꺼버리지 아니하며, 성실하게 바른 인생길만 펴리라.","상한 갈대를 꺾지 아니하며 꺼져가는 등불을 끄지 아니하고 진실로 정의를 시행할 것이며","상한 갈대를 꺾지 아니하며 꺼져가는 등불을 끄지 아니하고 진리로 공의를 베풀 것이며","그는 갈대가 부러졌다 하여 잘라내지 않고 꺼져 가는 심지도 끄지 않을 것이다. 그러나 그 자신은 심지처럼 꺼져 가지도 않고 갈대처럼 부러지지도 않고 끝까지 내 사명을 완수하여 세계 만민에게 옳게 사는 방법을 전파할 것이다. 먼 섬들과 해변의 주민들까지 그가 전하는 소식을 고대하고 있다.\"","A bruised reed he will not break, and a dimly burning wick he will not quench. He will faithfully bring forth justice.","A bruised reed shall he not break, and the smoking flax shall he not quench: he shall bring forth judgment unto truth.","A bruised reed he will not break, and a smoldering wick he will not snuff out. In faithfulness he will bring forth justice;","Calamum quassatum non conteret et linum fumigans non exstinguet; in veritatem proferet iudicium.","קנה רצוץ לא ישבור ופשתה כהה לא יכבנה לאמת יוציא משפט׃"],["29","42","4","그는 지치지 않고 기가 꺾이는 일 없이 마침내 세상에 공정을 세우리니 섬들도 그의 가르침을 고대하리라.","그는 기가 꺾여 용기를 잃는 일 없이 끝까지 바른 인생길을 세상에 펴리라. 바닷가에 사는 주민들도 그의 가르침을 기다린다.\"","그는 쇠하지 아니하며 낙담하지 아니하고 세상에 정의를 세우기에 이르리니 섬들이 그 교훈을 앙망하리라","그는 쇠하지 아니하며 낙담하지 아니하고 세상에 공의를 세우기에 이르리니 섬들이 그 교훈을 앙망하리라","(3절에 포함되어 있음)","He will not grow dim or be bruised until he establishes justice on the earth; the coastlands will wait for his teaching.","He shall not fail nor be discouraged, till he have set judgment in the earth: and the isles shall wait for his law.","he will not falter or be discouraged till he establishes justice on earth. In his law the islands will put their hope.\"","Non languebit nec frangetur, donec ponat in terra iudicium; et legem eius insulae exspectant.","לא יכהה ולא ירוץ עד ישים בארץ משפט ולתורתו איים ייחילו׃"],["29","42","5","하늘을 창조하시고 그것을 펼치신 분 땅과 거기에서 자라는 온갖 것들을 펴신 분 그곳에 사는 백성에게 목숨을, 그 위를 걸어 다니는 사람들에게 숨을 넣어 주신 분 주 하느님께서 이렇게 말씀하신다.","하늘을 창조하여 펼치시고 땅을 밟아 늘이시고 온갖 싹이 돋게 하신 하느님, 그 위에 사는 백성에게 입김을 넣어주시고 거기 움직이는 것들에게 숨결을 주시는 하느님 야훼께서 이렇게 말씀하신다.","하늘을 창조하여 펴시고 땅과 그 소산을 내시며 땅 위의 백성에게 호흡을 주시며 땅에 행하는 자에게 영을 주시는 하나님 여호와께서 이같이 말씀하시되","하늘을 창조하여 펴시고 땅과 그 소산을 베푸시며 땅 위의 백성에게 호흡을 주시며 땅에 행하는 자에게 신을 주시는 하나님 여호와께서 이같이 말씀하시되","여호와 하나님께서 하늘을 창조하셨다. 그분이 하늘을 천막처럼 팽팽히 쳐놓으셨다. 그분이 땅을 넓게 펼쳐 놓으시고 땅 위에서 온갖 식물과 동물이 생겨나게 하셨다. 그분이 세상의 인간들에게 호흡을 주시고 땅 위를 걸어 다니는 사람들에게 생명을 주셨다. 바로 그분이 이렇게 말씀하셨다.","Thus says God, the LORD, who created the heavens and stretched them out, who spread out the earth and its produce, Who gives breath to its people and spirit to those who walk on it:","Thus saith God the LORD, he that created the heavens, and stretched them out; he that spread forth the earth, and that which cometh out of it; he that giveth breath unto the people upon it, and spirit to them that walk therein:","This is what God the LORD says--he who created the heavens and stretched them out, who spread out the earth and all that comes out of it, who gives breath to its people, and life to those who walk on it:","Haec dicit Dominus Deus, creans caelos et extendens eos, firmans terram et quae germinant ex ea, dans flatum populo, qui est super eam, et spiritum calcantibus eam:","כה אמר האל יהוה בורא השמים ונוטיהם רקע הארץ וצאצאיה נתן נשמה לעם עליה ורוח להלכים בה׃"],["29","42","6","“주님인 내가 의로움으로 너를 부르고 네 손을 붙잡아 주었다. 내가 너를 빚어 만들어 백성을 위한 계약이 되고 민족들의 빛이 되게 하였으니","\"나 야훼가 너를 부른다. 정의를 세우라고 너를 부른다. 내가 너의 손을 잡아 지켜주고 너를 세워 인류와 계약을 맺으니 너는 만국의 빛이 되어라.","나 여호와가 의로 너를 불렀은즉 내가 네 손을 잡아 너를 보호하며 너를 세워 백성의 언약과 이방의 빛이 되게 하리니","나 여호와가 의로 너를 불렀은즉 내가 네 손을 잡아 너를 보호하며 너를 세워 백성의 언약과 이방의 빛이 되게 하리니","\"나 여호와가 이것을 시키려고 너를 불러 세웠다. 내가 항상 네 곁에 있으며 너를 승리의 용사로 무장시켜 주겠다. 너는 내 백성에게 평화를 가져다 줄 것이며 온 인류에게 생명의 빛이 될 것이다.","I, the LORD, have called you for justice, I have grasped you by the hand; I formed you, and set you as a covenant for the people, a light for the nations,","I the LORD have called thee in righteousness, and will hold thine hand, and will keep thee, and give thee for a covenant of the people, for a light of the Gentiles;","\"I, the LORD, have called you in righteousness; I will take hold of your hand. I will keep you and will make you to be a covenant for the people and a light for the Gentiles,"," “Ego, Dominus, vocavi te in iustitia et apprehendi manum tuam; et formavi te et dedi te in foedus populi, in lucem gentium,","אני יהוה קראתיך בצדק ואחזק בידך ואצרך ואתנך לברית עם לאור גוים׃"],["29","42","7","보지 못하는 눈을 뜨게 하고 갇힌 이들을 감옥에서, 어둠 속에 앉아 있는 이들을 감방에서 풀어 주기 위함이다.","소경들의 눈을 열어주고 감옥에 묶여 있는 이들을 풀어주고 캄캄한 영창 속에 갇혀 있는 이들을 놓아주어라.","네가 눈먼 자들의 눈을 밝히며 갇힌 자를 감옥에서 이끌어 내며 흑암에 앉은 자를 감방에서 나오게 하리라","네가 소경의 눈을 밝히며 갇힌 자를 옥에서 이끌어 내며 흑암에 처한 자를 간에서 나오게 하리라","너는 감옥에 갇힌 자들을 그 캄캄한 감방에서 데리고 나오며 소경의 눈을 다시 열어 줄 것이다.\"","To open the eyes of the blind, to bring out prisoners from confinement, and from the dungeon, those who live in darkness.","To open the blind eyes, to bring out the prisoners from the prison, and them that sit in darkness out of the prison house.","to open eyes that are blind, to free captives from prison and to release from the dungeon those who sit in darkness.","ut aperires oculos caecorum et educeres de conclusione vinctum, de domo carceris sedentes in tenebris.","לפקח עינים עורות להוציא ממסגר אסיר מבית כלא ישבי חשך׃"],["29","42","8","나는 야훼, 이것이 나의 이름이다. 나는 내 영광을 남에게 돌리지 않고 내가 받을 찬양을 우상들에게 돌리지 않는다.","나는 야훼다. 이것이 내 이름이다. 내가 받을 영광을 뉘게 돌리랴? 내가 받을 찬양을 어떤 우상에게 돌리랴?","나는 여호와이니 이는 내 이름이라 나는 내 영광을 다른 자에게, 내 찬송을 우상에게 주지 아니하리라","나는 여호와니 이는 내 이름이라 나는 내 영광을 다른 자에게, 내 찬송을 우상에게 주지 아니하리라","여호와께서 바벨론에서 포로생활을 하는 이스라엘 백성에게 말씀하셨다. \"나는 여호와이다! 여호와가 바로 내 이름이다. 역사를 지배하는 나는 영광을 어느 누구에게도 빼앗기지 않고, 나의 이 명성을 우상들에게 절대로 넘겨 주지 않겠다.","I am the LORD, LORD is my name; my glory I give to no other, nor my praise to idols.","I am the LORD: that is my name: and my glory will I not give to another, neither my praise to graven images.","\"I am the LORD; that is my name! I will not give my glory to another or my praise to idols.","Ego Dominus: hoc est nomen meum; et gloriam meam alteri non dabo et laudem meam sculptilibus.","אני יהוה הוא שמי וכבודי לאחר לא אתן ותהלתי לפסילים׃"],["29","42","9","보라, 예전에 알려 준 일들은 이루어졌고 새로 일어날 일들은 이제 내가 알려 준다. 싹이 트기도 전에 내가 너희에게 들려준다.”","전에 말한 일들은 이미 이루어졌다. 이제 새로 될 일을 내가 미리 알려준다. 싹도 트기 전에 너희의 귀에 들려준다.\"","보라 전에 예언한 일이 이미 이루어졌느니라 이제 내가 새 일을 알리노라 그 일이 시작되기 전에라도 너희에게 이르노라","보라 전에 예언한 일이 이미 이루었느니라 이제 내가 새 일을 고하노라 그 일이 시작되기 전이라도 너희에게 이르노라","너희가 포로로 잡혀 오기 전에 내가 미리 앗수르의 침략을 말하였고 그대로 이루어졌다. 이제 내가 새 일을 알려 주겠다. 새 일이 시작되기 전에 내가 미리 너희에게 알려 준다. 너희도 포로생활에서 해방되며 온 인류도 죄악에서 해방될 새로운 일을 내가 시작하겠다.\"","See, the earlier things have come to pass, new ones I now declare; Before they spring forth I announce them to you.","Behold, the former things are come to pass, and new things do I declare: before they spring forth I tell you of them.","See, the former things have taken place, and new things I declare; before they spring into being I announce them to you.\"","Quae prima fuerunt, ecce venerunt; nova quoque ego annuntio: antequam oriantur, audita vobis faciam “.","הראשנות הנה באו וחדשות אני מגיד בטרם תצמחנה אשמיע אתכם׃"],["29","42","10","주님께 노래하여라, 새로운 노래를. 땅 끝에서부터 그분께 찬양을 드려라. 바다와 그를 채운 것들, 섬들과 그 주민들은 소리를 높여라.","새 노래로 야훼를 찬양하여라. 지구 위 구석구석에서 찬양 소리 울려 퍼지게 하여라. 바다와 바다에 가득한 물고기들아, 소리를 질러라. 섬과 섬에 사는 사람들아, 환성을 올려라.","항해하는 자들과 바다 가운데의 만물과 섬들과 거기에 사는 사람들아 여호와께 새 노래로 노래하며 땅 끝에서부터 찬송하라","항해하는 자와 바다 가운데 만물과 섬들과 그 거민들아 여호와께 새 노래로 노래하며 땅 끝에서부터 찬송하라","온 세상 사람들아, 주께서 완성하실 약속의 미래를 내다보며 미리 새 노래로 찬양하여라. 지금은 바벨론의 탄압을 받으며 사는 이스라엘도 해방의 내일이 온 줄 믿고 미리 새 노래로 주님을 찬양하여라. 땅 끝에 사는 사람들도 주께서 승리하신 미래를 내다보며 미리 주님을 찬양하여라. 멀리 섬과 해변에 사는 사람들도 주님을 찬양하여라. 바다도 파도 치며 주님을 찬양하여라. 바다에 사는 물고기들도 주님을 찬양하여라.","Sing to the LORD a new song, his praise from the ends of the earth: Let the sea and what fills it resound, the coastlands, and those who dwell in them.","Sing unto the LORD a new song, and his praise from the end of the earth, ye that go down to the sea, and all that is therein; the isles, and the inhabitants thereof.","Sing to the LORD a new song, his praise from the ends of the earth, you who go down to the sea, and all that is in it, you islands, and all who live in them.","Cantate Domino canticum novum, laus eius ab extremis terrae; qui descenditis in mare, et plenitudo eius, insulae et habitatores earum.","שירו ליהוה שיר חדש תהלתו מקצה הארץ יורדי הים ומלאו איים וישביהם׃"],["29","42","11","광야와 그 성읍들 케다르족이 사는 부락들은 큰 소리로 외치고 셀라 주민들은 환성을 올리며 산봉우리에서마다 기뻐 소리리쳐라.","사막과 사막에 자리잡은 성읍들아, 찬양하여라. 케달족이 웅성대는 부락들에서도 찬양 소리 울려 퍼지게 하여라. 셀라 주민들도 환성을 올려라. 산 봉우리 봉우리에서 크게 외쳐라.","광야와 거기에 있는 성읍들과 게달 사람이 사는 마을들은 소리를 높이라 셀라의 주민들은 노래하며 산 꼭대기에서 즐거이 부르라","광야와 거기 있는 성읍들과 게달 사람의 거하는 촌락들은 소리를 높이라 셀라의 거민들은 노래하며 산 꼭대기에서 즐거이 부르라","광야에 사는 유목민들과 아라비아에 사는 게달 주민들도 주께 환호성을 올리며 찬양하여라. 에돔의 바위 꼭대기에 사는 사람들도 산지에 사는 사람들도 가장 높은 봉우리 위에서 주께 환호성을 올리며 찬양하여라.","Let the wilderness and its cities cry out, the villages where Kedar dwells; Let the inhabitants of Sela exult, and shout from the top of the mountains.","Let the wilderness and the cities thereof lift up their voice, the villages that Kedar doth inhabit: let the inhabitants of the rock sing, let them shout from the top of the mountains.","Let the desert and its towns raise their voices; let the settlements where Kedar lives rejoice. Let the people of Sela sing for joy; let them shout from the mountaintops.","Exsultent desertum et civitates eius, vici, quos habitat Cedar. Iubilent habitatores Petrae, de vertice montium clament.","ישאו מדבר ועריו חצרים תשב קדר ירנו ישבי סלע מראש הרים יצוחו׃"],["29","42","12","주님께 영광을 드리고 섬에서마다 그분에 대한 찬양을 알려라.","야훼께 영광을 돌려라. 그를 찬양하는 소리, 이 섬과 저 섬에서 메아리치게 하여라.","여호와께 영광을 돌리며 섬들 중에서 그의 찬송을 전할지어다","여호와께 영광을 돌리며 섬들 중에서 그의 찬송을 선전할찌어다","세상 사람들아, 모두 주님을 찬양하여 주께 영광을 돌려라. 멀리 섬마을에도 주께서 승리하신 것을 전파하여 그들도 주님을 찬양하게 하여라.","Let them give glory to the LORD, and utter his praise in the coastlands.","Let them give glory unto the LORD, and declare his praise in the islands.","Let them give glory to the LORD and proclaim his praise in the islands.","Ponant Domino gloriam et laudem eius in insulis nuntient.","ישימו ליהוה כבוד ותהלתו באיים יגידו׃"],["29","42","13","주님께서 용사처럼 나가시고 전사처럼 사기를 돋우신다. 고함을 치시고 함성을 터뜨리시며 당신 적들을 압도하신다.","야훼께서 위풍당당하게 나서신다. 분격하여 떨치고 일어나는 군인처럼, 적진에 육박하며 함성을 올려 고함치신다.","여호와께서 용사 같이 나가시며 전사 같이 분발하여 외쳐 크게 부르시며 그 대적을 크게 치시리로다","여호와께서 용사 같이 나가시며 전사 같이 분발하여 외쳐 크게 부르시며 그 대적을 크게 치시리로다","여호와께서 직접 용사처럼 싸움터로 나가시고 주님의 군대에게 사기를 일으켜 주시며 큰소리로 공격 명령을 내리신다. 인간을 탄압하는 모든 원수들에게 선전포고를 하시고 가는 곳마다 승리하신다. 온 세계 만민들아, 너희는 주님을 찬양하여라.","The LORD goes forth like a warrior, like a man of war he stirs up his fury; He shouts out his battle cry, against his enemies he shows his might:","The LORD shall go forth as a mighty man, he shall stir up jealousy like a man of war: he shall cry, yea, roar; he shall prevail against his enemies.","The LORD will march out like a mighty man, like a warrior he will stir up his zeal; with a shout he will raise the battle cry and will triumph over his enemies.","Dominus sicut fortis egredietur, sicut vir proeliator suscitabit zelum; vociferabitur et conclamabit, super inimicos suos praevalebit.","יהוה כגבור יצא כאיש מלחמות יעיר קנאה יריע אף יצריח על איביו יתגבר׃"],["29","42","14","나는 오랫동안 조용히 입을 다물고 참아 왔다. 이제 나는 해산하는 여인처럼 부르짖으리라. 헐떡이며 숨을 내쉬리라.","\"나 오랫동안 입을 다물고 말없이 참아왔다. 이제 해산하는 여인이 더 참을 수 없어 신음하듯이, 나 식식거리고 헐떡이며","내가 오랫동안 조용하며 잠잠하고 참았으나 내가 해산하는 여인 같이 부르짖으리니 숨이 차서 심히 헐떡일 것이라","내가 오래 동안 고요히 하며 잠잠하여 참았으나 이제는 내가 해산하는 여인 같이 부르짖으리니 숨이 차서 심히 헐떡일 것이라","주께서 말씀하셨다. \"나는 오랫동안 침묵을 지키고 내 백성의 부르짖는 소리를 듣고서도 대답하지 않았다. 나 스스로 억제하며 참아 왔으나 이제는 더 이상 참을 수가 없다. 나는 마치 해산하는 여인처럼 진통을 참을 수가 없어 몹시도 헐떡이고 신음하면서 부르짖는다.","For a long time I have kept silent, I have said nothing, holding myself back; Now I cry out like a woman in labor, gasping and panting.","I have long time holden my peace; I have been still, and refrained myself: now will I cry like a travailing woman; I will destroy and devour at once.","\"For a long time I have kept silent, I have been quiet and held myself back. But now, like a woman in childbirth, I cry out, I gasp and pant."," “Tacui semper, silui, patiens fui; sicut parturiens ululabo, gemam et fremam simul.","החשיתי מעולם אחריש אתאפק כיולדה אפעה אשם ואשאף יחד׃"],["29","42","15","나는 산과 언덕들을 황폐하게 하고 그 초목들을 모두 메마르게 하리라. 강들을 땅으로 만들고 못들을 메마르게 하리라.","모든 산과 모든 언덕을 휩쓸어 초목은 시들게 하고, 강물은 말라 사막이 되게 하며, 호수도 말라 그 바닥이 갈라지게 하리라.","내가 산들과 언덕들을 황폐하게 하며 그 모든 초목들을 마르게 하며 강들이 섬이 되게 하며 못들을 마르게 할 것이며","내가 큰 산과 작은 산을 황무케 하며 그 초목을 마르게 하며 강들로 섬이 되게 하며 못들을 마르게 할 것이며","내가 산과 언덕을 모조리 무너뜨리고 세상의 초목을 모조리 말려 죽이겠다. 내가 강물과 호수도 모조리 말려 버리겠다. 그때에는 지금 세상을 지배하는 바벨론 제국도 무너질 것이다.","I will lay waste mountains and hills, all their undergrowth I will dry up; I will turn the rivers into marshes, and the marshes I will dry up.","I will make waste mountains and hills, and dry up all their herbs; and I will make the rivers islands, and I will dry up the pools.","I will lay waste the mountains and hills and dry up all their vegetation; I will turn rivers into islands and dry up the pools.","Desertos faciam montes et colles et omne gramen eorum exsiccabo; et ponam flumina in insulas et stagna arefaciam.","אחריב הרים וגבעות וכל עשבם אוביש ושמתי נהרות לאיים ואגמים אוביש׃"],["29","42","16","나는 눈먼 이들을 그들이 모르는 길에서 이끌고 그들이 모르는 행로에서 걷게 하며 그들 앞의 어둠을 빛으로, 험한 곳을 평지로 만들리라. 이것들이 내가 할 일 나는 그 일들을 포기하지 않으리라.","그러나 나는 낯선 길 가는 소경의 손을 잡아주고, 가본 적 없는 오솔길을 살펴주어, 캄캄하던 앞길을 환히 트이게 하리라. 험한 길은 탄탄대로가 되게 하리라. 나는 이 일을 이루고야 말리라. 결코 중단하지 아니하리라.\"","내가 맹인들을 그들이 알지 못하는 길로 이끌며 그들이 알지 못하는 지름길로 인도하며 암흑이 그 앞에서 광명이 되게 하며 굽은 데를 곧게 할 것이라 내가 이 일을 행하여 그들을 버리지 아니하리니","내가 소경을 그들의 알지 못하는 길로 이끌며 그들의 알지 못하는 첩경으로 인도하며 흑암으로 그 앞에 광명이 되게 하며 굽은데를 곧게 할 것이라 내가 이 일을 행하여 그들을 버리지 아니하리니","그때에는 내가 소경과 같은 내 백성, 갈 길을 알지 못하는 내 백성을 직접 손을 붙잡고 인도해 주겠다. 그들의 캄캄한 앞길을 내가 밝혀 주며 모든 장애물을 제거하여 평탄한 길로 인도해 주겠다. 내가 이 일을 틀림없이 완수하리라. 절대로 중간에 포기하지 않으리라.","I will lead the blind on a way they do not know; by paths they do not know I will guide them. I will turn darkness into light before them, and make crooked ways straight. These are my promises: I made them, I will not forsake them.","And I will bring the blind by a way that they knew not; I will lead them in paths that they have not known: I will make darkness light before them, and crooked things straight. These things will I do unto them, and not forsake them.","I will lead the blind by ways they have not known, along unfamiliar paths I will guide them; I will turn the darkness into light before them and make the rough places smooth. These are the things I will do; I will not forsake them.","Et ducam caecos in viam, quam nesciunt, et in semitis, quas ignoraverunt, ambulare eos faciam; ponam tenebras coram eis in lucem et prava in recta. Haec verba faciam eis et non dereliquam eos “.","והולכתי עורים בדרך לא ידעו בנתיבות לא ידעו אדריכם אשים מחשך לפניהם לאור ומעקשים למישור אלה הדברים עשיתם ולא עזבתים׃"],["29","42","17","우상을 믿는 자들 “당신들이 저희의 신입니다.” 하고 부어 만든 상에게 말하는 자들 그들은 뒤로 물러나 크게 부끄러운 일을 당하리라.","우상들을 의지하는 자들은 꼬리를 감추고, 부어 만든 형상을 보고 \"당신들이 우리의 신이다.\" 하는 자들은 크게 부끄러움을 당하리라.","조각한 우상을 의지하며 부어 만든 우상을 향하여 너희는 우리의 신이라 하는 자는 물리침을 받아 크게 수치를 당하리라","조각한 우상을 의뢰하며 부어 만든 우상을 향하여 너희는 우리의 신이라 하는 자는 물리침을 받아 크게 수치를 당하리라","그러나 나무를 새겨 만든 신상들을 의지하는 이들과 금속을 부어 만든 우상들을 향하여 \"우리의 신\"이라고 고백하는 이들은 모두 버림받아 큰 수치를 당할 것이다.\"","They shall be turned back in utter shame who trust in idols; Who say to molten images, “You are our gods.”","They shall be turned back, they shall be greatly ashamed, that trust in graven images, that say to the molten images, Ye are our gods.","But those who trust in idols, who say to images, 'You are our gods,' will be turned back in utter shame.","Conversi sunt retrorsum; confundantur confusione, qui confidunt in sculptili, qui dicunt conflatili:  “Vos dii nostri “.","נסגו אחור יבשו בשת הבטחים בפסל האמרים למסכה אתם אלהינו׃"],["29","42","18","너희 귀먹은 자들아, 들어라. 너희 눈먼 자들아, 눈을 뜨고 보아라.","귀머거리들아, 들어라. 소경들아, 눈을 똑바로 뜨고 보아라.","너희 못 듣는 자들아 들으라 너희 맹인들아 밝히 보라","너희 귀머거리들아 들으라 너희 소경들아 밝히 보라","주께서 말씀하셨다. \"귀머거리들아, 너희의 귀를 열고 똑똑히 들어라. 소경들아, 너희 두 눈을 똑바로 뜨고 똑똑히 보아라.","You deaf ones, listen, you blind ones, look and see!","Hear, ye deaf; and look, ye blind, that ye may see.","\"Hear, you deaf; look, you blind, and see!","Surdi, audite; et caeci, intuemini ad videndum.","החרשים שמעו והעורים הביטו לראות׃"],["29","42","19","눈먼 자가 누구냐? 나의 종이 아니냐! 귀먹은 자가 누구냐? 내가 보내는 사자가 아니냐! 하느님께 봉헌된 이자처럼 눈먼 자 누가 있느냐? 주님의 종처럼 눈먼 자 누가 있느냐?","내 종과 같은 소경이 또 있으랴? 내가 보낸 심부름꾼과 같은 귀머거리가 또 있으랴? 나의 사명을 띠고 가는 자와 같은 소경이 또 있으랴? 야훼의 종과 같은 귀머거리가 또 어디 있으랴?","맹인이 누구냐 내 종이 아니냐 누가 내가 보내는 내 사자 같이 못 듣는 자겠느냐 누가 내게 충성된 자 같이 맹인이겠느냐 누가 여호와의 종 같이 맹인이겠느냐","소경이 누구냐 내 종이 아니냐 누가 나의 보내는 나의 사자 같이 귀머거리겠느냐 누가 1)나와 친한 자 같이 소경이겠느냐 누가 여호와의 종 같이 소경이겠느냐 내게 충성된 자","너희는 내가 듣지도 못하고 보지도 못한다고 생각하지만 듣지도 못하고 보지도 못하는 자는 바로 너희다. 내가 너희를 선택하여 내 백성으로 삼고 나의 종과 나의 심부름꾼으로 삼아 놓았으나 너희가 예언자들의 경고를 듣지 않고 무시하였다.","Who is blind but my servant, or deaf like the messenger I send? Who is blind like the one I restore, blind like the servant of the LORD?","Who is blind, but my servant? or deaf, as my messenger that I sent? who is blind as he that is perfect, and blind as the LORD's servant?","Who is blind but my servant, and deaf like the messenger I send? Who is blind like the one committed to me, blind like the servant of the LORD?","Quis caecus sicut servus meus, et surdus sicut nuntius, quem ego mittam? Quis caecus sicut qui restitutus est? Et quis caecus sicut servus Domini?","מי עור כי אם עבדי וחרש כמלאכי אשלח מי עור כמשלם ועור כעבד יהוה׃"],["29","42","20","그는 많이 보면서도 주의를 기울이지 않고 귀가 열려 있으면서도 듣지 못한다.","너는 눈이 있어도 보지 못하는 청맹과니, 귀가 있어도 듣지 못하는 귀머거리다.","네가 많은 것을 볼지라도 유의하지 아니하며 귀가 열려 있을지라도 듣지 아니하는도다","네가 많은 것을 볼찌라도 유의치 아니하며 귀는 밝을찌라도 듣지 아니하는도다","내가 행한 일들을 너희가 모두 보고서도 거기서 전혀 배운 것이 없다. 너희에게는 나의 경고를 들을 귀가 열려 있으면서도 한마디도 옳게 알아듣지를 못하였다.","You see many things but do not observe; ears open, but do not hear.","Seeing many things, but thou observest not; opening the ears, but he heareth not.","You have seen many things, but have paid no attention; your ears are open, but you hear nothing.\"","Multa vidisti, sed non servas; aures aperuisti, sed non audis.","ראית רבות ולא תשמר פקוח אזנים ולא ישמע׃"],["29","42","21","주님께서는 당신의 의로움을 위해 당신의 법을 드높이시고 영광스럽게 만드시기를 원하셨다.","야훼께서는 당신의 옳은 뜻을 세우시려고 법을 크게 들날리는 것을 기뻐하신다.","여호와께서 그의 의로 말미암아 기쁨으로 교훈을 크게 하며 존귀하게 하려 하셨으나","여호와께서 자기의 의로우심을 인하여 기쁨으로 그 2)교훈을 크게 하며 존귀케 하려 하셨으나 히, 율법","나는 너희를 죄악과 원수들에게서 해방시키려고 항상 너희에게 율법을 분명하게 가르쳐 주었다.","It was the LORD’s will for the sake of his justice to make his teaching great and glorious.","The LORD is well pleased for his righteousness' sake; he will magnify the law, and make it honourable.","It pleased the LORD for the sake of his righteousness to make his law great and glorious.","Dominus voluit propter iustitiam suam magnificare legem et extollere.","יהוה חפץ למען צדקו יגדיל תורה ויאדיר׃"],["29","42","22","그러나 이들은 약탈과 노략질을 당한 백성 모두 굴속에 묶여 있고 감방에 갇혀 있다. 이들은 약탈품이 되었지만 구해 주는 이 없고 노략품이 되었지만 “돌려주어라.” 하고 말해 주는 이 없다.","그런데 이 백성은 털리고 노략질만 당하였다. 모두 바위굴 속 올무에 걸리고 영창에 갇혔다. 털려도 구해 주는 이 없고 노략질을 당해도 \"돌려주어라.\" 하고 역성들어 주는 자 없다.","이 백성이 도둑 맞으며 탈취를 당하며 다 굴 속에 잡히며 옥에 갇히도다 노략을 당하되 구할 자가 없고 탈취를 당하되 되돌려 주라 말할 자가 없도다","이 백성이 도적 맞으며 탈취를 당하며 다 굴속에 잡히며 옥에 갇히도다 노략을 당하되 구할 자가 없고 탈취를 당하되 도로 주라 할 자가 없도다","그러나 너희가 그토록 귀중한 가르침을 거절하더니 이제는 모조리 약탈을 당하고 적진으로 끌려와서 굴속에 묶여 있고 옥중에 갇혀 있다. 원수들이 너희를 불잡아 포로로 끌어 갔어도 너희를 풀어 준 이가 아무도 없고 너희를 고향으로 데려다 주는 이가 없다.","This is a people plundered and despoiled, all of them trapped in holes, hidden away in prisons. They are taken as plunder, with no one to rescue them, as spoil, with no one to say, “Give back!”","But this is a people robbed and spoiled; they are all of them snared in holes, and they are hid in prison houses: they are for a prey, and none delivereth; for a spoil, and none saith, Restore.","But this is a people plundered and looted, all of them trapped in pits or hidden away in prisons. They have become plunder, with no one to rescue them; they have been made loot, with no one to say, \"Send them back.\"","Ipse autem populus direptus et vastatus; in foveis conclusi omnes, et in domibus carcerum absconditi sunt. Facti sunt in rapinam, nec est qui eruat; in direptionem, nec est qui dicat:  “Redde! “.","והוא עם בזוז ושסוי הפח בחורים כלם ובבתי כלאים החבאו היו לבז ואין מציל משסה ואין אמר השב׃"],["29","42","23","너희 가운데 누가 이것에 귀를 기울이고 앞날을 위하여 주의 깊게 들으려느냐?","너희 가운데 이 말을 귀담아들어 둘 자가 어디 있느냐? 이 말을 똑똑히 듣고 마음에 새겨 둘 자가 어디 있느냐?","너희 중에 누가 이 일에 귀를 기울이겠느냐 누가 뒤에 올 일을 삼가 듣겠느냐","너희 중에 누가 이 일에 귀를 기울이겠느냐 누가 장래사를 삼가 듣겠느냐","너희 가운데에는 이런 일을 당하고서도 깨닫는 이가 아무도 없느냐? 이토록 무서운 경험을 하고서도 귀기울여 나의 가르침을 듣는 사람이 아무도 없느냐?\"","Who among you will give ear to this, listen and pay attention from now on?","Who among you will give ear to this? who will hearken and hear for the time to come?","Which of you will listen to this or pay close attention in time to come?","Quis est in vobis, qui audiat hoc, attendat et auscultet futura?","מי בכם יאזין זאת יקשב וישמע לאחור׃"],["29","42","24","누가 야곱을 노략질당하게 내놓으시고 이스라엘을 약탈자들에게 내놓으셨느냐? 바로 주님이 아니시냐? 우리가 그분께 죄를 짓지 않았느냐? 그들은 그분의 길을 걸으려 하지 않았고 그분의 법에 순종하지 않았다.","누가 야곱을 노략질당하게 하였느냐? 누가 이스라엘을 약탈자에게 내주었느냐? 야훼가 아니시고 누구랴! 우리는 그를 거역하여 그의 길을 가지 아니하고 그의 법을 따르지 아니하였다.","야곱이 탈취를 당하게 하신 자가 누구냐 이스라엘을 약탈자들에게 넘기신 자가 누구냐 여호와가 아니시냐 우리가 그에게 범죄하였도다 그들이 그의 길로 다니기를 원하지 아니하며 그의 교훈을 순종하지 아니하였도다","야곱으로 탈취를 당케 하신 자가 누구냐 이스라엘을 도적에게 붙이신 자가 누구냐 여호와가 아니시냐 우리가 그에게 범죄하였도다 백성들이 그 길로 행치 아니하며 그 율법을 순종치 아니하였도다","도대체 누가 이스라엘 백성을 강도 떼에게 넘겨 주고 야곱의 후손들을 약탈자들에게 내주었느냐? 그것은 바로 여호와께서 하신 일이 아니냐? 우리가 주께 불순종하고 범죄하였기 때문에 주께서 우리를 원수들의 손에 넘겨 주신 것이 아니냐? 우리가 주님의 말씀에 따라 살려고 하지 않았고 주님의 율법을 무시하며 죄를 지었기 때문이다.","Who was it that gave Jacob to be despoiled, Israel to the plunderers? Was it not the LORD, against whom we have sinned? In his ways they refused to walk, his teaching they would not heed.","Who gave Jacob for a spoil, and Israel to the robbers? did not the LORD, he against whom we have sinned? for they would not walk in his ways, neither were they obedient unto his law.","Who handed Jacob over to become loot, and Israel to the plunderers? Was it not the LORD, against whom we have sinned? For they would not follow his ways; they did not obey his law.","Quis dedit in direptionem Iacob et Israel vastantibus? Nonne Dominus ipse, cui peccavimus? Et noluerunt in viis eius ambulare et non audierunt legem eius.","מי נתן למשוסה יעקב וישראל לבזזים הלוא יהוה זו חטאנו לו ולא אבו בדרכיו הלוך ולא שמעו בתורתו׃"],["29","42","25","그래서 그분께서 당신 분노의 열기와 전쟁의 폭력을 그들 위에 퍼부으시어 그것이 그들 주위에 타올랐지만 그들은 깨닫지 못하고 그것이 그들을 태웠지만 그들은 알아듣지 못하였다.","그리하여 그가 불길같이 노하시어 참혹한 전화를 퍼부으시고, 사방에서 불을 지르셨다. 그래도 그들은 깨닫지 못하였다. 말끔히 태워버리셨다. 그래도 그들은 제 정신을 차리지 못하였다.","그러므로 여호와께서 맹렬한 진노와 전쟁의 위력을 이스라엘에게 쏟아 부으시매 그 사방에서 불타오르나 깨닫지 못하며 몸이 타나 마음에 두지 아니하는도다","그러므로 여호와께서 맹렬한 진노와 전쟁의 위력으로 이스라엘에게 베푸시매 그 사방으로 불붙듯하나 깨닫지 못하며 몸이 타나 마음에 두지 아니하는도다","그렇기 때문에 주께서 이스라엘에게 무서운 진노를 쏟아 징벌하시고 엄청난 전란에 빠뜨리셨다. 주님의 분노의 불길이 사방에서 밀려와 이스라엘을 태워 없앴으나 그들은 조금도 깨닫지 못하였다. 주께서 내린 분노의 불꽃이 이 백성을 태웠으나 그들은 조금도 제정신을 차리지 못하였다.","So he poured out wrath upon them, his anger, and the fury of battle; It blazed all around them, yet they did not realize, it burned them, but they did not take it to heart.","Therefore he hath poured upon him the fury of his anger, and the strength of battle: and it hath set him on fire round about, yet he knew not; and it burned him, yet he laid it not to heart.","So he poured out on them his burning anger, the violence of war. It enveloped them in flames, yet they did not understand; it consumed them, but they did not take it to heart.","Et effudit super eum indignationem furoris sui et forte bellum. Et combussit eum in circuitu, et non cognovit; et succendit eum, et non intellexit.","וישפך עליו חמה אפו ועזוז מלחמה ותלהטהו מסביב ולא ידע ותבער בו ולא ישים על לב׃"],["29","43","1","그러나 이제 야곱아, 너를 창조하신 분, 이스라엘아, 너를 빚어 만드신 분, 주님께서 이렇게 말씀하신다. “내가 너를 구원하였으니 두려워하지 마라. 내가 너를 지명하여 불렀으니 너는 나의 것이다.","그러나 이제 야훼께서 말씀하신다. 야곱아, 너를 창조하신 야훼의 말씀이시다. 이스라엘아, 너를 빚어 만드신 야훼의 말씀이시다. \"두려워하지 마라. 내가 너를 건져주지 않았느냐? 내가 너를 지명하여 불렀으니, 너는 내 사람이다.","야곱아 너를 창조하신 여호와께서 지금 말씀하시느니라 이스라엘아 너를 지으신 이가 말씀하시느니라 너는 두려워하지 말라 내가 너를 구속하였고 내가 너를 지명하여 불렀나니 너는 내 것이라","야곱아 너를 창조하신 여호와께서 이제 말씀하시느니라 이스라엘아 너를 조성하신 자가 이제 말씀하시느니라 너는 두려워 말라 내가 너를 구속하였고 내가 너를 지명하여 불렀나니 너는 내 것이라","여호와께서 이렇게 말씀하셨다. \"너는 두려워하지 말아라. 내가 너를 해방시키리라! 내가 네게 이름을 지어 주면서 선택하였으니 너야말로 내 사람이다.","But now, thus says the LORD, who created you, Jacob, and formed you, Israel: Do not fear, for I have redeemed you; I have called you by name: you are mine.","But now thus saith the LORD that created thee, O Jacob, and he that formed thee, O Israel, Fear not: for I have redeemed thee, I have called thee by thy name; thou art mine.","But now, this is what the LORD says--he who created you, O Jacob, he who formed you, O Israel: \"Fear not, for I have redeemed you; I have summoned you by name; you are mine.","Et nunc haec dicit Dominus, qui creavit te, Iacob, et formavit te, Israel:  “Noli timere, quia redemi te et vocavi te nomine tuo; meus es tu.","ועתה כה אמר יהוה בראך יעקב ויצרך ישראל אל תירא כי גאלתיך קראתי בשמך לי אתה׃"],["29","43","2","네가 물 한가운데를 지난다 해도 나 너와 함께 있고 강을 지난다 해도 너를 덮치지 않게 하리라. 네가 불 한가운데를 걷는다 해도 너는 타지 않고 불꽃이 너를 태우지 못하리라.","네가 물결을 헤치고 건너갈 때 내가 너를 보살피리니 그 강물이 너를 휩쓸어가지 못하리라. 네가 불 속을 걸어가더라도 그 불길에 너는 그을리지도 타버리지도 아니하리라.","네가 물 가운데로 지날 때에 내가 너와 함께 할 것이라 강을 건널 때에 물이 너를 침몰하지 못할 것이며 네가 불 가운데로 지날 때에 타지도 아니할 것이요 불꽃이 너를 사르지도 못하리니","네가 물 가운데로 지날 때에 내가 함께할 것이라 강을 건널 때에 물이 너를 침몰치 못할 것이며 네가 불 가운데로 행할 때에 타지도 아니할 것이요 불꽃이 너를 사르지도 못하리니","내가 너를 해방시킬 때에 네가 물속으로 지나가게 되더라도 내가 너를 데리고 함께 건너가겠다. 네가 빠르게 흐르는 강물속으로 지나가더라도 그 물결이 너를 휩쓸어 가지 못할 것이다. 네가 불속으로 지나가게 되더라도 네가 불길에 그을지 않을 것이다. 어떤 불꽃도 너를 해칠 수 없을 것이다.","When you pass through waters, I will be with you; through rivers, you shall not be swept away. When you walk through fire, you shall not be burned, nor will flames consume you.","When thou passest through the waters, I will be with thee; and through the rivers, they shall not overflow thee: when thou walkest through the fire, thou shalt not be burned; neither shall the flame kindle upon thee.","When you pass through the waters, I will be with you; and when you pass through the rivers, they will not sweep over you. When you walk through the fire, you will not be burned; the flames will not set you ablaze.","Cum transieris per aquas, tecum ero, et flumina non operient te; cum ambulaveris in igne, non combureris, et flamma non ardebit in te,","כי תעבר במים אתך אני ובנהרות לא ישטפוך כי תלך במו אש לא תכוה ולהבה לא תבער בך׃"],["29","43","3","나는 주 너의 하느님 이스라엘의 거룩한 이, 너의 구원자이다. 내가 이집트를 너의 몸값으로 내놓고 에티오피아와 스바를 너 대신 내놓는다.","나 야훼가 너의 하느님이다. 이스라엘의 거룩한 자, 내가 너를 구원하는 자다. 이집트를 주고 너를 되찾았고 에티오피아와 스바를 주고 너를 찾아왔다.","대저 나는 여호와 네 하나님이요 이스라엘의 거룩한 이요 네 구원자임이라 내가 애굽을 너의 속량물로, 구스와 스바를 너를 대신하여 주었노라","대저 나는 여호와 네 하나님이요 이스라엘의 거룩한 자요 네 구원자임이라 내가 애굽을 너의 속량물로, 구스와 스바를 너의 대신으로 주었노라","바로 나 여호와가 네 하나님이며, 이스라엘의 거룩한 하나님 나 여호와가 너를 해방시켜 주는 자이기 때문이다. 나는 너를 해방시켜 주는 값으로 애굽과 구스와 스바 등 온 아프리카를 모두 다 바사에게 넘겨 주었다.","For I, the LORD, am your God, the Holy One of Israel, your savior. I give Egypt as ransom for you, Ethiopia and Seba in exchange for you.","For I am the LORD thy God, the Holy One of Israel, thy Saviour: I gave Egypt for thy ransom, Ethiopia and Seba for thee.","For I am the LORD, your God, the Holy One of Israel, your Savior; I give Egypt for your ransom, Cush and Seba in your stead.","quia ego Dominus Deus tuus, Sanctus Israel, salvator tuus: dedi propitiationem tuam Aegyptum, Aethiopiam et Saba pro te.","כי אני יהוה אלהיך קדוש ישראל מושיעך נתתי כפרך מצרים כוש וסבא תחתיך׃"],["29","43","4","네가 나의 눈에 값지고 소중하며 내가 너를 사랑하기 때문이다. 내가 너 대신 다른 사람들을 내놓고 네 생명 대신 민족들을 내놓는다.","너는 눈에 넣어도 아프지 않을 나의 귀염둥이, 나의 사랑이다. 그러니 어찌 해안 지방을 주고라도 너를 찾지 않으며 부족들을 내주고라도 너의 목숨을 건져내지 않으랴!","네가 내 눈에 보배롭고 존귀하며 내가 너를 사랑하였은즉 내가 네 대신 사람들을 내어 주며 백성들이 네 생명을 대신하리니","내가 너를 보배롭고 존귀하게 여기고 너를 사랑하였은즉 내가 사람들을 주어 너를 바꾸며 백성들로 네 생명을 대신하리니","세상의 어떤 백성이든지, 아니 온 세상을 다 네 값으로 내주고서라도 나는 너를 해방시켜 주겠다. 너는 온 세상보다 더 귀하고 내가 그토록 너를 사랑하기 때문이다.","Because you are precious in my eyes and honored, and I love you, I give people in return for you and nations in exchange for your life.","Since thou wast precious in my sight, thou hast been honourable, and I have loved thee: therefore will I give men for thee, and people for thy life.","Since you are precious and honored in my sight, and because I love you, I will give men in exchange for you, and people in exchange for your life.","Quoniam pretiosus factus es in oculis meis et gloriosus, ego diligo te et dabo homines pro te et populos pro anima tua.","מאשר יקרת בעיני נכבדת ואני אהבתיך ואתן אדם תחתיך ולאמים תחת נפשך׃"],["29","43","5","내가 너와 함께 있으니 두려워하지 마라. 내가 해 뜨는 곳에서 너의 후손들을 데려오고 해 지는 곳에서 너를 모아 오리라.","두려워하지 마라. 내가 너를 보살펴 준다. 내가 해 뜨는 곳에서 너의 종족을 데려오고, 해 지는 곳에서도 너를 모아오리라.","두려워하지 말라 내가 너와 함께 하여 네 자손을 동쪽에서부터 오게 하며 서쪽에서부터 너를 모을 것이며","두려워 말라 내가 너와 함께 하여 네 자손을 동방에서부터 오게하며 서방에서부터 너를 모을 것이며","너는 두려워 말아라. 내가 너와 함께 있기 때문이다. 이스라엘 백성이 아무리 흩어져 있다고 하여도 내가 그들을 해뜨는 곳에서도 데려오고 해지는 곳에서도 모아 오겠다.","Fear not, for I am with you; from the east I will bring back your offspring, from the west I will gather you.","Fear not: for I am with thee: I will bring thy seed from the east, and gather thee from the west;","Do not be afraid, for I am with you; I will bring your children from the east and gather you from the west.","Noli timere, quoniam ego tecum sum: ab oriente adducam semen tuum et ab occidente congregabo te.","אל תירא כי אתך אני ממזרח אביא זרעך וממערב אקבצך׃"],["29","43","6","내가 북녘에 이르리라. ‘내놓아라.’ 남녘에도 이르리라. ‘잡아 두지 마라. 나의 아들들을 먼 곳에서, 나의 딸들을 땅 끝에서 데려오너라.","내가 북쪽을 향해서도 외치리라. '그들을 어서 내놓아라.' 남쪽을 향해서도 외치리라. '그들을 잡아두지 마라.' 아무리 먼 데서라도 나의 아들들을 데려오너라. 땅 끝에서라도 나의 딸들을 데려오너라.","내가 북쪽에게 이르기를 내놓으라 남쪽에게 이르기를 가두어 두지 말라 내 아들들을 먼 곳에서 이끌며 내 딸들을 땅 끝에서 오게 하며","내가 북방에게 이르기를 놓으라 남방에게 이르기를 구류하지 말라 내 아들들을 원방에서 이끌며 내 딸들을 땅 끝에서 오게 하라","북쪽을 향해서도 내가 \"그들을 내놓아라!\"라고 외치며, 남쪽을 향해서도 \"그들을 가두어 두지 말라\"하고 외치겠다. 아무리 먼 곳에서라도 나의 아들들을 데려오너라. 세상 끝에서라도 나의 딸들을 데려오너라!","I will say to the north: Give them up! and to the south: Do not hold them! Bring back my sons from afar, and my daughters from the ends of the earth:","I will say to the north, Give up; and to the south, Keep not back: bring my sons from far, and my daughters from the ends of the earth;","I will say to the north, 'Give them up!' and to the south, 'Do not hold them back.' Bring my sons from afar and my daughters from the ends of the earth--","Dicam aquiloni:  “Da “ et austro:  “Noli prohibere; affer filios meos de longinquo et filias meas ab extremis terrae.","אמר לצפון תני ולתימן אל תכלאי הביאי בני מרחוק ובנותי מקצה הארץ׃"],["29","43","7","나의 이름으로 불리는 이들, 나의 영광을 위하여 내가 창조한 이들, 내가 빚어 만든 이들을 모두 데려오너라.’”","그들은 내 백성이라고 불리는 것들, 나의 영광을 빛내려고 창조한 내 백성, 내 손으로 빚어 만든 나의 백성이다.","내 이름으로 불려지는 모든 자 곧 내가 내 영광을 위하여 창조한 자를 오게 하라 그를 내가 지었고 그를 내가 만들었느니라","무릇 내 이름으로 일컫는 자 곧 내가 내 영광을 위하여 창조한 자를 오게 하라 그들을 내가 지었고 만들었느니라","그들은 모두 내 이름을 품고 다니는 백성이다. 나의 영광을 위하여 내가 그들을 창조하고 직접 손으로 빚어서 만들어 놓았다.\"","All who are called by my name I created for my glory; I formed them, made them.","Even every one that is called by my name: for I have created him for my glory, I have formed him; yea, I have made him.","everyone who is called by my name, whom I created for my glory, whom I formed and made.\"","Omnem, qui vocatur nomine meo, in gloriam meam creavi eum, formavi eum et feci eum “.","כל הנקרא בשמי ולכבודי בראתיו יצרתיו אף עשיתיו׃"],["29","43","8","눈이 있어도 눈먼 이 백성을, 귀가 있어도 귀먹은 이자들을 나오게 하여라.","눈이 있어도 보지 못하는 이 백성을 귀가 있어도 듣지 못하는 이 백성을 불러모아라.","눈이 있어도 보지 못하고 귀가 있어도 듣지 못하는 백성을 이끌어 내라","눈이 있어도 소경이요 귀가 있어도 귀머거리인 백성을 이끌어 내라","주께서 세계 만민을 모으시고 온 세계의 주인이심을 주장할 때에 이스라엘을 증인으로 세우며 이렇게 말씀하셨다. \"내 백성을 증인으로 세워 놓아라! 볼 눈이 있어도 소경처럼 보지 못하고, 들을 귀가 있어도 귀머거리처럼 듣지 못하는 이 백성을 나의 증인으로 세워라. 듣고 볼 능력이 있으면서도 소경과 귀머거리 노릇을 하는 백성이지만 내 증인으로 세워 놓아라.","Lead out the people, blind though they have eyes, deaf though they have ears.","Bring forth the blind people that have eyes, and the deaf that have ears.","Lead out those who have eyes but are blind, who have ears but are deaf.","Educ foras populum caecum, et oculos habentem, surdos, et aures eis sunt.","הוציא עם עור ועינים יש וחרשים ואזנים למו׃"],["29","43","9","모든 민족들은 함께 모이고 겨레들은 모여들어라. 그들 가운데 누가 이것을 미리 알려 주었으며 예전의 일들을 우리에게 미리 들려주었느냐? 그들이 증인들을 내세워서 자기들이 옳다는 것을 밝혀 사람들이 듣고 “사실이다.” 하고 말하게 해 보아라.","민족들이 벌써 다 모였고 부족들이 부름받고 모여왔다. 그들 가운데 이렇게 될 것을 이미 알려준 자가 있었느냐? 이런 일들을 앞질러 일러준 자가 있었느냐? 증인이라도 있거든 내세워 증거를 제시하게 하여라. 무리가 듣고 수긍할 만한 증인이 있거든 말하게 하여라.","열방은 모였으며 민족들이 회집하였는데 그들 중에 누가 이 일을 알려 주며 이전 일들을 우리에게 들려 주겠느냐 그들이 그들의 증인을 세워서 자기들의 옳음을 나타내고 듣는 자들이 옳다고 말하게 하여 보라","열방은 모였으며 민족들이 회집하였은들 그들 중에 누가 능히 이 일을 고하며 이전 일을 우리에게 보이겠느냐 그들로 증인을 세워서 자기의 옳음을 나타내어 듣는 자들로 옳다 말하게 하라","세상의 모든 민족들도 모아 놓고 모든 백성들도 집합시켜 놓아라. 그들의 모든 신들 가운데서 누가 오늘의 일을 예언하였느냐? 과거에도 그들이 예언한 대로 된 일이 있으면 우리에게 말해 보아라. 그들도 증인을 내세워 증명해 보아라. 세계 만민이 듣고 \"참으로 옳다\"고 인정할 수 있도록 하여라.\"","Let all the nations gather together, let the peoples assemble! Who among them could have declared this, or announced to us the earlier things? Let them produce witnesses to prove themselves right, that one may hear and say, “It is true!”","Let all the nations be gathered together, and let the people be assembled: who among them can declare this, and shew us former things? let them bring forth their witnesses, that they may be justified: or let them hear, and say, It is truth.","All the nations gather together and the peoples assemble. Which of them foretold this and proclaimed to us the former things? Let them bring in their witnesses to prove they were right, so that others may hear and say, \"It is true.\"","Omnes gentes congregentur simul, et colligantur nationes: quis in eis annuntiabit istud et priora audire nos faciet? Dent testes suos et iustificentur et audiant et dicant:  “Vere “.","כל הגוים נקבצו יחדו ויאספו לאמים מי בהם יגיד זאת וראשנות ישמיענו יתנו עדיהם ויצדקו וישמעו ויאמרו אמת׃"],["29","43","10","주님의 말씀이다. 너희가 나의 증인이다. 너희는 내가 선택한 나의 종이다. 이는 너희가 깨쳐서 나를 믿고 내가 바로 그분임을 깨닫게 하려는 것이다. 나 이전에 신이 만들어진 일이 없고 나 이후에 어떤 신도 존재하지 않으리라.","너희가 바로 나의 증인이다. 야훼의 말이다. 너를 뽑아 내 종으로 세운 것은 세상으로 하여금 나를 알고 믿게 하려는 것이요, 나밖에 없다는 것을 깨우치게 하려는 것이다. 손으로 빚은 신이 나보다 앞서 있을 수 없고 후에도 있을 수 없다.","나 여호와가 말하노라 너희는 나의 증인, 나의 종으로 택함을 입었나니 이는 너희가 나를 알고 믿으며 내가 그인 줄 깨닫게 하려 함이라 나의 전에 지음을 받은 신이 없었느니라 나의 후에도 없으리라","나 여호와가 말하노라 너희는 나의 증인, 나의 종으로 택함을 입었나니 이는 너희로 나를 알고 믿으며 내가 그인줄 깨닫게 하려 함이라 나의 전에 지음을 받은 신이 없었느니라 나의 후에도 없으리라","주께서 이스라엘에게 말씀하셨다. \"너희 이스라엘 백성이 나의 증인이다. 너희는 내가 선택한 백성이요 나를 섬기라고 종으로 세운 백성이다. 내가 한 모든 일의 증인이 바로 너희다. 너희가 나를 알고 나를 의지하고 따르며 이 세상에 나밖에는 다른 신이 없다는 것을 너희가 깨달아 알도록 내가 너희를 선택하여 종으로 삼았다. 내 앞에 다른 신이 없었으며 내 뒤에도 다른 신이 없을 것이다.","You are my witnesses—oracle of the LORD— my servant whom I have chosen To know and believe in me and understand that I am he. Before me no god was formed, and after me there shall be none.","Ye are my witnesses, saith the LORD, and my servant whom I have chosen: that ye may know and believe me, and understand that I am he: before me there was no God formed, neither shall there be after me.","\"You are my witnesses,\" declares the LORD, \"and my servant whom I have chosen, so that you may know and believe me and qnderstand that I am he. Before me no god was formed, nor will there be one after me.","Vos testes mei, dicit Dominus, et servus meus, quem elegi, ut sciatis et credatis mihi et intellegatis quia ego ipse sum; ante me non est formatus Deus et post me non erit.","אתם עדי נאם יהוה ועבדי אשר בחרתי למען תדעו ותאמינו לי ותבינו כי אני הוא לפני לא נוצר אל ואחרי לא יהיה׃"],["29","43","11","내가, 바로 내가 주님이다. 나 말고는 구원해 주는 이가 없다.","나, 내가 곧 야훼이다. 나 아닌 다른 구세주는 없다.","나 곧 나는 여호와라 나 외에 구원자가 없느니라","나 곧 나는 여호와라 나 외에 구원자가 없느니라","나만이 여호와, 세계의 주인이요 역사의 지배자이며 나밖에는 다른 구원자가 없다.","I, I am the LORD; there is no savior but me.","I, even I, am the LORD; and beside me there is no saviour.","I, even I, am the LORD, and apart from me there is no savior.","Ego, ego sum Dominus, et non est absque me salvator.","אנכי אנכי יהוה ואין מבלעדי מושיע׃"],["29","43","12","미리 알려서 구원하고 이를 들려준 것은 나지 너희 가운데에 있는 어떤 낯선 신이 아니다. 주님의 말씀이다. 너희는 나의 증인이고 나는 하느님이다.","내가 미리 말하였고 그 말한 대로 구원하였다. 이렇게 될 것을 일러준 신이 나말고 너희 가운데 있느냐? 너희가 곧 나의 증인이다. 야훼의 말이다. 나, 내가 곧 하느님이다.","내가 알려 주었으며 구원하였으며 보였고 너희 중에 다른 신이 없었나니 그러므로 너희는 나의 증인이요 나는 하나님이니라 여호와의 말씀이니라","내가 고하였으며 구원하였으며 보였고 너희 중에 1)다른 신이 없었나니 그러므로 너희는 나의 증인이요 나는 하나님이니라 여호와의 말이니라 이방신","내가 너희에게는 구원한다고 미리 알려 주고 선포했을 때 너희 가운데서 듣지 않은 사람이 아무도 없다. 그러므로 너희는 내가 참 신이라는 것을 알려 줄 증인들이다. 나는 이미 과거에 너희를 해방시켜 주었지만","It is I who declared, who saved, who announced, not some strange god among you; You are my witnesses—oracle of the LORD. I am God,","I have declared, and have saved, and I have shewed, when there was no strange god among you: therefore ye are my witnesses, saith the LORD, that I am God.","I have revealed and saved and proclaimed--I, and not some foreign god among you. You are my witnesses,\" declares the LORD, \"that I am God.","Ego, annuntiavi et salvavi; auditum feci, et non fuit in vobis alienus; et vos testes mei, dicit Dominus, et ego Deus,","אנכי הגדתי והושעתי והשמעתי ואין בכם זר ואתם עדי נאם יהוה ואני אל׃"],["29","43","13","앞으로도 나는 그러하리니 내 손에 든 것을 빼내 갈 자 없으리라. 내가 하는 일을 누가 돌이킬 수 있겠느냐?","1)처음부터 나밖에 없다. 내 손에 잡힌 것을 아무도 빼내지 못한다. 내가 하는 일을 아무도 뒤집을 수 없다.\"히브리어 본문: \"이제부터.\"","과연 태초로부터 나는 그이니 내 손에서 건질 자가 없도다 내가 행하리니 누가 막으리요","2)과연 태초로부터 나는 그니 내 손에서 능히 건질 자가 없도다 내가 행하리니 누가 막으리요이제부터","앞으로도 내가 너희를 해방시켜 주겠다. 나는 언제나 똑같은 해방주이다. 내가 해방시킨 백성을 내 손에서 빼앗아 갈 자는 아무도 없다. 내가 하려고 작정한 일은 아무도 방해할 수가 없다.\"","yes, from eternity I am he; There is none who can deliver from my hand: I act and who can cancel it?","Yea, before the day was I am he; and there is none that can deliver out of my hand: I will work, and who shall let it?","Yes, and from ancient days I am he. No one can deliver out of my hand. When I act, who can reverse it?\"","iam ab initio ego ipse. Et non est qui de manu mea eruat; operabor, et quis avertet illud? “.","גם מיום אני הוא ואין מידי מציל אפעל ומי ישיבנה׃"],["29","43","14","너희의 구원자, 이스라엘의 거룩하신 분 주님께서 이렇게 말씀하신다. “너희 때문에 내가 바빌론으로 사람을 보내어 빗장을 모두 벗기리니 칼데아인들의 아우성이 통곡으로 바뀌리라.","너희를 구해 낸 이스라엘의 거룩하신 이, 야훼께서 말씀하신다. \"나는 바빌론으로 사람을 보내어 모든 감옥의 빗장들을 벗기고 너희를 해방시켜 주리라. 갈대아 사람들은 기가 막혀 통곡하며 아우성치리라.","너희의 구속자요 이스라엘의 거룩한 이 여호와가 말하노라 너희를 위하여 내가 바벨론에 사람을 보내어 모든 갈대아 사람에게 자기들이 연락하던 배를 타고 도망하여 내려가게 하리라","너희의 구속자요 이스라엘의 거룩한 자 여호와가 말하노라 너희를 위하여 내가 바벨론에 보내어 모든 3)갈대아 사람으로 자기들의 연락하던 배를 타고 도망하여 내려가게 하리라 존귀한 자 곧 갈대아 사람으로","이스라엘의 거룩하산 분, 너희의 해방주 여호와께서 이렇게 말씀하셨다. \"너희를 위하여 내가 바벨론으로 정복자를 보내겠다. 그러면 그 도성의 주민들이 잔치를 벌이며 즐기는 유람선들을 타고서 강물을 따라 모조리 도망할 것이다.","Thus says the LORD, your redeemer, the Holy One of Israel: For your sake I send to Babylon; I will bring down all her defenses, and the Chaldeans shall cry out in lamentation.","Thus saith the LORD, your redeemer, the Holy One of Israel; For your sake I have sent to Babylon, and have brought down all their nobles, and the Chaldeans, whose cry is in the ships.","This is what the LORD says--your Redeemer, the Holy One of Israel: \"For your sake I will send to Babylon and bring down as fugitives all the Babylonians, in the ships in which they took pride.","Haec dicit Dominus, redemptor vester, Sanctus Israel:  “Propter vos misi in Babylonem et detraxi fugitivos universos et Chaldaeos in navibus suis gloriantes.","כה אמר יהוה גאלכם קדוש ישראל למענכם שלחתי בבלה והורדתי בריחים כלם וכשדים באניות רנתם׃"],["29","43","15","나는 주님, 너희의 거룩한 이 이스라엘의 창조자, 너희의 임금이다.”","나는 야훼, 너희의 거룩한 자, 이스라엘의 창조자, 너희의 임금이다.\"","나는 여호와 너희의 거룩한 이요 이스라엘의 창조자요 너희의 왕이니라","나는 여호와 너희의 거룩한 자요 이스라엘의 창조자요 너희 왕이니라","나는 너희의 거룩한 하나님 여호와요, 일찍이 너희를 창조하고 언제나 너희를 보호하고 인도하는 왕이다.\"","I am the LORD, your Holy One, the creator of Israel, your King.","I am the LORD, your Holy One, the creator of Israel, your King.","I am the LORD, your Holy One, Israel's Creator, your King.\"","Ego Dominus, Sanctus vester, creans Israel, rex vester “.","אני יהוה קדושכם בורא ישראל מלככם׃"],["29","43","16","주님께서 말씀하신다. 그분은 바다 가운데에 길을 내시고 거센 물 속에 큰길을 내신 분,","야훼께서 말씀하신다. 바다에 큰 길을 내시고 거센 물길을 뚫고 한길을 내신 이,","나 여호와가 이같이 말하노라 바다 가운데에 길을, 큰 물 가운데에 지름길을 내고","바다 가운데 길을, 큰 물 가운데 첩경을 내고","이스라엘의 해방주이신 여호와께서 말씀하셨다. \"내가 애굽에서 내 백성을 해방시킬 때에 바닷속에서도 큰길을 내었고 거센 물결 속에서도 곧은 길을 내었다.","Thus says the LORD, who opens a way in the sea, a path in the mighty waters,","Thus saith the LORD, which maketh a way in the sea, and a path in the mighty waters;","This is what the LORD says--he who made a way through the sea, a path through the mighty waters,","Haec dicit Dominus, qui dedit in mari viam et in aquis torrentibus semitam;","כה אמר יהוה הנותן בים דרך ובמים עזים נתיבה׃"],["29","43","17","병거와 병마 군대와 용사들을 함께 나오게 하신 분. 그들은 쓰러져 다시는 일어나지 못하고 꺼져 가는 심지처럼 사그라졌다.","그들을 다시는 일어나지 못하게 거꾸러뜨리시고, 꺼진 심지처럼 사그라뜨리시려고 병거와 기마를 출동시키시고 군대와 용사를 출동시키신 야훼께서 말씀하신다.","병거와 말과 군대의 용사를 이끌어 내어 그들이 일시에 엎드러져 일어나지 못하고 소멸하기를 꺼져가는 등불 같게 하였느니라","병거와 말과 군대의 용사를 이끌어 내어서 그들로 일시에 엎드러져 일지 못하고 소멸하기를 꺼져가는 등불 같게 한 나 여호와가 말하노라","이스라엘을 뒤쫓는 그 엄청난 애굽 군대를 전차와 말들과 함께 내가 모조리 깊은 물속에 집어넣었다. 그들이 깊은 바닷속에 잠겨서 다시는 기어 나오지 못하였다. 마치 꺼져 가는 심지처럼 그들이 모두 사그라졌다.","Who leads out chariots and horsemen, a powerful army, Till they lie prostrate together, never to rise, snuffed out, quenched like a wick.","Which bringeth forth the chariot and horse, the army and the power; they shall lie down together, they shall not rise: they are extinct, they are quenched as tow.","who drew out the chariots and horses, the army and reinforcements together, and they lay there, never to rise again, extinguished, snuffed out like a wick:","qui eduxit quadrigam et equum, agmen et robustum; simul iacuerunt nec resurgent, contriti sunt quasi linum et exstincti sunt.","המוציא רכב וסוס חיל ועזוז יחדו ישכבו בל יקומו דעכו כפשתה כבו׃"],["29","43","18","예전의 일들을 기억하지 말고 옛날의 일들을 생각하지 마라.","\"지나간 일을 생각하지 마라. 흘러간 일에 마음을 묶어두지 마라.","너희는 이전 일을 기억하지 말며 옛날 일을 생각하지 말라","너희는 이전 일을 기억하지 말며 옛적 일을 생각하지 말라","너희는 그 옛날 일만을 생각하며 오늘을 탄식하지 말아라. 항상 그 옛일만을 되돌아보며 과거에 매여 있지 말아라.","Remember not the events of the past, the things of long ago consider not;","Remember ye not the former things, neither consider the things of old.","\"Forget the former things; do not dwell on the past."," “Ne memineritis priorum et antiqua ne intueamini:","אל תזכרו ראשנות וקדמניות אל תתבננו׃"],["29","43","19","보라, 내가 새 일을 하려 한다. 이미 드러나고 있는데 너희는 그것을 알지 못하느냐? 정녕 나는 광야에 길을 내고 사막에 강을 내리라.","보아라, 내가 이제 새 일을 시작하였다. 이미 싹이 돋았는데 그것이 보이지 않느냐? 내가 사막에 큰 길을 내리라. 광야에 한길들을 트리라.","보라 내가 새 일을 행하리니 이제 나타낼 것이라 너희가 그것을 알지 못하겠느냐 반드시 내가 광야에 길을 사막에 강을 내리니","보라 내가 새 일을 행하리니 이제 나타낼 것이라 너희가 그것을 알지 못하겠느냐 정녕히 내가 광야에 길과 사막에 강을 내리니","보라, 내가 이미 새로운 일을 시작하였다. 그 일이 이미 새싹처럼 돋아났는데 너희는 아직도 그것을 알지 못하느냐? 바로 내가 광야에 큰길을 내고 죽음의 사막에 생명의 강줄기들이 흘러 가도록 하겠다.","See, I am doing something new! Now it springs forth, do you not perceive it? In the wilderness I make a way, in the wasteland, rivers.","Behold, I will do a new thing; now it shall spring forth; shall ye not know it? I will even make a way in the wilderness, and rivers in the desert.","See, I am doing a new thing! Now it springs up; do you not perceive it? I am making a way in the desert and streams in the wasteland.","ecce ego facio nova, et nunc orientur: nonne cognoscitis ea? Utique ponam in deserto viam et in invio flumina.","הנני עשה חדשה עתה תצמח הלוא תדעוה אף אשים במדבר דרך בישמון נהרות׃"],["29","43","20","들짐승들과 승냥이와 타조들도 나를 공경하리니 내가 선택한 나의 백성에게 물을 마시게 하려고 광야에는 샘을 내고 사막에는 강을 내기 때문이다.","사막에 물을 대어주고 광야에 물줄기를 끌어들이리니, 뽑아 세운 내 백성이 양껏 마시고 승냥이와 타조 같은 들짐승들이 나를 공경하리라.","장차 들짐승 곧 승냥이와 타조도 나를 존경할 것은 내가 광야에 물을, 사막에 강들을 내어 내 백성, 내가 택한 자에게 마시게 할 것임이라","장차 들짐승 곧 시랑과 및 타조도 나를 존경할 것은 내가 광야에 물들을, 사막에 강들을 내어 내 백성, 나의 택한 자로 마시게 할 것임이라","그래서 나의 선민 이스라엘이 고향으로 돌아가는 길에서 마음대로 마시도록 하겠다. 그러면 들짐승들도 그 물을 마시며 나에게 영광을 돌리며 승냥이와 타조들도 나를 찬양할 것이다.","Wild beasts honor me, jackals and ostriches, For I put water in the wilderness and rivers in the wasteland for my chosen people to drink,","The beast of the field shall honour me, the dragons and the owls: because I give waters in the wilderness, and rivers in the desert, to give drink to my people, my chosen.","The wild animals honor me, the jackals and the owls, because I provide water in the desert and streams in the wasteland, to give drink to my people, my chosen,","Glorificabit me bestia agri, dracones et struthiones, quia dedi in deserto aquas, flumina in invio, ut darem potum populo meo, electo meo.","תכבדני חית השדה תנים ובנות יענה כי נתתי במדבר מים נהרות בישימן להשקות עמי בחירי׃"],["29","43","21","이들은 내가 나를 위하여 빚어 만든 백성 이들이 나에 대한 찬양을 전하리라.","내가 친히 손으로 빚은 나의 백성이 나를 찬양하고 기리리라.","이 백성은 내가 나를 위하여 지었나니 나를 찬송하게 하려 함이니라","이 백성은 내가 나를 위하여 지었나니 나의 찬송을 부르게 하려 함이니라","그러면 내가 만든 새 백성 이스라엘이 이 일을 계속 이야기하면서 나를 찬양할 것이다.\"","The people whom I formed for myself, that they might recount my praise.","This people have I formed for myself; they shall shew forth my praise.","the people I formed for myself that they may proclaim my praise.","Populum istum formavi mihi; laudem meam narrabunt.","עם זו יצרתי לי תהלתי יספרו׃"],["29","43","22","야곱아, 너는 나를 부르지 않았다. 이스라엘아, 너는 나에게 싫증을 내었다.","야곱아, 너는 나를 찾지 않았다. 이스라엘아, 너는 나에게 정성을 쏟지 않았다.","그러나 야곱아 너는 나를 부르지 아니하였고 이스라엘아 너는 나를 괴롭게 여겼으며","그러나 야곱아 너는 나를 부르지 아니하였고 이스라엘아 너는 나를 괴로와하였으며","주께서 야곱의 후손인 이스라엘에게 말씀하셨다. \"너는 나를 귀한 손님으로 초대하여 나를 잘 섬기려고 힘을 쓴 것처럼 떠들지 말아라.","Yet you did not call upon me, Jacob, for you grew weary of me, Israel.","But thou hast not called upon me, O Jacob; but thou hast been weary of me, O Israel.","\"Yet you have not called upon me, O Jacob, you have not wearied yourselves for me, O Israel.","Non me invocasti, Iacob; immo taedio mei affectus es, Israel.","ולא אתי קראת יעקב כי יגעת בי ישראל׃"],["29","43","23","너는 번제를 올리려고 나에게 양을 가져오지도 않았고 희생 제물을 바쳐 나를 공경하지도 않았다. 나는 봉헌물 때문에 너를 괴롭히지도 않았고 유향 때문에 너를 싫증 나게 하지도 않았다.","너는 양을 번제로 바치지도 않았고 제물을 드려 나를 섬기지도 않았다. 내가 언제 너에게 봉헌물을 바치라고 성화를 대었느냐? 향을 피우라고 괴롭혔느냐?","네 번제의 양을 내게로 가져오지 아니하였고 네 제물로 나를 공경하지 아니하였느니라 나는 제물로 말미암아 너를 수고롭게 하지 아니하였고 유향으로 말미암아 너를 괴롭게 하지 아니하였거늘","네 번제의 양을 내게로 가져 오지 아니하였고 네 제물로 나를 공경하지 아니하였느니라 나는 4)예물로 인하여 너를 수고롭게 아니하였고 유향으로 인하여 너를 괴롭게 아니하였거늘 소제로","사실 너는 나에게 양을 끌어다 번제로 바치지도 않았고 희생제물을 드려 나를 섬기지도 않았다. 나는 곡물로 제물을 바치라고 네게 짐을 지우지도 않았고 분향제물을 바치라고 너를 괴롭히지도 않았다.","You did not bring me sheep for your burnt offerings, nor honor me with your sacrifices. I did not exact from you the service of offerings, nor weary you for frankincense.","Thou hast not brought me the small cattle of thy burnt offerings; neither hast thou honoured me with thy sacrifices. I have not caused thee to serve with an offering, nor wearied thee with incense.","You have not brought me sheep for burnt offerings, nor honored me with your sacrifices. I have not burdened you with grain offerings nor wearied you with demands for incense.","Non obtulisti mihi agnos holocausti tui et victimis tuis non glorificasti me; non te gravavi in oblatione nec laborem tibi praebui in ture.","לא הביאת לי שה עלתיך וזבחיך לא כבדתני לא העבדתיך במנחה ולא הוגעתיך בלבונה׃"],["29","43","24","너는 나를 위하여 돈을 주고 향초를 사지도 않았고 희생 제물의 기름기로 나를 흡족하게 하지도 않았다. 너는 도리어 너의 죄로 나를 괴롭히고 너의 죄악으로 나를 싫증 나게 만들었다.","너는 갈대향을 바치는 데 돈쓰는 것을 아까워하였고 제물의 기름기를 흡족히 바칠 생각도 없었다. 도리어 너는 죄를 지어 나의 화를 돋우었고 불의를 저질러 나의 속을 썩였다.","너는 나를 위하여 돈으로 향품을 사지 아니하며 희생의 기름으로 나를 흡족하게 하지 아니하고 네 죄짐으로 나를 수고롭게 하며 네 죄악으로 나를 괴롭게 하였느니라","너는 나를 위하여 돈으로 5)향품을 사지 아니하며 희생의 기름으로 나를 흡족케 아니하고 네 죄 짐으로 나를 수고롭게 하며 네 죄악으로 나를 괴롭게 하였느니라 창포로","너는 돈을 주고 향료를 사다가 나에게 태워 바친 적도 없으며 회생제물의 기름으로 나를 흡족하게 한 적도 없었다. 오히려 네 온갖 죄악을 나에게 짐으로 지워 주었고 네 온갖 범죄로 나를 괴롭혔다.","You did not buy me sweet cane, nor did you fill me with the fat of your sacrifices; Instead, you burdened me with your sins, wearied me with your crimes.","Thou hast bought me no sweet cane with money, neither hast thou filled me with the fat of thy sacrifices: but thou hast made me to serve with thy sins, thou hast wearied me with thine iniquities.","You have not bought any fragrant calamus for me, or lavished on me the fat of your sacrifices. But you have burdened me with your sins and wearied me with your offenses.","Non emisti mihi argento calamum et adipe victimarum tuarum non inebriasti me; verumtamen servire me fecisti in peccatis tuis, praebuisti mihi laborem in iniquitatibus tuis.","לא קנית לי בכסף קנה וחלב זבחיך לא הרויתני אך העבדתני בחטאותיך הוגעתני בעונתיך׃"],["29","43","25","나, 바로 나는 나 자신을 위하여 너의 악행들을 씻어 주는 이. 내가 너의 죄를 기억하지 않으리라.","네 죄악을 씻어 내 위신을 세워야겠다. 이 일을 나밖에 누가 하겠느냐? 너의 죄를 나의 기억에서 말끔히 씻어버리리라.","나 곧 나는 나를 위하여 네 허물을 도말하는 자니 네 죄를 기억하지 아니하리라","나 곧 나는 나를 위하여 네 허물을 도말하는 자니 네 죄를 기억지 아니하리라","과연 나는 너희에게 아무런 의무도 없으나 내가 자진하여 네 모든 죄악을 덮어 주고 네 허물을 더 이상 기억하지 않겠다.","It is I, I, who wipe out, for my own sake, your offenses; your sins I remember no more.","I, even I, am he that blotteth out thy transgressions for mine own sake, and will not remember thy sins.","\"I, even I, am he who blots out your transgressions, for my own sake, and remembers your sins no more.","Ego, ego sum ipse, qui deleo iniquitates tuas propter me et peccatorum tuorum non recordabor.","אנכי אנכי הוא מחה פשעיך למעני וחטאתיך לא אזכר׃"],["29","43","26","내 기억을 되살려 보아라. 우리 함께 시비를 가려보자. 너 말해 보아라, 네가 옳다는 것이 밝혀지도록.","네 속을 내 앞에 털어놓아라. 함께 시비를 가려보자. 너로서 억울한 점이 있거든 해명해 보아라.","너는 나에게 기억이 나게 하라 우리가 함께 변론하자 너는 말하여 네가 의로움을 나타내라","너는 나로 기억이 나게 하고 서로 변론하자 너는 네 일을 말하여 의를 나타내라","우리가 함께 법정에 서자. 나에게 잘못할 것이 있으면 고발해 보아라. 네 억울한 이야기를 모두 말하고 네가 옳다는 것을 증명해 보아라.","Would you have me remember, have us come to trial? Speak up, prove your innocence!","Put me in remembrance: let us plead together: declare thou, that thou mayest be justified.","Review the past for me, let us argue the matter together; state the case for your innocence.","Memorem me redde, iudicium agamus simul: narra, ut iustificeris.","הזכירני נשפטה יחד ספר אתה למען תצדק׃"],["29","43","27","너의 첫 조상부터 죄를 지었고 너의 대변자들도 나에게 반역하였다.","너의 시조부터 죄를 지었고 너를 변호할 자들마저 나를 반역하였으며,","네 시조가 범죄하였고 너의 교사들이 나를 배반하였나니","네 시조가 범죄하였고 너의 교사들이 나를 배역하였나니","너희 조상 야곱이 옛날에 범죄한 것처럼 네 지도자들이 나에게 반역하였다.","Your first father sinned; your spokesmen rebelled against me","Thy first father hath sinned, and thy teachers have transgressed against me.","Your first father sinned; your spokesmen rebelled against me.","Pater tuus primus peccavit, et interpretes tui praevaricati sunt in me;","אביך הראשון חטא ומליציך פשעו בי׃"],["29","43","28","그래서 나는 성소의 제후들을 더럽혀지게 만들고 야곱이 전멸당하게, 이스라엘이 모욕당하게 내어 놓았다.","너의 지도자들조차 내 성소를 더럽혔다. 그래서 나는 판결을 내렸다. '야곱을 전멸시켜라. 이스라엘에게 욕을 돌려라.'\"","그러므로 내가 성소의 어른들을 욕되게 하며 야곱이 진멸 당하도록 내어 주며 이스라엘이 비방거리가 되게 하리라","그러므로 내가 6)성소의 어른들로 욕을 보게 하며 야곱으로 저주를 입게 하며 이스라엘로 비방거리가 되게 7)하리라거룩한 방백하였노라","그래서 내가 바로 내 성전의 제사장들을 더러운 곳으로 끌어다가 짓밟아 죽이고 야곱의 후손들을 모조리 멸망시키고 이스라엘이 수치와 치욕을 당하게 하였다.\"","Till I repudiated the holy princes, put Jacob under the ban, exposed Israel to scorn.","Therefore I have profaned the princes of the sanctuary, and have given Jacob to the curse, and Israel to reproaches.","So I will disgrace the dignitaries of your temple, and I will consign Jacob to destruction and Israel to scorn.","et contaminavi principes sanctuarii, dedi ad internecionem Iacob et Israel in opprobrium “.","ואחלל שרי קדש ואתנה לחרם יעקב וישראל לגדופים׃"],["29","44","1","이제 들어라, 나의 종 야곱아 내가 선택한 이스라엘아.","\"이제 들어라, 나의 종 야곱아, 내가 뽑아 세운 이스라엘아.\"","나의 종 야곱, 내가 택한 이스라엘아 이제 들으라","나의 종 야곱, 나의 택한 이스라엘아 이제 들으라","이스라엘 백성아, 들어라! 너를 창조하시고 너와 함께 계시면서 도와주시는 여호와께서 말씀하셨다. \"너 야곱의 후손아, 너는 내가 선택한 내 백성이니 두려워하지 말아라. 내가 옛날에 선택한 여수룬아, 너는 내 일을 맡은 종이니 조금도 두려워하지 말아라.","Hear then, Jacob, my servant, Israel, whom I have chosen.","Yet now hear, O Jacob my servant; and Israel, whom I have chosen:","\"But now listen, O Jacob, my servant, Israel, whom I have chosen.","Et nunc audi, Iacob serve meus, et Israel, quem elegi.","ועתה שמע יעקב עבדי וישראל בחרתי בו׃"],["29","44","2","너를 만드신 분 모태에서부터 너를 빚으시고 너를 도우시는 분 주님께서 이렇게 말씀하신다. “두려워하지 마라, 나의 종 야곱아 내가 선택한 여수룬아.","너를 만드신 야훼, 너를 모태에 생기게 하시고 너를 도우시는 야훼께서 말씀하신다. \"두려워하지 마라, 나의 종 야곱아, 내가 뽑아 세운 1)여수룬아. 이스라엘의 애칭이다. 신명 32와 33장 참조.","너를 만들고 너를 모태에서부터 지어 낸 너를 도와 줄 여호와가 이같이 말하노라 나의 종 야곱, 내가 택한 여수룬아 두려워하지 말라","너를 지으며 너를 모태에서 조성하고 너를 도와줄 여호와가 말하노라 나의 종 야곱, 나의 택한 여수룬아 두려워 말라","(1절에 포함되어 있음)","Thus says the LORD who made you, your help, who formed you from the womb: Do not fear, Jacob, my servant, Jeshurun, whom I have chosen.","Thus saith the LORD that made thee, and formed thee from the womb, which will help thee; Fear not, O Jacob, my servant; and thou, Jesurun, whom I have chosen.","This is what the LORD says--he who made you, who formed you in the womb, and who will help you: Do not be afraid, O Jacob, my servant, Jeshurun, whom I have chosen.","Haec dicit Dominus, qui fecit te et formavit te ab utero, auxiliator tuus:  “Noli timere, serve meus Iacob, et dilecte, quem elegi.","כה אמר יהוה עשך ויצרך מבטן יעזרך אל תירא עבדי יעקב וישרון בחרתי בו׃"],["29","44","3","내가 목마른 땅에 물을, 메마른 곳에 시냇물을 부어 주리라. 너의 후손들에게 나의 영을, 너의 새싹들에게 나의 복을 부어 주리라.","나는 목마른 땅에 물을 부어주고 메마른 곳에 시냇물이 흐르게 하리라. 나는 너의 후손 위에 내 영을 부어주고 너의 새싹들에게 나의 복을 내리리라.","나는 목마른 자에게 물을 주며 마른 땅에 시내가 흐르게 하며 나의 영을 네 자손에게, 나의 복을 네 후손에게 부어 주리니","대저 내가 1)갈한 자에게 물을 주며 마른 땅에 시내가 흐르게 하며 나의 신을 네 자손에게, 나의 복을 네 후손에게 내리리니 간조한 땅에","내가 메마른 대지에 비를 내려서 강물이 흘러 가게 하듯이 내가 죽어 가는 네게도 생명력을 부어 네가 새싹을 내어 열매를 맺도록 하겠다. 내가 네 후손에게 나의 영과 복을 부어 주어 다시 살아나도록 하겠다.","I will pour out water upon the thirsty ground, streams upon the dry land; I will pour out my spirit upon your offspring, my blessing upon your descendants.","For I will pour water upon him that is thirsty, and floods upon the dry ground: I will pour my spirit upon thy seed, and my blessing upon thine offspring:","For I will pour water on the thirsty land, and streams on the dry ground; I will pour out my Spirit on your offspring, and my blessing on your descendants.","Effundam enim aquas super terram sitientem et fluenta super aridam; effundam spiritum meum super semen tuum et benedictionem meam super stirpem tuam:","כי אצק מים על צמא ונזלים על יבשה אצק רוחי על זרעך וברכתי על צאצאיך׃"],["29","44","4","그들은 물길 사이의 풀처럼, 흐르는 물가의 버드나무처럼 솟아나리라.","그들은 물 가운데 난 풀처럼 자라리라. 시냇가에 선 버들처럼 크리라.","그들이 풀 가운데에서 솟아나기를 시냇가의 버들 같이 할 것이라","그들이 풀 가운데서 솟아나기를 시냇가의 버들 같이 할 것이라","네 후손들이 풀처럼 무성하게 자라 오르고 시냇가의 버드나무처럼 높이 자랄 것이다.","They shall spring forth amid grass like poplars beside flowing waters.","And they shall spring up as among the grass, as willows by the water courses.","They will spring up like grass in a meadow, like poplar trees by flowing streams.","et germinabunt inter herbas quasi salices iuxta praeterfluentes aquas.","וצמחו בבין חציר כערבים על יבלי מים׃"],["29","44","5","그때에 어떤 이는 ‘나는 주님의 것’이라 말하고 어떤 이는 야곱의 이름을 따라 자신을 부르리라. 또 어떤 이는 제 손에 ‘주님의 것’이라 쓰고 이스라엘의 이름을 제 이름으로 삼으리라.”","자기가 야훼의 것임을 자랑하는 사람이 있는가 하면 야곱의 후손이라 불리는 것을 좋아하는 사람도 있으리라. 손에 '야훼의 것'이라고 문신을 새기는 사람이 있는가 하면 이스라엘의 후손이라 불리는 것을 기뻐하는 사람도 있으리라.\"","한 사람은 이르기를 나는 여호와께 속하였다 할 것이며 또 한 사람은 야곱의 이름으로 자기를 부를 것이며 또 다른 사람은 자기가 여호와께 속하였음을 그의 손으로 기록하고 이스라엘의 이름으로 존귀히 여김을 받으리라","혹은 이르기를 나는 여호와께 속하였다 할 것이며 혹은 야곱의 이름으로 자칭할 것이며 혹은 자기가 여호와께 속하였음을 손으로 기록하고 이스라엘의 이름으로 칭호하리라","그때에는 세계 만민이 앞을 다투어 여호와의 백성이 되려고 할 것이다. \"나는 여호와의 사람이다.\"라고 공언하는 사람도 있고 그것을 자기의 팔에 새기고 다니는 사람도 있을 것이다. \"나도 이제는 야곱의 후손이 되었다.\"고 자랑하는 사람도 있을 것이고 이스라엘이라는 존귀한 이름을 넣어서 자기 이름을 다시 짓는 사람도 있을 것이다.\"","One shall say, “I am the LORD’s,” another shall be named after Jacob, And this one shall write on his hand, “The LORD’s,” and receive the name Israel.","One shall say, I am the LORD's; and another shall call himself by the name of Jacob; and another shall subscribe with his hand unto the LORD, and surname himself by the name of Israel.","One will say, 'I belong to the LORD'; another will call himself by the name of Jacob; still another will write on his hand, 'The LORD'S,' and will take the name Israel.","Iste dicet:  “Domini ego sum “, et ille vocabit se nomine Iacob; et hic scribet manu sua:  “Domino “, et inscribetur nomine Israel “.","זה יאמר ליהוה אני וזה יקרא בשם יעקב וזה יכתב ידו ליהוה ובשם ישראל יכנה׃"],["29","44","6","주 이스라엘의 임금님, 이스라엘의 구원자이신 만군의 주님께서 이렇게 말씀하신다. “나는 처음이며 나는 마지막이다. 나 말고 다른 신은 없다.","이스라엘의 임금, 그의 구세주, 만군의 야훼께서 말씀하신다. \"2)내가 시작이요, 내가 마감이다. 나밖에 다른 신이 없다. \"시작하는 것도 나요, 마감하는 것도 나다.\"라고 옮길 수도 있다.","이스라엘의 왕인 여호와, 이스라엘의 구원자인 만군의 여호와가 이같이 말하노라 나는 처음이요 나는 마지막이라 나 외에 다른 신이 없느니라","이스라엘의 왕인 여호와, 이스라엘의 구속자인 만군의 여호와가 말하노라 나는 처음이요 나는 마지막이라 나 외에 다른 신이 없느니라","압박받으며 고난을 당하는 이스라엘을 해방시키고 다스리시는 하나님, 온 세계의 주인이신 여호와께서 말씀하셨다. \"내가 처음이요 마지막이다. 내가 태초의 창조자이면서 동시에 최후의 심판자이다. 처음부터 끝까지 세계 역사를 지배하는 신은 나밖에 다른 아무도 없다!","Thus says the LORD, Israel’s king, its redeemer, the LORD of hosts: I am the first, I am the last; there is no God but me.","Thus saith the LORD the King of Israel, and his redeemer the LORD of hosts; I am the first, and I am the last; and beside me there is no God.","\"This is what the LORD says--Israel's King and Redeemer, the LORD Almighty: I am the first and I am the last; apart from me there is no God.","Haec dicit Dominus, rex Israel et redemptor eius, Dominus exercituum:  “Ego primus et ego novissimus, et absque me non est Deus.","כה אמר יהוה מלך ישראל וגאלו יהוה צבאות אני ראשון ואני אחרון ומבלעדי אין אלהים׃"],["29","44","7","나와 같은 자 누구냐? 누구든 말해 보아라. 그것을 알리고 내 앞에 펼쳐 보아라. 다가올 일들을 누가 예전에 들려주었느냐? 앞으로 닥칠 일들을 우리에게 알려 보아라.","누가 나와 같으냐? 나서서 말해 보아라. 누가 처음에 장래의 일을 미리 들려주었느냐? 앞으로 될 일을 우리에게 말해 보아라.","내가 영원한 백성을 세운 이후로 나처럼 외치며 알리며 나에게 설명할 자가 누구냐 있거든 될 일과 장차 올 일을 그들에게 알릴지어다","내가 옛날 백성을 세운 이후로 나처럼 외치며 고하며 진술할 자가 누구뇨 있거든 될 일과 장차 올 일을 고할찌어다","이 점에서 누가 나와 겨룰 수 있느냐? 내가 인간을 창조한 이후부터 해오는 일을 또 누가 할 수 있느냐? 신들 가운데서 앞으로 올 일들을 예고한 일이 있었느냐? 그런 신이 있으면 내 앞으로 나와서 그런 일을 증명해 보아라.","Who is like me? Let him stand up and declare, make it evident, and confront me with it. Who of old announced future events? Let them foretell to us the things to come.","And who, as I, shall call, and shall declare it, and set it in order for me, since I appointed the ancient people? and the things that are coming, and shall come, let them shew unto them.","Who then is like me? Let him proclaim it. Let him declare and lay out before me what has happened since I established my ancient people, and what is yet to come--yes, let him foretell what will come.","Quis similis mei? Conclamet et annuntiet et exponat mihi, ex quo constitui populum antiquum; ventura et, quae futura sunt, annuntiet nobis.","ומי כמוני יקרא ויגידה ויערכה לי משומי עם עולם ואתיות ואשר תבאנה יגידו למו׃"],["29","44","8","너희는 무서워하지 마라. 겁내지 마라. 내가 예전부터 너희에게 들려주고 알려 주지 않았느냐? 너희가 나의 증인이다. 나 말고 다른 신이 또 있느냐? 다른 반석은 없다. 나는 그런 것을 모른다.”","겁내지 마라, 두려워하지 마라. 내가 오래 전부터 미리 들려주고 알려주지 않았느냐? 너희가 나의 증인이다. 나밖에 다른 신이 또 있느냐? 과연 다른 바위는 없다. 나는 그런 것 모른다.\"","너희는 두려워하지 말며 겁내지 말라 내가 예로부터 너희에게 듣게 하지 아니하였느냐 알리지 아니하였느냐 너희는 나의 증인이라 나 외에 신이 있겠느냐 과연 반석은 없나니 다른 신이 있음을 내가 알지 못하노라","너희는 두려워 말며 겁내지 말라 내가 예로부터 너희에게 들리지 아니하였느냐 고하지 아니하였느냐 너희는 나의 증인이라 나 외에 신이 있겠느냐 과연 반석이 없나니 다른 신이 있음을 알지 못하노라","그러므로 이스라엘 백성아, 너는 조금도 두려워하지 말아라. 당황하지도 말아라. 지금 일어날 일들을 내가 이미 너희에게 알려주지 않았느냐? 너희가 그것을 이미 옛날에 들었으니 바로 너희가 나의 증인들이다. 나처럼 미리 알려 준 신이 있었느냐? 반석처럼 굳건하게 의지할 수 있는 신이 나밖에 또 있느냐? 나는 그런 신을 도무지 모른다\"","Do not fear or be troubled. Did I not announce it to you long ago? I declared it, and you are my witnesses. Is there any God but me? There is no other Rock, I know of none!","Fear ye not, neither be afraid: have not I told thee from that time, and have declared it? ye are even my witnesses. Is there a God beside me? yea, there is no God; I know not any.","Do not tremble, do not be afraid. Did I not proclaim this and foretell it long ago? You are my witnesses. Is there any God besides me? No, there is no other Rock; I know not one.\"","Nolite timere neque conturbemini; nonne ex tunc audire te feci et annuntiavi? Vos estis testes mei. Numquid est Deus absque me aut Petra, quam ego non noverim? “.","אל תפחדו ואל תרהו הלא מאז השמעתיך והגדתי ואתם עדי היש אלוה מבלעדי ואין צור בל ידעתי׃"],["29","44","9","우상을 빚어 만드는 자들은 모두 헛것들이고 이들이 좋아하는 우상들은 쓸모가 없다. 그들의 증인들은 보지 못하고 알지 못하여 수치만 당할 뿐이다.","우상을 빚어 만드는 자들은 하나같이 바람잡이, 아무 덕을 끼칠 수 없는 것들을 소중히 여기는 바보들이다. 그렇게 눈이 멀어 멋도 모르고 우상을 섬기다가 결국 창피나 당하리라.","우상을 만드는 자는 다 허망하도다 그들이 원하는 것들은 무익한 것이거늘 그것들의 증인들은 보지도 못하며 알지도 못하니 그러므로 수치를 당하리라","우상을 만드는 자는 다 허망하도다 그들의 기뻐하는 우상은 무익한 것이어늘 그것의 증인들은 보지도 못하며 알지도 못하니 그러므로 수치를 당하리라","나무를 깎고 돌을 다듬고 금속을 부어서 우상을 만드는 이들은 모두 쓸모 없는 일을 하는 사람들이요, 그 아름다운 신상들도 쓸모없는 것들이다. 신상들이 무슨 일을 하였느냐고 우상을 숭배하는 이들에게 물어 보면, 아무도 대답을 못하고 수치스럽게 얼굴만 붉힐 것이다. 그들이 신상들에게서 아무 소리도 듣지 못하고 증거할 만한 일을 체험하지도 못했기 때문이다.","Those who fashion idols are all nothing; their precious works are of no avail. They are their witnesses: they see nothing, know nothing, and so they are put to shame.","They that make a graven image are all of them vanity; and their delectable things shall not profit; and they are their own witnesses; they see not, nor know; that they may be ashamed.","All who make idols are nothing, and the things they treasure are worthless. Those who would speak up for them are blind; they are ignorant, to their own shame.","Plastae idoli omnes nihil sunt, et pretiosa eorum non proderunt eis; testes eorum non vident neque intellegunt, ut confundantur.","יצרי פסל כלם תהו וחמודיהם בל יועילו ועדיהם המה בל יראו ובל ידעו למען יבשו׃"],["29","44","10","누가 쓸모없는 신을 빚어 만들고 우상을 부어 만드느냐?","수입을 바라지 않고 신상을 빚어 내거나 우상을 부어 만들 자가 있겠느냐?","신상을 만들며 무익한 우상을 부어 만든 자가 누구냐","신상을 만들며 무익한 우상을 부어 만든 자가 누구뇨","도대체 아무 이익도 안되는 신을 만들고 우상을 주조하는 사람이 어디에 있느냐?","Who would fashion a god or cast an idol, that is of no use?","Who hath formed a god, or molten a graven image that is profitable for nothing?","Who shapes a god and casts an idol, which can profit him nothing?","Quis formavit deum et sculptile conflavit lucrum non quaerens?","מי יצר אל ופסל נסך לבלתי הועיל׃"],["29","44","11","보라, 그것을 신봉하는 자들은 모두 수치를 당한다. 그것을 만든 장인들은 인간일 따름이다. 그들이 모두 모여 나서게 하여라. 무서워하며 수치만 당하리라.","우상과 짝하는 자들은 무안이나 당하리라. 우상을 만드는 것은 결국 인간, 하나도 빠지지 말고 출두하여라. 모두들 어이없이 창피를 당하리라.","보라 그와 같은 무리들이 다 수치를 당할 것이라 그 대장장이들은 사람일 뿐이라 그들이 다 모여 서서 두려워하며 함께 수치를 당할 것이니라","보라 그 동류가 다 수치를 당할 것이라 그 장색들은 사람이라 그들이 다 모여 서서 두려워하며 함께 수치를 당할 것이니라","우상을 만드는 기술자들은 모두 사람에 불과하다. 그러므로 신상들에게 도움을 비는 이들이 모두 실망하며 수치스러워 할 것이다. 신상을 만든 이들과 우상을 섬기는 이들을 함께 모아 우상이 어떤 점에서 유익한지 증명해 보이라고 하여라. 헛된 것들에게 도움을 빈 것만을 깨닫고도 수치스러워 하며 헤어질 것이다.","Look, all its company will be shamed; they are artisans, mere human beings! They all assemble and stand there, only to cower in shame.","Behold, all his fellows shall be ashamed: and the workmen, they are of men: let them all be gathered together, let them stand up; yet they shall fear, and they shall be ashamed together.","He and his kind will be put to shame; craftsmen are nothing but men. Let them all come together and take their stand; they will be brought down to terror and infamy.","Ecce omnes participes eius confundentur; fabri enim sunt ex hominibus: conveniant omnes, stent; pavebunt, confundentur simul.","הן כל חבריו יבשו וחרשים המה מאדם יתקבצו כלם יעמדו יפחדו יבשו יחד׃"],["29","44","12","철공이 연장을 잡고 숯불에 달구어 작업을 한다. 망치로 두드려 그것을 만들면서 힘센 팔로 작업을 한다. 그러면 그는 허기져서 힘을 잃고 물을 마시지 못하여 지쳐 버린다.","숯불에 달군 쇠를 망치로 두드려 모양을 만드는 대장장이를 보아라. 팔을 걷어붙이고 만드느라 시장하여 허기지고 물도 마시지 못하여 기진맥진했구나.","철공은 철로 연장을 만들고 숯불로 일하며 망치를 가지고 그것을 만들며 그의 힘센 팔로 그 일을 하나 배가 고프면 기운이 없고 물을 마시지 아니하면 피로하니라","철공은 2)철을 숯불에 불리고 메로 치고 강한 팔로 괄리므로 심지어 주려서 기력이 진하며 물을 마시지 아니하여 곤비하며 연장을 벼리되 숯불에","우상이 무엇이냐? 대장장이가 쇳덩어리를 불에 달구어 망치로 두들겨서 만든 것이다. 대장장이가 우상을 만들 때에 팔에서 힘이 다 빠지고 배가 고파서 피곤해지고 목이 말라서 지쳐 버려도 그 신상이 무엇을 도와줄 수가 있느냐?","The ironsmith fashions a likeness, he works it over the coals, Shaping it with hammers, working it with his strong arm. With hunger his strength wanes, without water, he grows faint.","The smith with the tongs both worketh in the coals, and fashioneth it with hammers, and worketh it with the strength of his arms: yea, he is hungry, and his strength faileth: he drinketh no water, and is faint.","The blacksmith takes a tool and works with it in the coals; he shapes an idol with hammers, he forges it with the might of his arm. He gets hungry and loses his strength; he drinks no water and grows faint.","Faber ferrarius securim operatur in prunis et in malleis format illam et polit eam in brachio fortitudinis suae; esurit et deficit, non bibit aquam et lassescit.","חרש ברזל מעצד ופעל בפחם ובמקבות יצרהו ויפעלהו בזרוע כחו גם רעב ואין כח לא שתה מים וייעף׃"],["29","44","13","목공은 줄을 늘여 석필로 그 모양을 그리고 대패질을 한 뒤 걸음쇠로 그 모양을 그리고 사람의 모습처럼 인간의 아름다움을 본떠 우상을 만들어서 신전에 세운다.","목수는 줄을 늘이고 석필로 금을 그어 모양을 그린다. 끌질하고 걸음쇠로 선을 그어 가며 사람의 초상을 뜬다. 이렇게 잘난 사람의 얼굴 모습을 본떠 우상을 만들어 그것을 신전에 모신다.","목공은 줄을 늘여 재고 붓으로 긋고 대패로 밀고 곡선자로 그어 사람의 아름다움을 따라 사람의 모양을 만들어 집에 두게 하며","목공은 줄을 늘여 재고 3)붓으로 긋고 대패로 밀고 정규로 그어 사람의 아름다움을 따라 인형을 새겨 집에 두게 하며 히, 도끼","또 나무로 만든 신상은 다른 점이 있느냐? 목수가 통나무를 재어 잘라서 사람의 모양을 그려 놓고 그대로 깎아내지 않느냐? 그런 다음에는 표면을 매끄럽게 다듬고 색을 칠해서 위엄 있는 사람 모양으로 만든 것이 아니냐? 신전에 모셔 놓은 신상들이 그런 것들이어서, 한번 안치해 놓으면 움직이지 못하고 항상 그대로 있지 않느냐? 그것이 바로 나무 우상이다.","The woodworker stretches a line, and marks out a shape with a stylus. He shapes it with scraping tools, with a compass measures it off, Making it the copy of a man, human display, enthroned in a shrine.","The carpenter stretcheth out his rule; he marketh it out with a line; he fitteth it with planes, and he marketh it out with the compass, and maketh it after the figure of a man, according to the beauty of a man; that it may remain in the house.","The carpenter measures with a line and makes an outline with a marker; he roughs it out with chisels and marks it with compasses. He shapes it in the form of man, of man in all his glory, that it may dwell in a shrine.","Artifex lignarius extendit normam, describit illud stilo, operatur illud scalpellis et circino describit illud quasi imaginem viri, quasi speciosum hominem, qui resideat in domo.","חרש עצים נטה קו יתארהו בשרד יעשהו במקצעות ובמחוגה יתארהו ויעשהו כתבנית איש כתפארת אדם לשבת בית׃"],["29","44","14","그는 향백나무들을 찍어 오거나 솔잣나무와 참나무를 골라 그것들을 숲의 나무들 사이에서 튼튼히 자라게 한다. 그가 월계수를 심으면 비가 그것을 자라게 한다.","송백을 찍어낸다. 삼목이나 상수리나무를 베어낸다. 숲 속에서 싱싱하게 자란 나무들이다. 심어둔 송백이 비를 맞고 큰 것들이다.","그는 자기를 위하여 백향목을 베며 디르사 나무와 상수리나무를 취하며 숲의 나무들 가운데에서 자기를 위하여 한 나무를 정하며 나무를 심고 비를 맞고 자라게도 하느니라","그는 혹 백향목을 베이며 혹 디르사나무와 상수리나무를 취하며 혹 삼림 중에 자기를 위하여 한 나무를 택하며 혹 나무를 심고 비에 자라게도 하나니","우상을 만들기 위해서는 송백이나 상수리나무나 삼목과 같이 특별히 단단한 나무들을 삼림에서 골라다 쓰고, 송백을 심어 놓고 비를 맞히며 단단하게 키운 다음 베어서 쓰기도 한다.","He goes out to cut down cedars, takes a holm tree or an oak. He picks out for himself trees of the forest, plants a fir, and the rain makes it grow.","He heweth him down cedars, and taketh the cypress and the oak, which he strengtheneth for himself among the trees of the forest: he planteth an ash, and the rain doth nourish it.","He cut down cedars, or perhaps took a cypress or oak. He let it grow among the trees of the forest, or planted a pine, and the rain made it grow.","Succidit sibi cedros et arripit ilicem et quercum, quae steterat inter ligna saltus; plantavit pinum, quam pluvia nutrivit.","לכרת לו ארזים ויקח תרזה ואלון ויאמץ לו בעצי יער נטע ארן וגשם יגדל׃"],["29","44","15","그것은 사람에게 땔감이 되기도 하니 그 일부를 가져다가 제 몸을 덥히고 불을 피워 빵을 굽기도 한다. 그러고서는 신을 제작하여 그것에 경배하고 신상을 만들어 그 앞에 엎드린다.","땔감밖에 되지 않는 것들, 베어다가 몸이나 녹이고 빵이나 굽는 데 쓸 것들, 그런 나무로 신이랍시고 만들어 예배를 드리는구나. 신상이랍시고 만들어놓고 그 앞에 엎드려 큰절을 하는구나.","이 나무는 사람이 땔감을 삼는 것이거늘 그가 그것을 가지고 자기 몸을 덥게도 하고 불을 피워 떡을 굽기도 하고 신상을 만들어 경배하며 우상을 만들고 그 앞에 엎드리기도 하는구나","무릇 이 나무는 사람이 화목을 삼는 것이어늘 그가 그것을 가지고 자기 몸을 더웁게도 하고 그것으로 불을 피워서 떡을 굽기도 하고 그것으로 신상을 만들어 숭배하며 우상을 만들고 그 앞에 부복하기도 하는구나","그런 나무들은 본래 땔감으로 쓰던 것들이다. 장작불을 피워서 밥도 짓고 방도 따뜻하게 덥히던 것인데 바로 그런 나무를 가지고 신상을 만들어 놓고서 그것이 신이라고 그 앞에 절을 하며 섬기고 있다.","It is used for fuel: with some of the wood he warms himself, makes a fire and bakes bread. Yet he makes a god and worships it, turns it into an idol and adores it!","Then shall it be for a man to burn: for he will take thereof, and warm himself; yea, he kindleth it, and baketh bread; yea, he maketh a god, and worshippeth it; he maketh it a graven image, and falleth down thereto.","It is man's fuel for burning; some of it he takes and warms himself, he kindles a fire and bakes bread. But he also fashions a god and worships it; he makes an idol and bows down to it.","Homini facta sunt ad comburendum; sumit ex eis, ut calefaciat, et succendit et coquit panes. De reliquo autem operatur deum et adorat; facit sculptile et curvatur ante illud.","והיה לאדם לבער ויקח מהם ויחם אף ישיק ואפה לחם אף יפעל אל וישתחו עשהו פסל ויסגד למו׃"],["29","44","16","그는 나무 반 토막에는 불을 붙여 그 위에서 고기를 굽고 구운 고기를 배불리 먹는다. 또 제 몸을 덥히면서 “아, 따뜻한 불기운이 느껴지는구나.” 하고 말한다.","반 토막으로는 불을 피우고 그 불에 고기를 구워 배불리 먹으면서 흥얼거린다. \"아, 뜨뜻하게 불까지 쬐니 좋기도 하구나!\" 이렇게 불을 쬐면서","그 중의 절반은 불에 사르고 그 절반으로는 고기를 구워 먹고 배불리며 또 몸을 덥게 하여 이르기를 아하 따뜻하다 내가 불을 보았구나 하면서","그 중에 얼마는 불사르고 얼마는 고기를 삶아 먹기도 하며 고기를 구워 배불리기도 하며 또 몸을 더웁게 하여 이르기를 아하 따뜻하다 내가 불을 보았구나 하면서","우상을 만들고 남은 나무 토막으로는 불을 피워서 고기를 구워 놓고 배불리 먹기도 한다. 또는 그 나무 토막으로 장작불을 피워 놓고 앉아 피면서 \"아, 따뜻하다! 참 좋은 불이다!\" 하고 감탄하기도 한다.","Half of it he burns in the fire, on its embers he roasts meat; he eats the roast and is full. He warms himself and says, “Ah! I am warm! I see the flames!”","He burneth part thereof in the fire; with part thereof he eateth flesh; he roasteth roast, and is satisfied: yea, he warmeth himself, and saith, Aha, I am warm, I have seen the fire:","Half of the wood he burns in the fire; over it he prepares his meal, he roasts his meat and eats his fill. He also warms himself and says, \"Ah! I am warm; I see the fire.\"","Medium eius comburit igne et medio eius carnes assat, manducat assaturam et saturatur et calefit et dicit:  “Vah, calefactus sum, vidi focum “.","חציו שרף במו אש על חציו בשר יאכל יצלה צלי וישבע אף יחם ויאמר האח חמותי ראיתי אור׃"],["29","44","17","그 나머지로는 신을, 자기 우상을 만들고 그 앞에 엎드려 경배한다. 그리고 그것에게 기도하며 “당신은 저의 신이시니 저를 구하소서.” 하고 말한다.","남은 토막을 가지고 신이랍시고 만들지들 않느냐? 신상이랍시고 만들어놓고 그 앞에 엎드려 큰절을 하며 예배하고, \"당신이 나의 신입니다. 나를 구해 주십시오.\" 하고 기도까지 하는구나.","그 나머지로 신상 곧 자기의 우상을 만들고 그 앞에 엎드려 경배하며 그것에게 기도하여 이르기를 너는 나의 신이니 나를 구원하라 하는도다","그 나머지로 신상 곧 자기의 우상을 만들고 그 앞에 부복하여 경배하며 그것에게 기도하여 이르기를 너는 나의 신이니 나를 구원하라 하는도다","바로 그런 땔감 중에서 남은 부분을 우상으로 만들어 놓고서 신이라고 절을 하며 숭배한다. 사람들은 그런 나무 토막들 앞에 엎드려 \"내가 섬기는 신이시여, 나를 구원해 주소서!\" 하고 기도를 드린다.","The rest of it he makes into a god, an image to worship and adore. He prays to it and says, “Help me! You are my god!”","And the residue thereof he maketh a god, even his graven image: he falleth down unto it, and worshippeth it, and prayeth unto it, and saith, Deliver me; for thou art my god.","From the rest he makes a god, his idol; he bows down to it and worships. He prays to it and says, \"Save me; you are my god.\"","Reliquum autem eius deum fecit, sculptile sibi; curvatur ante illud et adorat illud et obsecrat dicens:  “Libera me, quia deus meus es tu “.","ושאריתו לאל עשה לפסלו יסגוד לו וישתחו ויתפלל אליו ויאמר הצילני כי אלי אתה׃"],["29","44","18","그것들은 알지도 못하고 깨닫지도 못하니 눈은 들러붙어 보지 못하고 마음은 알아듣지 못하기 때문이다.","이렇게 모두들 지각이 없고 철이 없는 것들, 눈은 닫혀 아무것도 보지 못하고 마음은 어두워 아무것도 깨닫지 못하는 것들.","그들이 알지도 못하고 깨닫지도 못함은 그들의 눈이 가려서 보지 못하며 그들의 마음이 어두워져서 깨닫지 못함이니라","그들이 알지도 못하고 깨닫지도 못함은 그 눈이 가리워져서 보지 못하며 그 마음이 어두워져서 깨닫지 못함이라","그런데도 우상을 숭배하는 이들은 그런 신상들이 나무 토막인 줄을 알지도 못하고 깨닫지도 못한다. 그들의 눈은 무엇에 가리어져 있어서 사실대로 보지를 못하고 그들의 마음은 무엇에 막혀 있어서 아무 것도 깨닫지를 못한다.","They do not know, do not understand; their eyes are too clouded to see, their minds, to perceive.","They have not known nor understood: for he hath shut their eyes, that they cannot see; and their hearts, that they cannot understand.","They know nothing, they understand nothing; their eyes are plastered over so they cannot see, and their minds closed so they cannot understand.","Nescierunt neque intellexerunt; nam clausit oculos eorum, ne videant et ne intellegant corde suo.","לא ידעו ולא יבינו כי טח מראות עיניהם מהשכיל לבתם׃"],["29","44","19","아무도 깊이 생각하지 않고 지각도 없고 분별력도 없어 “나는 그 반 토막에 불을 붙여 그 숯불 위에서 빵을 굽고 고기를 구워 먹었지. 이제 남은 것으로 혐오스러운 것을 만들어 그 나무 조각 앞에 엎드려야지.” 하고 말할 줄도 모른다.","\"반 토막으로는 불을 피우고 그 이글이글 타는 장작불에 빵을 굽고 고기를 구워 먹자. 남은 토막으로는 3)신상을 만들어놓고 그 나무토막 앞에 엎드리자.\" 하고 말하는 생각도 없고 지각도 없고 철도 없는 것들. 히브리어 본문: \"역겨운 것.\"","마음에 생각도 없고 지식도 없고 총명도 없으므로 내가 그것의 절반을 불 사르고 또한 그 숯불 위에서 떡도 굽고 고기도 구워 먹었거늘 내가 어찌 그 나머지로 가증한 물건을 만들겠으며 내가 어찌 그 나무 토막 앞에 굴복하리요 말하지 아니하니","마음에 생각도 없고 지식도 없고 총명도 없으므로 내가 그 나무의 얼마로 불을 사르고 그 숯불 위에 떡도 굽고 고기도 구워 먹었거늘 내가 어찌 그 나머지로 가증한 물건을 만들겠으며 내가 어찌 그 나무토막 앞에 굴복하리요 말하지 아니하니","나무를 잘라 신상을 만드는 이들은 자신이 하는 일들에 대하여 반성하고 깨달을 줄을 모른다. 그들이 만약 제정신을 차리고 깨닫기만 한다면 이렇게 후회해야 마땅할 것이다. \"내가 똑같은 나무를 잘라서 한쪽으로는 불을 피워 고기도 굽고 떡도 쪄서 먹었다. 그런데 내가 어떻게 그 나무의 다른 쪽으로는 신상을 만들어 놓고 나무 토막 앞에 절하며 섬길 수가 있겠는가?\"","He does not think clearly; he lacks the wit and knowledge to say, “Half the wood I burned in the fire, on its embers I baked bread, I roasted meat and ate. Shall I turn the rest into an abomination? Shall I worship a block of wood?”","And none considereth in his heart, neither is there knowledge nor understanding to say, I have burned part of it in the fire; yea, also I have baked bread upon the coals thereof; I have roasted flesh, and eaten it: and shall I make the residue thereof an abomination? shall I fall down to the stock of a tree?","No one stops to think, no one has the knowledge or understanding to say, \"Half of it I used for fuel; I even baked bread over its coals, I roasted meat and I ate. Shall I make a detestable thing from what is left? Shall I bow down to a block of wood?\"","Non recogitant in corde suo, scientia et intellegentia carent, ut dicant:  “Medietatem eius combussi igne et coxi super carbones eius panes, coxi carnes et comedi et de reliquo eius abominationem faciam; ante truncum ligni procidam? “.","ולא ישיב אל לבו ולא דעת ולא תבונה לאמר חציו שרפתי במו אש ואף אפיתי על גחליו לחם אצלה בשר ואכל ויתרו לתועבה אעשה לבול עץ אסגוד׃"],["29","44","20","재를 뒤쫓는 자, 그는 현혹된 마음에 이끌려 제 목숨을 구하지도 못하고 “내 오른손에 있는 것은 거짓이 아닌가?” 하고 말할 줄도 모른다.","재티나 먹고 사는 것들. 생각이 비뚤어져 터무니없는 짓이나 하는 것들. \"내 오른손에 붙잡고 있는 것이 허수아비나 아닐까?\" 하고 반성하기는커녕 그 터무니없는 생각에서 도무지 헤어나지를 못하는구나.","그는 재를 먹고 허탄한 마음에 미혹되어 자기의 영혼을 구원하지 못하며 나의 오른손에 거짓 것이 있지 아니하냐 하지도 못하느니라","그는 재를 먹고 미혹한 마음에 미혹되어서 스스로 그 영혼을 구원하지 못하며 나의 오른손에 거짓 것이 있지 아니하냐 하지도 못하느니라","그가 타지 않은 나무 토막의 신상을 숭배한다면 마찬가지로 타버린 재도 숭배해야 옳을 것이다. 한번 속은 사람은 계속 그릇된 인생을 살기 마련이다. 그러나 그런 식으로는 그들이 자기 생명을 구원할 수도 없고 스스로 헛것을 붙잡고 있었다고 고백할 수도 없다.","He is chasing ashes! A deluded mind has led him astray; He cannot save himself, does not say, “This thing in my right hand—is it not a fraud?”","He feedeth on ashes: a deceived heart hath turned him aside, that he cannot deliver his soul, nor say, Is there not a lie in my right hand?","He feeds on ashes, a deluded heart misleads him; he cannot save himself, or say, \"Is not this thing in my right hand a lie?\"","Cinere vescitur; cor insipiens decepit eum, et non liberabit animam suam neque dicet:  “Nonne mendacium est in dextera mea? “.","רעה אפר לב הותל הטהו ולא יציל את נפשו ולא יאמר הלוא שקר בימיני׃"],["29","44","21","야곱아, 이것을 기억하여라. 이스라엘아, 너는 나의 종이다. 내가 너를 빚어 만들었다. 너는 나의 종이다. 이스라엘아, 나는 너를 잊지 않으리라.","\"야곱아, 이런 일들을 마음에 새겨두어라. 이스라엘아, 너는 나의 종임을 잊지 마라. 너는 내가 빚어 만든 나의 종이다. 이스라엘아, 나는 결코 너를 잊지 아니하리라.","야곱아 이스라엘아 이 일을 기억하라 너는 내 종이니라 내가 너를 지었으니 너는 내 종이니라 이스라엘아 너는 나에게 잊혀지지 아니하리라","야곱아 이스라엘아 이 일을 기억하라 너는 내 종이니라 내가 너를 지었으니 너는 내 종이니라 이스라엘아 너는 나의 잊음이 되지 아니하리라","주께서 말씀하셨다. \"야곱의 후손인 이스라엘 사람들아, 너희가 비록 포로생활의 어려운 처지에 있을지라도 이 사실을 잊지 말아라. 너희는 내가 보호하는 백성이다. 너희는 내가 창조하여 나를 섬기도록 선택한 백성이다. 이스라엘아, 그러므로 내가 너를 결코 잊지 않겠다.","Remember these things, Jacob, Israel, for you are my servant! I formed you, a servant to me; Israel, you shall never be forgotten by me:","Remember these, O Jacob and Israel; for thou art my servant: I have formed thee; thou art my servant: O Israel, thou shalt not be forgotten of me.","\"Remember these things, O Jacob, for you are my servant, O Israel. I have made you, you are my servant; O Israel, I will not forget you.","Memento horum, Iacob, et Israel, quoniam servus meus es tu; formavi te, servus meus es tu, Israel, non decipies me.","זכר אלה יעקב וישראל כי עבדי אתה יצרתיך עבד לי אתה ישראל לא תנשני׃"],["29","44","22","내가 너의 악행들을 구름처럼, 너의 죄악들을 안개처럼 쓸어버렸다. 나에게 돌아오너라. 내가 너를 구원하였다.","나는 너의 악행을 먹구름처럼 흩어버렸고 너의 죄를 뜬구름처럼 날려보냈다. 나에게 돌아오너라. 내가 너를 구해 내었다.\"","내가 네 허물을 빽빽한 구름 같이, 네 죄를 안개 같이 없이하였으니 너는 내게로 돌아오라 내가 너를 구속하였음이니라","내가 네 허물을 빽빽한 구름의 사라짐 같이, 네 죄를 안개의 사라짐 같이 도말하였으니 너는 내게로 돌아오라 내가 너를 구속하였음이니라","내가 너희의 악행과 죄악을 모두 용서하여 먹구름이 사라지고 아침 안개가 사라지듯이 말끔하게 치워 버렸다. 그러므로 너희는 이제 내게로 다시 돌아오너라. 그러면 내가 너희를 해방시키리라.\"","I have brushed away your offenses like a cloud, your sins like a mist; return to me, for I have redeemed you.","I have blotted out, as a thick cloud, thy transgressions, and, as a cloud, thy sins: return unto me; for I have redeemed thee.","I have swept away your offenses like a cloud, your sins like the morning mist. Return to me, for I have redeemed you.\"","Delevi ut nubem iniquitates tuas et quasi nebulam peccata tua; revertere ad me, quoniam redemi te.","מחיתי כעב פשעיך וכענן חטאותיך שובה אלי כי גאלתיך׃"],["29","44","23","주님께서 이 일을 이루셨으니, 하늘아, 환성을 올려라. 땅속 깊은 곳들아, 함성을 질러라. 기뻐 소리쳐라, 산들아 수풀과 그 안에 있는 모든 나무들아. 주님께서 야곱을 구원하셨고 이스라엘에게 당신 영광을 드러내셨다.","하늘아, 야훼께서 하신 일을 기뻐 노래하여라. 땅 속 깊은 곳아, 큰소리로 외쳐라. 모든 산아 기쁨에 넘쳐 환하게 빛나거라. 모든 숲과 그 속의 나무야, 환하게 빛나거라. 야훼께서 야곱을 구해 내시어 당신의 영광을 이스라엘에서 빛내셨다.","여호와께서 이 일을 행하셨으니 하늘아 노래할지어다 땅의 깊은 곳들아 높이 부를지어다 산들아 숲과 그 가운데의 모든 나무들아 소리내어 노래할지어다 여호와께서 야곱을 구속하셨으니 이스라엘 중에 자기의 영광을 나타내실 것임이로다","여호와께서 이 일을 행하셨으니 하늘아 노래할찌어다 땅의 깊은 곳들아 높이 부를찌어다 산들아 삼림과 그 가운데 모든 나무들아 소리내어 노래할찌어다 여호와께서 야곱을 구속하셨으니 이스라엘로 자기를 영화롭게 하실 것임이로다","주께서 이루실 그 앞날을 내다보고 하늘아, 환호성을 질러라. 온 땅아, 주께 찬양하여라! 산들아, 환호성을 터뜨려라. 삼림과 숲속의 나무들아, 소리를 높이 질러라. 여호와께서 야곱을 해방시키시고 주님의 권세와 능력을 이스라엘에게 보여주시지 않았느냐?","Raise a glad cry, you heavens—the LORD has acted! Shout, you depths of the earth. Break forth, mountains, into song, forest, with all your trees. For the LORD has redeemed Jacob, shows his glory through Israel.","Sing, O ye heavens; for the LORD hath done it: shout, ye lower parts of the earth: break forth into singing, ye mountains, O forest, and every tree therein: for the LORD hath redeemed Jacob, and glorified himself in Israel.","Sing for joy, O heavens, for the LORD has done this; shout aloud, O earth beneath. Burst into song, you mountains, you forests and all your trees, for the LORD has redeemed Jacob, he displays his glory in Israel.","Exsultate, caeli, quoniam hoc fecit Dominus; iubilate, fundamenta terrae, resonate, montes, laudationem, saltus et omne lignum eius, quoniam redemit Dominus Iacob et in Israel glorificabitur.","רנו שמים כי עשה יהוה הריעו תחתיות ארץ פצחו הרים רנה יער וכל עץ בו כי גאל יהוה יעקב ובישראל יתפאר׃"],["29","44","24","너의 구원자이신 주님, 너를 모태에서부터 빚어 만드신 분께서 이렇게 말씀하신다. “나는 주님, 모든 것을 만든 이다. 나는 혼자서 하늘을 펼치고 나 홀로 땅을 넓혔다.","너를 모태에 생기게 하신 하느님, 너를 구해 내신 야훼께서 말씀하신다. \"나 야훼가 만물을 창조하였다. 나는 혼자서 하늘을 펼치고 땅을 밟아 늘였다. 그 때 누가 나를 도왔느냐?","네 구속자요 모태에서 너를 지은 나 여호와가 이같이 말하노라 나는 만물을 지은 여호와라 홀로 하늘을 폈으며 나와 함께 한 자 없이 땅을 펼쳤고","네 구속자요 모태에서 너를 조성한 나 여호와가 말하노라 나는 만물을 지은 여호와라 나와 함께한 자 없이 홀로 하늘을 폈으며 땅을 베풀었고","이스라엘 백성아, 네 창조주이시며 해방주이신 여호와께서 이렇게 말씀하셨다. \"나는 태초에 모든 것을 창조하고 역사를 항상 지배하는 여호와이다. 내가 홀로 하늘을 차일처럼 팽팽하게 당겨 놓고 내 힘으로 온 땅을 펼쳐 놓았다.","Thus says the LORD, your redeemer, who formed you from the womb: I am the LORD, who made all things, who alone stretched out the heavens, I spread out the earth by myself.","Thus saith the LORD, thy redeemer, and he that formed thee from the womb, I am the LORD that maketh all things; that stretcheth forth the heavens alone; that spreadeth abroad the earth by myself;","\"This is what the LORD says--your Redeemer, who formed you in the womb: I am the LORD, who has made all things, who alone stretched out the heavens, who spread out the earth by myself,","Haec dicit Dominus, redemptor tuus et formator tuus ex utero:  “Ego sum Dominus, qui feci omnia, extendi caelos solus, expandi terram; et quis mecum?","כה אמר יהוה גאלך ויצרך מבטן אנכי יהוה עשה כל נטה שמים לבדי רקע הארץ מי אתי׃"],["29","44","25","나는 수다쟁이들의 표징을 부수어 버리고 점쟁이들을 바보로 만든다. 나는 현자들을 물리치고 그들의 지식을 어리석은 것으로 만든다.","나는 거짓 예언자들의 징조를 빗나가게 하며 점쟁이들을 바보로 만든다. 지혜 있다는 자들의 생각을 뒤엎어 아는 체하면서 어리석은 짓만 하게 한다.","헛된 말을 하는 자들의 징표를 폐하며 점 치는 자들을 미치게 하며 지혜로운 자들을 물리쳐 그들의 지식을 어리석게 하며","거짓말 하는 자의 징조를 폐하며 점 치는 자를 미치게 하며 지혜로운 자들을 물리쳐 그 지식을 어리석게 하며","시대의 징조를 보고 예언하는 이들에게 내가 그들의 모든 거짓말에 대하여 벌을 내리고 점쟁이들이 모두 바보인 것을 내가 폭로해 놓겠다. 내가 똑똑한 현인들도 할 말을 모르게 만들어 버리고 그들의 지식이 아무 쓸모도 없다는 것을 확실하게 보여주겠다.","I bring to nought the omens of babblers, make fools of diviners, Turn back the wise and make their knowledge foolish.","That frustrateth the tokens of the liars, and maketh diviners mad; that turneth wise men backward, and maketh their knowledge foolish;","who foils the signs of false prophets and makes fools of diviners, who overthrows the learning of the wise and turns it into nonsense,","Qui irrita facio signa divinorum et hariolos stultos reddo; compello sapientes retrorsum et scientiam eorum vanam facio;","מפר אתות בדים וקסמים יהולל משיב חכמים אחור ודעתם ישכל׃"],["29","44","26","나는 내 종의 말을 실현시키고 내 사자들의 계획을 성취시킨다. 나는 예루살렘에게는 ‘사람들이 살리라.’ 하고 유다의 성읍들을 두고는 ‘이것들은 재건될 것이다. 그 폐허들을 내가 복구하리라.’ 하고 말한다.","나는 내 종들의 말을 세워주고 내 사명을 띤 자의 계획을 이루어준다. 나는 명령한다. '예루살렘에 환도하여라. 유다의 도시들을 재건하여라.' 그 허물어진 곳을 내가 다시 세우리라.","그의 종의 말을 세워 주며 그의 사자들의 계획을 성취하게 하며 예루살렘에 대하여는 이르기를 거기에 사람이 살리라 하며 유다 성읍들에 대하여는 중건될 것이라 내가 그 황폐한 곳들을 복구시키리라 하며","4)내 종의 말을 응하게 하며 4)내 사자의 모략을 성취하게 하며 예루살렘에 대하여는 이르기를 거기 사람이 살리라 하며 유다 성읍들에 대하여는 이르기를 중건될 것이라 내가 그 황폐한 곳들을 복구시키리라 하며 히, 그히, 그","그러나 나의 종들이 예언할 것은 언제나 내가 그대로 성취시켜 주었고 나의 심부름꾼들이 선포한 나의 계획은 내가 항상 그대로 실현하였다. 역사를 지배하는 내가 이제 예루살렘에 대하여 선언한다. \"사람들이 거기서 다시 살 것이다!\" 잿더미가 된 그 도성을 내가 다시 일으켜 놓겠다. 유다 땅의 성읍들도 재건될 것이다.","I confirm the words of my servant, carry out the plan my messengers announce. I say to Jerusalem, Be inhabited! To the cities of Judah, Be rebuilt! I will raise up their ruins.","That confirmeth the word of his servant, and performeth the counsel of his messengers; that saith to Jerusalem, Thou shalt be inhabited; and to the cities of Judah, Ye shall be built, and I will raise up the decayed places thereof:","who carries out the words of his servants and fulfills the predictions of his messengers, who says of Jerusalem, 'It shall be inhabited,' of the towns of Judah, 'They shall be built,' and of their ruins, 'I will restore them,'","qui suscito verbum servi mei et consilium nuntiorum meorum compleo. Qui dico Ierusalem:  “Habitaberis “ et civitatibus Iudae:  “Aedificabimini “ et deserta eius suscitabo;","מקים דבר עבדו ועצת מלאכיו ישלים האמר לירושלם תושב ולערי יהודה תבנינה וחרבותיה אקומם׃"],["29","44","27","나는 깊은 물에게 ‘말라 버려라. 너의 물줄기들을 내가 메마르게 하리라.’ 하고 말한다.","나는 명령한다. '바다야, 말라버려라.' 바다의 물줄기를 내가 말리리라.","깊음에 대하여는 이르기를 마르라 내가 네 강물들을 마르게 하리라 하며","깊음에 대하여는 이르기를 마르라 내가 네 강물들을 마르게 하리라 하며","깊은 바다와 넓은 강들과 같이 부귀와 영화를 누리는 바벨론 제국에게는 내가 이렇게 선언한다. \"세계를 위협하는 깊은 바다야, 밑바닥까지 말라라! 네 강줄기들도 모조리 잦아들어라!\"","I say to the deep, Be dry! I will dry up your rivers.","That saith to the deep, Be dry, and I will dry up thy rivers:","who says to the watery deap, 'Be dry, and I will dry up your streams,'","qui dico profundo:  “Desolare, et flumina tua arefaciam “;","האמר לצולה חרבי ונהרתיך אוביש׃"],["29","44","28","나는 키루스에 대하여 말한다. ‘그는 나의 목자. 그가 나의 뜻을 모두 성취시키며 예루살렘을 두고 ′그것은 재건되고 성전은 그 기초가 세워지리라.′ 하고 말하리라.’”","나는 고레스에게 명령한다. '너는 내 양을 쳐라.' 그는 내 뜻을 받들어 이루리라. '너는 예루살렘을 재건하여라. 성전의 기초를 놓아라.'\"","고레스에 대하여는 이르기를 내 목자라 그가 나의 모든 기쁨을 성취하리라 하며 예루살렘에 대하여는 이르기를 중건되리라 하며 성전에 대하여는 네 기초가 놓여지리라 하는 자니라","고레스에 대하여는 이르기를 그는 나의 목자라 나의 모든 기쁨을 성취하리라 하며 예루살렘에 대하여는 이르기를 중건되리라 하며 성전에 대하여는 이르기를 네 기초가 세움이 되리라 하는 자니라","내가 이제 고레스에게 새 임무를 준다. \"내가 너를 내 백성의 목자로 삼는다!\" 내가 하려는 일을 그가 모두 실현할 것이다. 그래서 그가 이런 명령을 내릴 것이다. \"예루살렘을 재건하고, 성전을 다시 세워라!\"","I say of Cyrus, My shepherd! He carries out my every wish, Saying of Jerusalem, “Let it be rebuilt,” and of the temple, “Lay its foundations.”","That saith of Cyrus, He is my shepherd, and shall perform all my pleasure: even saying to Jerusalem, Thou shalt be built; and to the temple, Thy foundation shall be laid.","who says of Cyrus, 'He is my shepherd and will accomplish all that I please; he will say of Jerusalem, \"Let it be rebuilt,\" and of the temple, \"Let its foundations be laid.\"'","qui dico de Cyro:  “Pastor meus est et omnem voluntatem meam complebit “; qui dico Ierusalem:  “Aedificaberis “, et templo:  “Fundaberis “ “.","האמר לכורש רעי וכל חפצי ישלם ולאמר לירושלם תבנה והיכל תוסד׃"],["29","45","1","주님께서 당신의 기름부음받은이에게, 당신께서 오른손을 붙잡아 주신 키루스에게 말씀하시니 민족들을 그 앞에 굴복시키고 임금들의 허리띠를 풀어 버리며 문들을 열어젖히고 성문들이 닫히지 않게 하시려는 것이다.","야훼께서 당신이 기름 부어 세우신 고레스에게 말씀하신다. \"내가 너의 오른손을 잡아주어 만백성을 네 앞에 굴복시키고 제왕들을 무장해제 시키리라. 네 앞에 성문을 활짝 열어 젖혀 다시는 닫히지 않게 하리라.","여호와께서 그의 기름 부음을 받은 고레스에게 이같이 말씀하시되 내가 그의 오른손을 붙들고 그 앞에 열국을 항복하게 하며 내가 왕들의 허리를 풀어 그 앞에 문들을 열고 성문들이 닫히지 못하게 하리라","나 여호와는 나의 기름 받은 고레스의 오른손을 잡고 열국으로 그 앞에 항복하게 하며 열왕의 허리를 풀며 성 문을 그 앞에 열어서 닫지 못하게 하리라 내가 고레스에게 이르기를","주께서 고레스에 대하여 이렇게 말씀하셨다. \"내가 그를 선택하여 왕으로 세워 놓았다. 내가 그와 함께 있어서 그를 도와주고 내가 그의 앞에서 세계 만민을 굴복시키며 왕들의 권세를 빼앗아 그에게 넘겨 주겠다. 그가 가는 곳마다 내가 성문을 열어 주어 성문들이 닫히지 못하게 하겠다.\"","Thus says the LORD to his anointed, Cyrus, whose right hand I grasp, Subduing nations before him, stripping kings of their strength, Opening doors before him, leaving the gates unbarred:","Thus saith the LORD to his anointed, to Cyrus, whose right hand I have holden, to subdue nations before him; and I will loose the loins of kings, to open before him the two leaved gates; and the gates shall not be shut;","\"This is what the LORD says to his anointed, to Cyrus, whose right hand I take hold of to subdue nations before him and to strip kings of their armor, to open doors before him so that gates will not be shut:","Haec dicit Dominus de uncto suo Cyro:  “Apprehendi dexteram eius, ut subiciam ante faciem eius gentes et dorsa regum vertam et aperiam coram eo ianuas; et portae non claudentur.","כה אמר יהוה למשיחו לכורש אשר החזקתי בימינו לרד לפניו גוים ומתני מלכים אפתח לפתח לפניו דלתים ושערים לא יסגרו׃"],["29","45","2","내가 네 앞을 걸어가면서 산들을 평지로 만들고 청동 문들을 부수며 쇠 빗장들을 부러뜨리리라.","내가 너를 이끌고 앞장서서 언덕을 훤하게 밀고 나가리라. 청동성문을 두드려 부수고 쇠빗장을 부러뜨리리라.","내가 너보다 앞서 가서 험한 곳을 평탄하게 하며 놋문을 쳐서 부수며 쇠빗장을 꺾고","내가 네 앞서 가서 험한 곳을 평탄케 하며 놋문을 쳐서 부수며 쇠빗장을 꺾고","주께서 고레스 자신에게도 이렇게 말씀하셨다. \"내가 네 앞에 먼저 가서 모든 장애물을 제거하겠다. 청동의 성문들도 내가 산산조각으로 박살을 내버리고 무쇠 빗장도 쳐서 부러뜨리겠다.","I will go before you and level the mountains; Bronze doors I will shatter, iron bars I will snap.","I will go before thee, and make the crooked places straight: I will break in pieces the gates of brass, and cut in sunder the bars of iron:","I will go before you and will level the mountains; I will break down gates of bronze and cut through bars of iron.","Ego ante te ibo et montes humiliabo; portas aereas conteram et vectes ferreos confringam.","אני לפניך אלך והדורים אושר דלתות נחושה אשבר ובריחי ברזל אגדע׃"],["29","45","3","내가 어둠 속에 있는 보화와 숨겨진 보물을 너에게 주리니 내가 바로 너를 지명하여 부르는 주님임을, 이스라엘의 하느님임을 네가 알게 하려는 것이다.","내가 감추어두었던 보화, 숨겨두었던 재물을 너에게 주면 너는 알리라, 내가 바로 야훼임을. 내가 바로 너를 지명하여 불러낸 이스라엘의 하느님임을!","네게 흑암 중의 보화와 은밀한 곳에 숨은 재물을 주어 네 이름을 부르는 자가 나 여호와 이스라엘의 하나님인 줄을 네가 알게 하리라","네게 흑암 중의 보화와 은밀한 곳에 숨은 재물을 주어서 너로 너를 지명하여 부른 자가 나 여호와 이스라엘의 하나님인줄 알게 하리라","바벨론의 궁중에 숨어 있는 보물들도 내가 네게 넘겨 주고 그 감추어 놓은 재물들도 네게 내주겠다. 그러면 너를 불러서 사용하는 나 여호와가 이스라엘의 하나님인 줄을 네가 알게 될 것이다.","I will give you treasures of darkness, riches hidden away, That you may know I am the LORD, the God of Israel, who calls you by name.","And I will give thee the treasures of darkness, and hidden riches of secret places, that thou mayest know that I, the LORD, which call thee by thy name, am the God of Israel.","I will give you the treasures of darkness, riches stored in secret places, so that you may know that I am the LORD, the God of Israel, who summons you by name.","Et dabo tibi thesauros absconditos et divitias occultas, ut scias quia ego Dominus, qui vocavi te nomine tuo, Deus Israel.","ונתתי לך אוצרות חשך ומטמני מסתרים למען תדע כי אני יהוה הקורא בשמך אלהי ישראל׃"],["29","45","4","나의 종 야곱 때문에 내가 선택한 이스라엘 때문에 내가 너를 지명하여 부르고 너는 나를 알지 못하지만 나 너에게 칭호를 내린다.","나의 종 야곱을 도우라고 내가 뽑아 세운 이스라엘을 도우라고 나는 너를 지명하여 불렀다. 나를 알지도 못하는 너에게 이 작위를 내렸다.","내가 나의 종 야곱, 내가 택한 자 이스라엘을 위하여 네 이름을 불러 너는 나를 알지 못하였을지라도 네게 칭호를 주었노라","내가 나의 종 야곱, 나의 택한 이스라엘을 위하여 너를 지명하여 불렀나니 너는 나를 알지 못하였을찌라도 나는 네게 칭호를 주었노라","너는 나를 알지 못하였지만 나는 너를 불러서 영광스러운 칭호를 네게 주겠다. 나는 이미 이스라엘 백성을 선택하여 나를 섬기게 하였으나 그 야곱의 후손들이 지금 바벨론에서 포로생활을 하고 있다. 그래서 나는 너를 불러서 내 백성을 해방시켜 주기로 작정하였다.","For the sake of Jacob, my servant, of Israel my chosen one, I have called you by name, giving you a title, though you do not know me.","For Jacob my servant's sake, and Israel mine elect, I have even called thee by thy name: I have surnamed thee, though thou hast not known me.","For the sake of Jacob my servant, of Israel my chosen, I summon you by name and bestow on you a title of honor, though you do not acknowledge me.","Propter servum meum Iacob et Israel electum meum, et vocavi te nomine tuo; designavi te, et non cognovisti me.","למען עבדי יעקב וישראל בחירי ואקרא לך בשמך אכנך ולא ידעתני׃"],["29","45","5","나는 주님이다. 다른 이가 없다. 나 말고는 다른 신이 없다. 너는 나를 알지 못하지만 나 너를 무장시키니","내가 야훼다. 누가 또 있느냐? 나밖에 다른 신은 없다. 너는 비록 나를 몰랐지만 너를 무장시킨 것은 나다.","나는 여호와라 나 외에 다른 이가 없나니 나 밖에 신이 없느니라 너는 나를 알지 못하였을지라도 나는 네 띠를 동일 것이요","나는 여호와라 나 외에 다른이가 없나니 나 밖에 신이 없느니라 너는 나를 알지 못하였을찌라도 나는 네 띠를 동일 것이요","나는 세계의 주인이니 더 이상 다른 주인은 아무도 없다. 그러므로 나밖에는 다른 신이 없다. 고레스야, 너는 나를 전혀 모르고 있었지만 내가 네게 권세를 주겠다.","I am the LORD, there is no other, there is no God besides me. It is I who arm you, though you do not know me,","I am the LORD, and there is none else, there is no God beside me: I girded thee, though thou hast not known me:","I am the LORD, and there is no other; apart from me there is no God. I will strengthen you, though you have not acknowledged me,","Ego Dominus, et non est amplius: extra me non est Deus. Accinxi te, et non cognovisti me,","אני יהוה ואין עוד זולתי אין אלהים אאזרך ולא ידעתני׃"],["29","45","6","해 뜨는 곳에서도 해 지는 곳에서도 나밖에 없음을, 내가 주님이고 다른 이가 없음을 알게 하려는 것이다.","이는 나밖에 다른 신이 없음을 해 뜨는 곳에서 해 지는 곳에까지 알리려는 것이다. 내가 야훼다. 누가 또 있느냐?","해 뜨는 곳에서든지 지는 곳에서든지 나 밖에 다른 이가 없는 줄을 알게 하리라 나는 여호와라 다른 이가 없느니라","해 뜨는 곳에서든지 지는 곳에서든지 나 밖에 다른이가 없는줄을 무리로 알게 하리라 나는 여호와라 다른이가 없느니라","나만이 온 세상의 주인이며 나밖에는 다른 신이 없다는 것을 온 세상이 다 알게 하려고 내가 너를 불러 왕으로 세우겠다.","so that all may know, from the rising of the sun to its setting, that there is none besides me. I am the LORD, there is no other.","That they may know from the rising of the sun, and from the west, that there is none beside me. I am the LORD, and there is none else.","so that from the rising of the sun to the place of its setting men may know there is none besides me. I am the LORD, and there is no other.","ut sciant ab ortu solis et ab occidente quoniam absque me nullus est. Ego Dominus, et non est alter,","למען ידעו ממזרח שמש וממערבה כי אפס בלעדי אני יהוה ואין עוד׃"],["29","45","7","나는 빛을 만드는 이요 어둠을 창조하는 이다. 나는 행복을 주는 이요 불행을 일으키는 이다. 나 주님이 이 모든 것을 이룬다.","빛을 만든 것도 나요, 어둠을 지은 것도 나다. 행복을 주는 것도 나요, 불행을 조장하는 것도 나다. 이 모든 일을 나 야훼가 하였다.","나는 빛도 짓고 어둠도 창조하며 나는 평안도 짓고 환난도 창조하나니 나는 여호와라 이 모든 일들을 행하는 자니라 하였노라","나는 빛도 짓고 어두움도 창조하며 나는 평안도 짓고 환난도 창조하나니 나는 여호와라 이 모든 일을 행하는 자니라 하였노라","나는 빛도 만들고 어둠도 창조하는 자이다. 나는 평화도 이루고 재앙도 불러오는 자이다. 이 모든 일을 집행하는 자가 바로 나 여호와이다!","I form the light, and create the darkness, I make weal and create woe; I, the LORD, do all these things.","I form the light, and create darkness: I make peace, and create evil: I the LORD do all these things.","I form the light and create darkness, I bring prosperity and create disaster; I, the LORD, do all these things.","formans lucem et creans tenebras, faciens pacem et creans malum: ego Dominus faciens omnia haec.","יוצר אור ובורא חשך עשה שלום ובורא רע אני יהוה עשה כל אלה׃"],["29","45","8","하늘아, 위에서 이슬을 내려라. 구름아, 의로움을 뿌려라. 땅은 열려 구원이 피어나게, 의로움도 함께 싹트게 하여라. 나 주님이 이것을 창조하였다.","하늘아, 높은 곳에서 정의를 이슬처럼 내려라. 구름아, 승리를 비처럼 뿌려라. 구원이 피어나게, 정의도 함께 싹트게 땅아, 열려라. 이 모든 것을 창조한 것은 나 야훼다.\"","하늘이여 위로부터 공의를 뿌리며 구름이여 의를 부을지어다 땅이여 열려서 구원을 싹트게 하고 공의도 함께 움돋게 할지어다 나 여호와가 이 일을 창조하였느니라","너 하늘이여 위에서부터 의로움을 비 같이 듣게 할찌어다 궁창이여 의를 부어 내릴찌어다 땅이여 열려서 1)구원을 내고 의도 함께 움돋게 할찌어다 나 여호와가 이 일을 창조하였느니라 구원의 열매를","하늘아, 위에서 정의를 빗방울처럼 쏟아라. 모든 구름들아, 정의를 강물처럼 쏟아라. 대지야, 그 빗방울과 강물로 마른 땅을 녹여라! 해방과 평화의 새싹을 뿜어 내어라! 나 여호와가 직접 이 일을 이루어 놓겠다.\"","Let justice descend, you heavens, like dew from above, like gentle rain let the clouds drop it down. Let the earth open and salvation bud forth; let righteousness spring up with them! I, the LORD, have created this.","Drop down, ye heavens, from above, and let the skies pour down righteousness: let the earth open, and let them bring forth salvation, and let righteousness spring up together; I the LORD have created it.","\"You heavens above, rain down righteousness; let the clouds shower it down. Let the earth open wide, let salvation spring up, let righteousness grow with it; I, the LORD, have created it.","Rorate, caeli, desuper, et nubes pluant iustitiam; aperiatur terra et germinet salvationem; et iustitia oriatur simul: ego Dominus creavi eam “.","הרעיפו שמים ממעל ושחקים יזלו צדק תפתח ארץ ויפרו ישע וצדקה תצמיח יחד אני יהוה בראתיו׃"],["29","45","9","불행하여라, 자기를 빚어 만드신 분과 다투는 자! 오지그릇 한 조각에 지나지 않으면서 그렇게 하는 자. 진흙이 자기를 빚어 만드는 이에게 “당신은 무얼 만드는 거요?” “당신이 만든 것에는 손잡이가 없잖소.” 하고 말할 수 있느냐?","아! 네가 비참하게 되리라. 자기를 빚어낸 이와 다투는 자야. 옹기그릇이 옹기장이와 어찌 말다툼하겠느냐? 옹기흙이 어찌 옹기장이에게 \"당신이 무엇을 만드는 거요?\" 할 수 있겠느냐? 작품이 어떻게 작자에게 \"형편없는 솜씨로군.\" 하고 불평할 수 있겠느냐?","질그릇 조각 중 한 조각 같은 자가 자기를 지으신 이와 더불어 다툴진대 화 있을진저 진흙이 토기장이에게 너는 무엇을 만드느냐 또는 네가 만든 것이 그는 손이 없다 말할 수 있겠느냐","질그릇 조각 중 한 조각 같은 자가 자기를 지으신 자로 더불어 다툴찐대 화 있을찐저 진흙이 토기장이를 대하여 너는 무엇을 만드느뇨 할 수 있겠으며 너의 만든 것이 너를 가리켜 그는 손이 없다 할 수 있겠느뇨","누가 감히 자기의 창조주에게 비난할 수 있느냐? 하나님이 어떻게 다윗의 왕손도 아닌 고레스를 이스라엘의 해방주로 쓰시느냐고 누가 감히 항의한다면 그것은 옹기그릇이 옹기장이에게 항의하는 것보다 더 악한 일이다. 토기장이가 진흙덩이를 주무르면 그 진흙이 \"무엇을 만들 셈이냐?\"고 토기장이에게 묻느냐? 작품이 예술가에게 \"솜씨도 없게 만들었다.\"고 불평할 수 있느냐?","Woe to anyone who contends with their Maker; a potsherd among potsherds of the earth! Shall the clay say to the potter, “What are you doing?” or, “What you are making has no handles”?","Woe unto him that striveth with his Maker! Let the potsherd strive with the potsherds of the earth. Shall the clay say to him that fashioneth it, What makest thou? or thy work, He hath no hands?","\"Woe to him who quarrels with his Maker, to him who is but a potsherd among the potsherds on the ground. Does tha clay say to the potter, 'What are you making?' Does your work say, 'He has no hands'?","Vae, qui contradicit fictori suo, testa de vasis fictilibus terrae! Numquid dicet lutum figulo suo:  “Quid facis? “ et  “Opus tuum absque manibus est “?","הוי רב את יצרו חרש את חרשי אדמה היאמר חמר ליצרו מה תעשה ופעלך אין ידים לו׃"],["29","45","10","불행하여라, 제 아버지에게 “무얼 낳고 계십니까?” 하고 여인에게 “무엇 때문에 산고를 겪고 계십니까?” 하고 말하는 자!","어느 누가 제 아비에게 \"왜 이 모양으로 낳았소?\" 할 수 있겠느냐? 자기 어미에게 어찌 \"이 모양으로 낳느라고 그 고생을 하였소?\" 할 수 있겠느냐?","아버지에게는 무엇을 낳았소 하고 묻고 어머니에게는 무엇을 낳으려고 해산의 수고를 하였소 하고 묻는 자는 화 있을진저","아비에게 묻기를 네가 무엇을 났느냐 2)어미에게 묻기를 네가 무엇을 낳으려고 구로하느냐 하는 자에게 화 있을찐저 히, 여인","자기 아버지에게 \"왜 나를 이 모양으로 낳았느냐?\"고 항의하는 자식과 자기 어머니에게 \"왜 나를 낳았느냐?\"고 원망하는 자식은 저주받을 것들이다.","Woe to anyone who asks a father, “What are you begetting?” or a woman, “What are you giving birth to?”","Woe unto him that saith unto his father, What begettest thou? or to the woman, What hast thou brought forth?","Woe to him who says to his father, 'What have you begotten?' or to his mother, 'What have you brought to birth?'","Vae, qui dicit patri:  “Quid generas? “ et mulieri:  “Quid parturis? “.","הוי אמר לאב מה תוליד ולאשה מה תחילין׃"],["29","45","11","이스라엘의 거룩하신 분, 그를 빚어 만드신 분 주님께서 이렇게 말씀하신다. “그래, 너희가 내 아들들에 대하여 나에게 물으려느냐? 내 손의 작품에 대하여 너희가 나에게 명령하려느냐?","이스라엘을 빚어 만드신 거룩하신 이, 야훼께서 말씀하신다. \"내 자식들의 일로 너희가 나를 심문하는 것이냐? 이 손으로 하는 일을 이래라 저래라 명령하는 것이냐?","이스라엘의 거룩하신 이 곧 이스라엘을 지으신 여호와께서 이같이 이르시되 너희가 장래 일을 내게 물으며 또 내 아들들과 내 손으로 한 일에 관하여 내게 명령하려느냐","이스라엘의 거룩하신 자 곧 이스라엘을 지으신 여호와께서 가라사대 장래 일을 내게 물으라 또 내 아들들의 일과 내 손으로 한 일에 대하여 내게 부탁하라","이스라엘의 창조주이신 거룩한 하나님 여호와께서 이렇게 말씀하셨다. \"내 백성을 내가 어떻게 할 것이냐고 너희가 따질 작정이냐? 그것은 내가 직접 하는 일이니 너희가 간섭하지 말아라!","Thus says the LORD, the Holy One of Israel, his maker: Do you question me about my children, tell me how to treat the work of my hands?","Thus saith the LORD, the Holy One of Israel, and his Maker, Ask me of things to come concerning my sons, and concerning the work of my hands command ye me.","\"This is what the LORD says--the Holy One of Israel, and its Maker: Concerning things to come, do you question me about my children, or give me orders about the work of my hands?","Haec dicit Dominus, Sanctus Israel, plastes eius:  “Numquid ventura interrogatis me super filios meos et super opus manuum mearum mandatis mihi?","כה אמר יהוה קדוש ישראל ויצרו האתיות שאלוני על בני ועל פעל ידי תצוני׃"],["29","45","12","바로 내가 땅을 만들었고 그 위에 있는 인간을 창조하였다. 바로 이내 손으로 하늘을 펼쳤고 그 모든 군대에게 명령을 내린다.","땅을 만든 것은 나다. 그 위에 사람을 창조해 놓은 것도 나다. 이 손으로 내가 하늘을 펼쳤다. 그 모든 별들에게 내가 명령을 내렸다.","내가 땅을 만들고 그 위에 사람을 창조하였으며 내가 내 손으로 하늘을 펴고 하늘의 모든 군대에게 명령하였노라","내가 땅을 만들고 그 위에 사람을 창조하였으며 내가 친수로 하늘을 펴고 그 만상을 명하였노라","땅을 만든 자도 나요 땅 위에 사는 인간을 창조한 자도 바로 나다! 내가 손으로 직접 하늘을 팽팽히 펼쳐 놓았으며 별들에게 명령하여 제자리에 가 있도록 하였다.","It was I who made the earth and created the people upon it; It was my hands that stretched out the heavens; I gave the order to all their host.","I have made the earth, and created man upon it: I, even my hands, have stretched out the heavens, and all their host have I commanded.","It is I who made the earth and created mankind upon it. My own hands stretched out the heavens; I marshaled their starry hosts.","Ego feci terram et hominem super eam creavi ego; manus meae tetenderunt caelos, et omni militiae eorum mandavi.","אנכי עשיתי ארץ ואדם עליה בראתי אני ידי נטו שמים וכל צבאם צויתי׃"],["29","45","13","바로 내가 의로움으로써 그를 일으켰으니 그의 모든 길을 곧게 하리라. 그가 내 도성을 재건하고 유배 간 나의 백성을 대가도 선물도 아니 받고 풀어 주리라.” 만군의 주님께서 말씀하신다.","내가 1)그를 일으켜 승리하게 하였다. 그의 앞길을 평탄하게 닦아준 것도 나다. 그가 나의 도읍을 재건하리라. 포로 된 내 백성을 해방시키리라. 대가도 선물도 아니 받고 해방시키리라. 만군의 야훼가 말한다.\"고레스를 가리킨다.","내가 공의로 그를 일으킨지라 그의 모든 길을 곧게 하리니 그가 나의 성읍을 건축할 것이며 사로잡힌 내 백성을 값이나 갚음이 없이 놓으리라 만군의 여호와의 말이니라 하셨느니라","내가 의로 그를 일으킨지라 그의 모든 길을 곧게 하리니 그가 나의 성읍을 건축할 것이며 나의 사로잡힌 자들을 값이나 갚음 없이 놓으리라 만군의 여호와의 말이니라 하셨느니라","고레스가 승리하고 일어나게 한 이도 바로 나다. 그가 나의 임무를 수행하도록 내가 그를 일으켰다. 나는 앞으로 그가 하는 일마다 잘 되도록 하겠다. 그는 나의 도성 예루살렘을 재건하고, 바벨론으로 끌려간 나의 백성을 고향으로 돌려보낼 것이다. 그는 무슨 돈이나 뇌물을 받지 않고 내 백성을 해방시켜 줄 것이다.\"","It was I who stirred him up for justice; all his ways I make level. He shall rebuild my city and let my exiles go free Without price or payment, says the LORD of hosts.","I have raised him up in righteousness, and I will direct all his ways: he shall build my city, and he shall let go my captives, not for price nor reward, saith the LORD of hosts.","I will raise up Cyrus in my righteousness: I will make all his ways straight. He will rebuild my city and set my exiles free, but not for a price or reward, says the LORD Almighty.\"","Ego suscitavi eum in iustitia et omnes vias eius dirigam; ipse aedificabit civitatem meam et captivitatem meam dimittet non in pretio neque in muneribus “, dicit Dominus exercituum.","אנכי העירתהו בצדק וכל דרכיו אישר הוא יבנה עירי וגלותי ישלח לא במחיר ולא בשחד אמר יהוה צבאות׃"],["29","45","14","주님께서 이렇게 말씀하신다. “이집트의 재산과 에티오피아의 소득과 키 큰 족속 스바인들이 너에게 건너와서 너의 것이 되고 너의 뒤를 따르리라. 그들은 사슬에 묶여 건너와서 네 앞에 엎드려 빌며 말하리라. ‘과연 당신에게만 하느님이 계십니다. 다른 이가 없습니다. 다른 신이 없습니다.’”","야훼께서 말씀하신다. \"이집트의 농민과 에티오피아의 상인들, 스바의 거인족이 너에게로 넘어와 너의 종이 되리라. 사슬에 묶여 네 뒤를 따르며 네 앞에 엎드리고 네 하느님께 빌리라. 너에게만 하느님은 있다. 그밖에는 없다. 그밖에는 다른 신이 없다.\"","여호와께서 이같이 말씀하시되 애굽의 소득과 구스가 무역한 것과 스바의 장대한 남자들이 네게로 건너와서 네게 속할 것이요 그들이 너를 따를 것이라 사슬에 매여 건너와서 네게 굴복하고 간구하기를 하나님이 과연 네게 계시고 그 외에는 다른 하나님이 없다 하리라 하시니라","여호와께서 말씀하시되 애굽의 수고한 것과 구스의 무역한 것과 스바의 장대한 족속들이 다 네게로 돌아와서 네게 속할 것이요 그들이 너를 따를 것이라 사슬에 매여 건너와서 네게 굴복하고 간구하기를 하나님이 과연 네게 계시고 그 외에는 다른 하나님이 없다 하리라 하시니라","이스라엘 백성이 바벨론의 포로생활 속에서 괴로워하고 있을 때에 여호와께서는 이미 주님을 섬기는 시온의 공동체에게 이렇게 약속하셨다. \"애굽 사람과 구스 사람들이 온갖 보물을 가지고 너를 찾아올 것이다. 키가 큰 스바 사람들도 찾아와서 너와 함께 살 것이다. 아프리카 저 멀리 모든 민족에 이르기까지 온 세상 사람들이 마치 하나님에게 포로 되어 쇠사슬에 매인 듯이 네 앞에 와 엎드려 이렇게 고백할 것이다. \"그대에게만 하나님이 계시고, 다른 하나님은 어디에도 없다.","Thus says the LORD: The earnings of Egypt, the gain of Ethiopia, and the Sabeans, tall of stature, Shall come over to you and belong to you; they shall follow you, coming in chains. Before you they shall bow down, saying in prayer: “With you alone is God; and there is none other, no other god!","Thus saith the LORD, The labour of Egypt, and merchandise of Ethiopia and of the Sabeans, men of stature, shall come over unto thee, and they shall be thine: they shall come after thee; in chains they shall come over, and they shall fall down unto thee, they shall make supplication unto thee, saying, Surely God is in thee; and there is none else, there is no God.","This is what the LORD says: \"The products of Egypt and the merchandise of Cush, and those tall Sabeans--they will come over to you and will be yours; they will trudge behind you, coming over to you in chains. They will bow down before you and plead with you, saying, 'Surely God is with you, and there is no other; there is no other god.'\"","Haec dicit Dominus:  “Labor Aegypti et negotiatio Aethiopiae et Sabaim viri sublimes ad te transibunt et tui erunt; post te ambulabunt, vincti manicis pergent et te adorabunt teque deprecabuntur:  “Tantum in te est Deus, et non est absque te Deus! “.","כה אמר יהוה יגיע מצרים וסחר כוש וסבאים אנשי מדה עליך יעברו ולך יהיו אחריך ילכו בזקים יעברו ואליך ישתחוו אליך יתפללו אך בך אל ואין עוד אפס אלהים׃"],["29","45","15","아, 구원을 베푸시는 이스라엘의 하느님! 정녕 당신은 자신을 숨기시는 하느님이십니다.","하느님께서 너도 몰래 너를 보살피셨다. 이스라엘의 하느님, 구세주께서 너를 보살피셨다.","구원자 이스라엘의 하나님이여 진실로 주는 스스로 숨어 계시는 하나님이시니이다","구원자 이스라엘의 하나님이여 진실로 주는 스스로 숨어 계시는 하나님이시니이다","과연 숨어 계시는 하나님이 너와 함께 계시고, 이스라엘의 하나님만이 온 인류를 구원하시는 분이시다!","Truly with you God is hidden, the God of Israel, the savior!","Verily thou art a God that hidest thyself, O God of Israel, the Saviour.","Truly you are a God who hides himself, O God and Savior of Israel.","Vere tu es Deus absconditus, Deus Israel, salvator.","אכן אתה אל מסתתר אלהי ישראל מושיע׃"],["29","45","16","그들은 모두 함께 부끄러워하며 수치를 당하리라. 우상을 만드는 자들은 치욕 속에 물러가리라.","성을 내며 너에게 달려드는 자들은 모두 어이없이 창피를 당하리라. 우상을 조각하는 그들은 창피해서 꽁무니를 빼리라.","우상을 만드는 자는 부끄러움을 당하며 욕을 받아 다 함께 수욕 중에 들어갈 것이로되","우상을 만드는 자는 부끄러움을 당하며 욕을 받아 다 함께 수욕 중에 들어갈 것이로되","우상을 만들어 섬기는 이들은 모두 실망하고 수치와 절망 속에서 자멸해 갈 것이지만","They are put to shame and disgrace, all of them; they go in disgrace who carve images.","They shall be ashamed, and also confounded, all of them: they shall go to confusion together that are makers of idols.","All the makers of idols will be put to shame and disgraced; they will go off into disgrace together.","Confusi sunt et erubuerunt omnes, simul abierunt in confusionem fabricatores idolorum.","בושו וגם נכלמו כלם יחדו הלכו בכלמה חרשי צירים׃"],["29","45","17","이스라엘은 주님께 구원을 받았으니 이는 영원한 구원이어라. 영원무궁토록 너희는 부끄러움도 수치도 당하지 않으리라.","이스라엘은 야훼께 구원을 얻으리니, 그 구원이 영원무궁하리라. 너희는 영원히 모욕과 수모를 받지 아니하리라.","이스라엘은 여호와께 구원을 받아 영원한 구원을 얻으리니 너희가 영원히 부끄러움을 당하거나 욕을 받지 아니하리로다","이스라엘은 여호와께 구원을 입어 영원한 구원을 얻으리니 영세에 부끄러움을 당하거나 욕을 받지 아니하리로다","이스라엘은 여호와의 도움을 받아 언제까지든지 구원을 누리며 살 것이다. 너희는 언제까지나 부끄러움을 당하지 않고 자멸해 가는 일도 없을 것이다.\"","Israel has been saved by the LORD, saved forever! You shall never be put to shame or disgrace in any future age.”","But Israel shall be saved in the LORD with an everlasting salvation: ye shall not be ashamed nor confounded world without end.","But Israel will be saved by the LORD with an everlasting salvation; you will never be put to shame or disgraced, to ages everlasting.","Israel salvatus est in Domino salute aeterna; non confundemini et non erubescetis usque in saeculum saeculi.","ישראל נושע ביהוה תשועת עולמים לא תבשו ולא תכלמו עד עולמי עד׃"],["29","45","18","주님께서 말씀하신다. 하늘을 창조하신 분 그분께서 하느님이시다. 땅을 빚으시고 땅을 만드신 분 그분께서 그것을 굳게 세우셨다. 그분께서는 그것을 혼돈으로 창조하지 않으시고 살 수 있는 곳으로 빚어 만드셨다. 내가 주님이다. 다른 이가 없다.","야훼께서 말씀하신다. 하늘을 창조하신 그분, 하느님이신 그분, 땅을 빚어 만드신 그분, 땅을 단단하게 다지신 그분, 땅을 황무지로 창조하지 아니하시고 사람이 살 수 있도록 빚어 만드신 그분께서 말씀하신다. \"내가 야훼다. 누가 또 있느냐?","대저 여호와께서 이같이 말씀하시되 하늘을 창조하신 이 그는 하나님이시니 그가 땅을 지으시고 그것을 만드셨으며 그것을 견고하게 하시되 혼돈하게 창조하지 아니하시고 사람이 거주하게 그것을 지으셨으니 나는 여호와라 나 외에 다른 이가 없느니라","여호와는 하늘을 창조하신 하나님이시며 땅도 조성하시고 견고케 하시되 헛되이 창조치 아니하시고 사람으로 거하게 지으신 자시니라 그 말씀에 나는 여호와라 나 외에 다른이가 없느니라","하늘과 땅을 지으신 분, 홀로 하나님이신 여호와 땅의 기초를 굳게 놓으신 분, 땅을 황량하고 공허하게 지으신 것이 아니라 모든 피조물이 살 수 있도록 창조하신 하나님께서 이렇게 말씀하셨다. \"온 세계의 주인은 바로 나요, 나밖에는 다른 신이 없다.","For thus says the LORD, The creator of the heavens, who is God, The designer and maker of the earth who established it, Not as an empty waste did he create it, but designing it to be lived in: I am the LORD, and there is no other.","For thus saith the LORD that created the heavens; God himself that formed the earth and made it; he hath established it, he created it not in vain, he formed it to be inhabited: I am the LORD; and there is none else.","For this is what the LORD says--he who created the heavens, he is God; he who fashioned and made the earth, he founded it; he did not create it to be empty, but formed it to be inhabited--he says: \"I am the LORD, and there is no other.","Quia haec dicit Dominus, qui creavit caelos, ipse Deus, qui formavit terram et fecit eam, ipse fundavit eam; non ut vacua esset, creavit eam, ut habitaretur, formavit eam:  “Ego Dominus, et non est alius.","כי כה אמר יהוה בורא השמים הוא האלהים יצר הארץ ועשה הוא כוננה לא תהו בראה לשבת יצרה אני יהוה ואין עוד׃"],["29","45","19","나는 숨어서도 이야기하지 않았고 어두운 땅 어느 구석에서도 이야기하지 않았다. 나는 야곱의 후손들에게 “너희는 나를 혼돈 속에서 찾아라.” 하고 말하지 않았다. 나 주님은 의로운 것을 말하고 바른 것을 알린다.","나는 숨어서 수군수군하지 않았다. 캄캄한 땅, 어느 구석에서 말하지 않았다. 나는 야곱의 후예에게 나를 찾으러 황무지로 나가라고 하지 않았다. 나 야훼는 옳은 말만 한다. 이루어질 일만 말한다.","나는 감추어진 곳과 캄캄한 땅에서 말하지 아니하였으며 야곱 자손에게 너희가 나를 혼돈 중에서 찾으라고 이르지 아니하였노라 나 여호와는 의를 말하고 정직한 것을 알리느니라","나는 흑암한 곳에서 은밀히 말하지 아니하였으며 야곱 자손에게 너희가 나를 3)헛되이 찾으라 이르지 아니하였노라 나 여호와는 의를 말하고 정직을 고하느니라혼돈하게","마술가들은 캄캄한 무덤 속의 망령들과 이야기를 한다지만 나는 그렇게 숨어서도 말하지 않았고 헛소리도 하지 않았다. 나는 야곱의 후손들에게 \"텅 빈 무덤 속에서 나를 찾으라\"고 말하지 않았다. 나는 믿을 만한 일들만 이야기하고 이루어질 일들만 알려 준다.","I have not spoken in secret from some place in the land of darkness, I have not said to the descendants of Jacob, “Look for me in an empty waste.” I, the LORD, promise justice, I declare what is right.","I have not spoken in secret, in a dark place of the earth: I said not unto the seed of Jacob, Seek ye me in vain: I the LORD speak righteousness, I declare things that are right.","I have not spoken in secret, from somewhere in a land of darkness; I have not said to Jacob's descendants, 'Seek me in vain.' I, the LORD, speak the truth; I declare what is right.","Non in abscondito locutus sum, in loco terrae tenebroso; non dixi semini Iacob:  “Frustra quaerite me “. Ego Dominus loquens iustitiam, annuntians recta.","לא בסתר דברתי במקום ארץ חשך לא אמרתי לזרע יעקב תהו בקשוני אני יהוה דבר צדק מגיד מישרים׃"],["29","45","20","민족들 가운데에서 살아남은 자들아 모여 오너라. 다 함께 가까이 오너라. 나무 우상을 떠받들고 다니는 자들과 구원을 베풀지 못하는 신에게 기도하는 자들은 지각없는 자들이다.","민족들 가운데서 살아 남은 자들아, 다 모여오너라. 목상을 새겨 떠받들고 다니는 자들아, 살려줄 힘도 없는 신에게 기도하는 바보들아,","열방 중에서 피난한 자들아 너희는 모여 오라 함께 가까이 나아오라 나무 우상을 가지고 다니며 구원하지 못하는 신에게 기도하는 자들은 무지한 자들이니라","열방 중에서 피난한 자들아 너희는 모여 오라 한가지로 가까이 나아 오라 나무 우상을 가지고 다니며 능히 구원치 못하는 신에게 기도하는 자들은 무지한 자니라","고레스가 민족들을 멸망시킬 때에 살아 남은 사람들아, 너희가 모두 모여서 이 심판에 앞으로 나아오라! 너희 민족들은 무능한 우상들을 의지하다가 멸망할 줄도 모르고 어찌하여 아직 나무로 만든 우상들을 들고 다니느냐? 무엇 때문에 살려 줄 수도 없는 신에게 살려 달라고 비느냐?","Come and assemble, gather together, you fugitives from among the nations! They are without knowledge who bear wooden idols and pray to gods that cannot save.","Assemble yourselves and come; draw near together, ye that are escaped of the nations: they have no knowledge that set up the wood of their graven image, and pray unto a god that cannot save.","\"Gather together and come; assemble, you fugitives from the nations. Ignorant are those who carry about idols of wood, who pray to gods that cannot save.","Congregamini et venite et accedite simul, qui salvati estis ex gentibus. Nescierunt, qui levant lignum sculpturae suae et rogant deum non salvantem.","הקבצו ובאו התנגשו יחדו פליטי הגוים לא ידעו הנשאים את עץ פסלם ומתפללים אל אל לא יושיע׃"],["29","45","21","말해 보아라. 설명해 보아라. 함께 의논도 해 보아라. 누가 이것을 옛날에 들려주었느냐? 누가 이것을 예전에 알려 주었느냐? 나 주님이 아니냐? 나밖에는 다른 신이 아무도 없다. 의롭고 구원을 베푸는 하느님 나 말고는 아무도 없다.","할 말이 있거든 해보아라. 증거가 있거든 내놓아 보아라. 서로 의논해 보아라. 처음에 그것을 들려준 자가 있느냐? 예전부터 그것을 일러준 자가 있느냐? 나 야훼밖에 누가 있느냐? 나는 정의를 세워 구원을 이루는 하느님이니, 나밖에 다른 신은 없다.","너희는 알리며 진술하고 또 함께 의논하여 보라 이 일을 옛부터 듣게 한 자가 누구냐 이전부터 그것을 알게 한 자가 누구냐 나 여호와가 아니냐 나 외에 다른 신이 없나니 나는 공의를 행하며 구원을 베푸는 하나님이라 나 외에 다른 이가 없느니라","너희는 고하며 진술하고 또 피차 상의하여 보라 이 일을 이전부터 보인 자가 누구냐 예로부터 고한 자가 누구냐 나 여호와가 아니냐 나 외에 다른 신이 없나니 나는 공의를 행하며 구원을 베푸는 하나님이라 나 외에 다른이가 없느니라","너희가 이제 무슨 답변을 할 수 있는지 서로 의논해 보아라. 오늘날 일어날 일을 오래전에 알려준 신이 누구냐? 바벨론이 멸망한다고 내가 알려 주지 않았느냐? 나 여호와밖에는 다른 신이 없다! 억압받는 민족들을 해방시켜 권리를 되찾아 주고 모든 짓눌린 이들을 구원해 주는 이는 나밖에 아무도 없다.","Come close and declare; let them take counsel together: Who announced this from the beginning, declared it from of old? Was it not I, the LORD, besides whom there is no other God? There is no just and saving God but me.","Tell ye, and bring them near; yea, let them take counsel together: who hath declared this from ancient time? who hath told it from that time? have not I the LORD? and there is no God else beside me; a just God and a Saviour; there is none beside me.","Declare what is to be, present it--let them take counsel together. Who foretold this long ago, who declared it from the distant past? Was it not I, the LORD? And there is no God apart from me, a righteous God and a Savior; there is none but me.","Annuntiate et venite et consiliamini simul. Quis auditum fecit hoc ab initio, ex tunc praedixit illud? Numquid non ego Dominus, et non est ultra Deus absque me? Deus iustus et salvans non est praeter me.","הגידו והגישו אף יועצו יחדו מי השמיע זאת מקדם מאז הגידה הלוא אני יהוה ואין עוד אלהים מבלעדי אל צדיק ומושיע אין זולתי׃"],["29","45","22","땅 끝들아, 모두 나에게 돌아와 구원을 받아라. 나는 하느님, 다른 이가 없다.","온 세상 모든 인간들아, 머리를 돌려 나에게로 와서 구원을 받아라. 나만이 하느님, 다른 신은 없다.","땅의 모든 끝이여 내게로 돌이켜 구원을 받으라 나는 하나님이라 다른 이가 없느니라","땅 끝의 모든 백성아 나를 앙망하라 그리하면 구원을 얻으리라 나는 하나님이라 다른 이가 없음이니라","온 세상에 사는 사람들아, 너희는 모두 내게로 돌아오너라! 구원을 받아라! 이 세상의 신은 바로 나이며 나 이외에는 신이 없기 때문이다.","Turn to me and be safe, all you ends of the earth, for I am God; there is no other!","Look unto me, and be ye saved, all the ends of the earth: for I am God, and there is none else.","\"Turn to me and be saved, all you ends of the earth; for I am God, and there is no other.","Convertimini ad me et salvi eritis, omnes fines terrae, quia ego Deus, et non est alius.","פנו אלי והושעו כל אפסי ארץ כי אני אל ואין עוד׃"],["29","45","23","내가 나 자신을 두고 맹세한다. 내 입에서 의로운 말이 나갔으니 그 말은 돌이킬 수 없는 것이다. 정녕 모두 나에게 무릎을 꿇고 입으로 맹세하며","내가 나의 이름을 걸어 맹세한다. 내 입에서 나가는 말은 틀림이 없다. 내 말은 반드시 그대로 이루어지고야 만다. 그리하여 사람마다 나에게 무릎을 꿇고 모든 민족들이 제 나라 말로 나에게 신앙을 고백하리라.","내가 나를 두고 맹세하기를 내 입에서 공의로운 말이 나갔은즉 돌아오지 아니하나니 내게 모든 무릎이 꿇겠고 모든 혀가 맹세하리라 하였노라","내가 나를 두고 맹세하기를 나의 입에서 의로운 말이 나갔은즉 돌아오지 아니 하나니 내게 모든 무릎이 꿇겠고 모든 혀가 맹약하리라 하였노라","내가 나 자신을 걸고서 맹세하지만 내가 말한 의로운 일은 취소되는 일이 없이 그대로 이루어진다. 세계 만민이 내 앞에 무릎을 꿇고 모든 사람이 나에게 신앙을 고백할 것이다.","By myself I swear, uttering my just decree, a word that will not return: To me every knee shall bend; by me every tongue shall swear,","I have sworn by myself, the word is gone out of my mouth in righteousness, and shall not return, That unto me every knee shall bow, every tongue shall swear.","By myself I have sworn, my mouth has uttered in all integrity a word that will not be revoked: Before me every knee will bow; by me every tongue will swear.","In memetipso iuravi: Egressa est de ore meo iustitia, verbum, quod non revertetur; quia mihi curvabitur omne genu, et iurabit omnis lingua “.","בי נשבעתי יצא מפי צדקה דבר ולא ישוב כי לי תכרע כל ברך תשבע כל לשון׃"],["29","45","24","말하리라. “주님께만 의로움과 권능이 있다. 그분께 격분하는 자들은 모두 그분 앞에 와서 부끄러운 일을 당하리라.","정의를 세울 힘은 야훼께만 있다.'\" 성을 내며 야훼께 대들던 자는 모두 그의 앞에서 무안을 당하리라.","내게 대한 어떤 자의 말에 공의와 힘은 여호와께만 있나니 사람들이 그에게로 나아갈 것이라 무릇 그에게 노하는 자는 부끄러움을 당하리라 그러나","어떤 자의 내게 대한 말에 의와 힘은 여호와께만 있나니 사람들은 그에게로 나아갈 것이라 무릇 그를 노하는 자는 부끄러움을 당하리라마는","\"세계 만민을 살리실 의로운 힘은 여호와에게만 있다.\" 그러나 여호와께 저항하며 화를 내던 이들은 모두 여호와께 와서도 수치를 당할 것이다.","Saying, “Only in the LORD are just deeds and power. Before him in shame shall come all who vent their anger against him.","Surely, shall one say, in the LORD have I righteousness and strength: even to him shall men come; and all that are incensed against him shall be ashamed.","They will say of me, 'In the LORD alone are righteousness and strength.'\" All who have raged against him will come to him and be put to shame."," “Tantum in Domino “ dicent  “sunt iustitiae et robur! “. Ad eum venient et confundentur omnes, qui repugnant ei;","אך ביהוה לי אמר צדקות ועז עדיו יבוא ויבשו כל הנחרים בו׃"],["29","45","25","이스라엘의 모든 후손들은 주님 안에서 승리와 영예를 얻으리라.”","이스라엘의 모든 후예는 승리를 베푸신 야훼를 자랑스러이 모시리라.","이스라엘 자손은 다 여호와로 말미암아 의롭다 함을 얻고 자랑하리라 하느니라","이스라엘 자손은 다 여호와로 의롭다 함을 얻고 자랑하리라 하느니라 하셨느니라","오직 이스라엘의 후손들은 여호와 덕분에 해방을 받아 권리를 되찾고 그분을 찬양할 것이다.","In the LORD all the descendants of Israel shall have vindication and glory.”","In the LORD shall all the seed of Israel be justified, and shall glory.","But in the LORD all the descendants of Israel will be found righteous and will exult.","in Domino iustificabitur et laudabitur omne semen Israel.","ביהוה יצדקו ויתהללו כל זרע ישראל׃"],["29","46","1","벨 신이 꺾인다. 느보 신이 고꾸라진다. 그 우상들이 짐승과 가축에 실린다. 너희가 떠받들고 다니던 것들이 지친 동물들에게 짐으로 지워진다.","벨 신이 엎드러진다. 느보 신이 거꾸러진다. 그 우상들이 짐승과 가축에게 실려간다. 들어다 올려놓으면, 짐승이 싣고 가다가 지치도록 무거운 짐이 된다.","벨은 엎드러졌고 느보는 구부러졌도다 그들의 우상들은 짐승과 가축에게 실렸으니 너희가 떠메고 다니던 그것들이 피곤한 짐승의 무거운 짐이 되었도다","벨은 엎드러졌고 느보는 구부러졌도다 그들의 우상들은 짐승과 가축에게 실리웠으니 너희가 떠메고 다니던 그것은 피곤한 짐승의 무거운 짐이 되었도다","바벨론이 고레스에게 멸망할 때에 바벨론의 최고신 벨도 무릎을 꿇고 그의 아들 느보도 거꾸러졌다. 그들을 섬기던 제사장들이 점령군들을 피하여 그 우상들을 짐승과 가축들의 등에 싣고 도망가려고 하였다. 그 우상들은 너희가 메고 가는 무거운 짐이었다. 짐승들도 힘겹게 그 우상들을 끌고 갔다.","Bel bows down, Nebo stoops, their idols set upon beasts and cattle; They must be borne upon shoulders, a load for weary animals.","Bel boweth down, Nebo stoopeth, their idols were upon the beasts, and upon the cattle: your carriages were heavy loaden; they are a burden to the weary beast.","Bel bows down, Nebo stoops low; their idols are borne by beasts of burden. The images that are carried about are burdensome, a burden for the weary.","Concidit Bel, incurvavit se Nabo; fuerunt simulacra eorum bestiis et iumentis. Statuae vestrae portantur, onera lassis.","כרע בל קרס נבו היו עצביהם לחיה ולבהמה נשאתיכם עמוסות משא לעיפה׃"],["29","46","2","그들은 다 함께 고꾸라지고 꺾여서 짐을 건지기는커녕 저희들 자신이 유배를 간다.","다 함께 거꾸러지고 엎드러져 짐을 건지기는커녕, 저희들 자신이 귀양살이로 끌려가는구나.","그들은 구부러졌고 그들은 일제히 엎드러졌으므로 그 짐을 구하여 내지 못하고 자기들도 잡혀 갔느니라","그들은 구부러졌고 그들은 일제히 엎드러졌으므로 그 짐을 구하여 내지 못하고 자기도 잡혀 갔느니라","그러나 그들이 모두 거꾸러지고 무릎을 꿇었으며 어떤 짐 하나도 건져낼 수가 없었다. 오히려 그 신상들이 제사장들과 함께 포로가 되어 끌려가고 말았다.","They stoop and bow down together; unable to deliver those who bear them, they too go into captivity.","They stoop, they bow down together; they could not deliver the burden, but themselves are gone into captivity.","They stoop and bow down together; unable to rescue the burden, they themselves go off into captivity.","Se incurvaverunt et conciderunt simul; non potuerunt salvare onus et ipsi in captivitatem ibunt.","קרסו כרעו יחדו לא יכלו מלט משא ונפשם בשבי הלכה׃"],["29","46","3","내 말을 들어라, 야곱 집안아 이스라엘 집안의 남은 자들아, 모태에서부터 업혀 다니고 태중에서부터 안겨 다닌 자들아.","\"야곱 가문아, 내 말을 들어라. 이스라엘 가문에서 살아 남은 자들아, 들어라. 너희가 세상에 태어날 때부터 나는 너희를 업고 다녔다. 모태에서 떨어질 때부터 안고 다녔다.","야곱의 집이여 이스라엘 집에 남은 모든 자여 내게 들을지어다 배에서 태어남으로부터 내게 안겼고 태에서 남으로부터 내게 업힌 너희여","야곱 집이여 이스라엘 집의 남은 모든 자여 나를 들을찌어다 배에서 남으로부터 내게 안겼고 태에서 남으로부터 내게 품기운 너희여","그러나 주께서는 그와 정반대로 말씀하셨다. \"야곱의 자손들아, 내 말을 들어라! 남아 있는 이스라엘 사람들은 모두 내 말을 들어라. \"너희가 나를 업고 다닌 것이 아니라 내가 너희를 태어날 때부터 업고 다녔으며, 너희가 모태에서 떨어질 때부터 내가 너희를 안고 다녔다.","Hear me, O house of Jacob, all the remnant of the house of Israel, My burden from the womb, whom I have carried since birth.","Hearken unto me, O house of Jacob, and all the remnant of the house of Israel, which are borne by me from the belly, which are carried from the womb:","\"Listen to me, O house of Jacob, all you who remain of the house of Israel, you whom I have upheld since you were conceived, and have carried since your birth.","Audite me, domus Iacob et omne residuum domus Israel, qui portamini ab utero, qui gestamini a vulva.","שמעו אלי בית יעקב וכל שארית בית ישראל העמסים מני בטן הנשאים מני רחם׃"],["29","46","4","너희가 늙어 가도 나는 한결같다. 너희가 백발이 되어도 나는 너희를 지고 간다. 내가 만들었으니 내가 안고 간다. 내가 지고 가고 내가 구해 낸다.","너희는 늙어가도 나는 한결같다. 너희가 비록 백발이 성성해도 나는 여전히 너희를 업고 다니리라. 너희를 업어 살려내리라.","너희가 노년에 이르기까지 내가 그리하겠고 백발이 되기까지 내가 너희를 품을 것이라 내가 지었은즉 내가 업을 것이요 내가 품고 구하여 내리라","너희가 노년에 이르기까지 내가 그리하겠고 백발이 되기까지 내가 너희를 품을 것이라 내가 지었은즉 안을 것이요 품을 것이요 구하여 내리라","너희가 늙더라도 나는 여전히 너희를 업고 다니겠다. 너희가 백발이 되어도 나는 너희를 품고 다니겠다. 나는 항상 똑같이 너희를 돌보아주겠다. 내가 이제까지 한 것과 같이, 앞으로도 나는 계속 너희를 업고 다니겠다. 내가 너희를 품고 다니며 건져 주겠다.","Even to your old age I am he, even when your hair is gray I will carry you; I have done this, and I will lift you up, I will carry you to safety.","And even to your old age I am he; and even to hoar hairs will I carry you: I have made, and I will bear; even I will carry, and will deliver you.","Even to your old age and gray hairs I am he, I am he who will sustain you. I have made you and I will carry you; I will sustain you and I will rescue you.","Usque ad senectam ego ipse et usque ad canos ego portabo; et ego feci et ego feram, ego portabo et salvabo.","ועד זקנה אני הוא ועד שיבה אני אסבל אני עשיתי ואני אשא ואני אסבל ואמלט׃"],["29","46","5","너희는 나를 누구와 비교하고 견주겠느냐? 우리를 누구와 맞대어 비슷하다고 하겠느냐?","누구의 모습을 내가 본떴겠느냐? 누구의 모습을 나와 비교하여 서로 같다 하겠느냐?","너희가 나를 누구에게 비기며 누구와 짝하며 누구와 비교하여 서로 같다 하겠느냐","너희가 나를 누구에 비기며 누구와 짝하며 누구와 비교하여 서로 같다 하겠느냐","너희가 나를 누구와 비교할 수가 있느냐? 나와 견줄 신이 세상에 있다고 너희는 생각하느냐?","To whom would you liken me as an equal, compare me, as though we were alike?","To whom will ye liken me, and make me equal, and compare me, that we may be like?","\"To whom will you compare me or count me equal? To whom will you liken me that we may be compared?","Cui assimilatis me et adaequatis et comparatis me, et erimus similes?","למי תדמיוני ותשוו ותמשלוני ונדמה׃"],["29","46","6","주머니에서 금을 쏟아 내고 은을 저울로 다는 자들 그들은 금세공인을 고용하여 그것들로 신을 만들고 그 앞에 엎드려 경배한다.","돈자루에서 금을 꺼내고 은을 저울로 달아내면서 은장이를 고용하여 신상을 만들게 하고 그 앞에 엎드려 예배하기를 꺼리지 않는 자들,","사람들이 주머니에서 금을 쏟아 내며 은을 저울에 달아 도금장이에게 주고 그것으로 신을 만들게 하고 그것에게 엎드려 경배하며","사람들이 주머니에서 금을 쏟아 내며 은을 저울에 달아 장색에게 주고 그것으로 신을 만들게 하고 그것에게 엎드려 경배하고","우상들은 사람이 금과 은으로 만든 것이다. 주머니 속의 금과 은을 쏟아다가 저울로 달아서 세공업자들에게 주고 신상을 만들어 달라고 부탁해서 만든 것이 우상들이다. 바벨론 사람들은 그런 신상들 앞에 엎드려 경배한다.","There are those who pour out gold from a purse and weigh out silver on the scales; They hire a goldsmith to make it into a god before which they bow down in worship.","They lavish gold out of the bag, and weigh silver in the balance, and hire a goldsmith; and he maketh it a god: they fall down, yea, they worship.","Some pour out gold from their bags and weigh out silver on the scales; they hire a goldsmith to make it into a god, and they bow down and worship it.","Qui effundunt aurum de sacculo et argentum statera ponderant, conducunt aurificem, ut faciat deum, et procidunt et adorant.","הזלים זהב מכיס וכסף בקנה ישקלו ישכרו צורף ויעשהו אל יסגדו אף ישתחוו׃"],["29","46","7","그들이 그것을 어깨에 올려 메고 가서 제자리에 내려놓으면 거기에 선 채로 그것은 움직이지도 못한다. 누가 그에게 소리 질러도 대답하지 못하고 그를 곤경에서 구해 주지도 못한다.","그들이 어깨에 들어올려 메어다가 자리잡아 안치하면 제자리에 선 채 움직이지도 못한다. 아무리 불러도 대답이 없고, 누구 하나 곤경에서 구해 주지도 못한다.","그것을 들어 어깨에 메어다가 그의 처소에 두면 그것이 서 있고 거기에서 능히 움직이지 못하며 그에게 부르짖어도 능히 응답하지 못하며 고난에서 구하여 내지도 못하느니라","그것을 들어 어깨에 메어다가 그의 처소에 두면 그것이 서서 있고 거기서 능히 움직이지 못하며 그에게 부르짖어도 능히 응답지 못하며 고난에서 구하여 내지도 못하느니라","그러나 그 우상들은 아무런 힘이 없다. 사람들이 어깨에 메고 장엄하게 행진을 한 다음 다시 제자리에 앉혀 놓으면 모든 우상은 그 자리에서 움직일 수가 없다. 누가 살려 달라고 부르짖으며 빌어도 우상은 대답을 못한다. 우상은 궁지에 빠진 사람 그 누구도 건져내 주지 못한다.","They lift it to their shoulders to carry; when they set it down, it stays, and does not move from the place. They cry out to it, but it cannot answer; it delivers no one from distress.","They bear him upon the shoulder, they carry him, and set him in his place, and he standeth; from his place shall he not remove: yea, one shall cry unto him, yet can he not answer, nor save him out of his trouble.","They lift it to their shoulders and carry it; they set it up in its place, and there it stands. From that spot it cannot move. Though one cries out to it, it does not answer; it cannot save him from his troubles.","Portant illum in umeris gestantes et ponentes in loco suo; et stabit ac de loco suo non movebitur; sed et si quis clamat ad eum, non respondet; de tribulatione eius non salvabit eum.","ישאהו על כתף יסבלהו ויניחהו תחתיו ויעמד ממקומו לא ימיש אף יצעק אליו ולא יענה מצרתו לא יושיענו׃"],["29","46","8","너희는 이것을 기억하고 알아들어라. 너희 죄인들아, 마음을 가다듬고","이를 생각하고 부끄러움을 알아라. 너 반역자들아, 이를 마음에 새겨두어라.","너희 패역한 자들아 이 일을 기억하고 장부가 되라 이 일을 마음에 두라","너희 패역한 자들아 이 일을 기억하고 장부가 되라 이 일을 다시 생각하라","너희는 이것을 분명히 알아 두고 마음에 깊이 새겨 두어라! 똑똑히 정신을 차리고 옳게 생각하여라.\"","Remember this and be firm, take it to heart, you rebels;","Remember this, and shew yourselves men: bring it again to mind, O ye transgressors.","\"Remember this, fix it in mind, take it to heart, you rebels.","Mementote istud et confundamini; redite, praevaricatores, ad cor.","זכרו זאת והתאששו השיבו פושעים על לב׃"],["29","46","9","먼 옛날의 일들을 기억해 보아라. 내가 하느님, 다른 이가 없다. 내가 하느님, 나 같은 이가 없다.","처음부터 이루어진 일들을 생각해 보아라. 내가 신이다. 나밖에 없다. 내가 하느님이다. 나와 같은 자 또 어디 있느냐?","너희는 옛적 일을 기억하라 나는 하나님이라 나 외에 다른 이가 없느니라 나는 하나님이라 나 같은 이가 없느니라","너희는 옛적 일을 기억하라 나는 하나님이라 나 외에 다른이가 없느니라 나는 하나님이라 나 같은이가 없느니라","바벨론의 포로생활 속에서 지치고 절망하는 이스라엘 사람들에게 주께서 말씀하셨다. \"너희는 내가 예전에 애굽에서 해방시키고 광야에서도 온갖 기적으로 먹여 살리고, 마침내 가나안 땅을 차지하게 한 일들을 기억해 보아라. 나밖에는 다른 신이 없고 나와 같은 신은 하나도 없다는 것을 똑똑히 알아라.","remember the former things, those long ago: I am God, there is no other; I am God, there is none like me.","Remember the former things of old: for I am God, and there is none else; I am God, and there is none like me,","Remember the former things, those of long ago; I am God, and there is no other; I am God, and there is none like me.","Recordamini prioris saeculi, quoniam ego sum Deus, et non est ultra Deus, nec est similis mei.","זכרו ראשנות מעולם כי אנכי אל ואין עוד אלהים ואפס כמוני׃"],["29","46","10","나는 처음부터 장래 일들을 알려 주고 예전부터 아직 이루어지지 않은 일들을 알려 주며 “내 계획은 성사되고 나는 내 뜻을 모두 이룬다.”고 말하는 이다.","처음부터 장차 있을 일을 일러주고 일이 이루어지기도 전에 미리 알려준 자, 나밖에 없다. '무엇이든지 내 뜻대로 된다. 나는 결심한 것은 이루고야 만다.' 하고 주장할 자, 나밖에 없다.","내가 시초부터 종말을 알리며 아직 이루지 아니한 일을 옛적부터 보이고 이르기를 나의 뜻이 설 것이니 내가 나의 모든 기뻐하는 것을 이루리라 하였노라","내가 종말을 처음부터 고하며 아직 이루지 아니한 일을 옛적부터 보이고 이르기를 나의 모략이 설 것이니 내가 나의 모든 기뻐하는 것을 이루리라 하였노라","나는 태초부터 종말의 일을 미리 알려 주었다. 무슨 일이 이루어지기 오래전에 그 일을 내가 예고하였다. 내가 작정한 일은 모두 그대로 시행하겠다. 내가 착수한 일은 모두 그대로 완성해 놓겠다.","At the beginning I declare the outcome; from of old, things not yet done. I say that my plan shall stand, I accomplish my every desire.","Declaring the end from the beginning, and from ancient times the things that are not yet done, saying, My counsel shall stand, and I will do all my pleasure:","I make known the end from the beginning, from ancient times, what is still to come. I say: My purpose will stand, and I will do all that I please.","Annuntians ab exordio novissimum et ab initio, quae necdum facta sunt, dicens:  “Consilium meum stabit, et omnem voluntatem meam faciam “.","מגיד מראשית אחרית ומקדם אשר לא נעשו אמר עצתי תקום וכל חפצי אעשה׃"],["29","46","11","나는 해 뜨는 곳에서 맹금을 불러오고 먼 나라에서 내 계획을 이룰 사람을 불러오는 이다. 내가 말하였으니 그것을 반드시 이루리라. 내가 계획하였으니 그것을 반드시 실행하리라.","나만이 해돋는 곳에서 독수리를 불러오며, 먼 곳에서 내 뜻을 이룰 사나이를 불러온다. 나는 한 번 말한 것은 이루고야 만다. 계획을 세운 것은 그대로 하고야 만다.","내가 동쪽에서 사나운 날짐승을 부르며 먼 나라에서 나의 뜻을 이룰 사람을 부를 것이라 내가 말하였은즉 반드시 이룰 것이요 계획하였은즉 반드시 시행하리라","내가 동방에서 독수리를 부르며 먼 나라에서 나의 모략을 이룰 사람을 부를 것이라 내가 말하였은즉 정녕 이룰 것이요 경영하였은즉 정녕 행하리라","나는 이제 동쪽의 먼 안샨 땅에서 나의 계획을 실현할 사람을 독수리처럼 불러오겠다. 이 일도 내가 예고하였으니 그대로 이루어질 것이다. 그 일이 이미 시작되었다. 내가 이미 그 일을 시작하였다.","I summon from the east a bird of prey, from a distant land, one to carry out my plan. Yes, I have spoken, I will accomplish it; I have planned it, and I will do it.","Calling a ravenous bird from the east, the man that executeth my counsel from a far country: yea, I have spoken it, I will also bring it to pass; I have purposed it, I will also do it.","From the east I summon a bird of prey; from a far-off land, a man to fulfill my purpose. What I have said, that will I bring about; what I have planned, that will I do.","Vocans ab oriente avem rapacem et de terra longinqua virum consilii mei; et locutus sum et adducam illud, decrevi et faciam illud.","קרא ממזרח עיט מארץ מרחק איש עצתו אף דברתי אף אביאנה יצרתי אף אעשנה׃"],["29","46","12","내 말을 들어라, 마음이 굳은 자들아 의로움에서 멀리 떨어져 있는 자들아.","마음이 꺾여 승리를 생각할 수 없는 자들아, 내 말을 들어라.","마음이 완악하여 공의에서 멀리 떠난 너희여 내게 들으라","마음이 완악하여 의에서 멀리 떠난 너희여 나를 들으라","그런데도 나의 말을 믿지 못하는 완고하고 반항하는 포로민들아, 너희가 그동안 아무 구원도 체험하지 못하여 완전히 절망하게 되었으나","Listen to me, you fainthearted, far from the victory of justice:","Hearken unto me, ye stouthearted, that are far from righteousness:","Listen to me, you stubborn-hearted, you who are far from righteousness.","Audite me, duri corde, qui longe estis a iustitia.","שמעו אלי אבירי לב הרחוקים מצדקה׃"],["29","46","13","나는 내 의로움을 가까이 가져왔다. 그것은 멀리 있지 않다. 나의 구원은 지체하지 않는다. 나의 영광인 이스라엘을 위하여 나는 시온에 구원을 베푼다.","나는 곧 승리한다. 멀지 않았다. 내가 즉시 구원을 베풀리라. 나 시온에 구원을 베풀고 이스라엘에게 나의 영광을 입혀주리라.","내가 나의 공의를 가깝게 할 것인즉 그것이 멀지 아니하나니 나의 구원이 지체하지 아니할 것이라 내가 나의 영광인 이스라엘을 위하여 구원을 시온에 베풀리라","내가 나의 의를 가깝게 할것인즉 상거가 멀지 아니하니 나의 구원이 지체치 아니할 것이라 내가 나의 1)영광인 이스라엘을 위하여 구원을 시온에 베풀리라구원을 시온에 나의 영광을 이스라엘에 나타내리라","너희의 구원이 이제 가까웠다. 너희가 해방될 시각이 이미 닥쳐오고 있다. 나의 구원은 조금도 지연되지 않는다. 예루살렘이 새 출발을 하도록 하겠다. 이스라엘이 다시 영광을 누리도록 하겠다.\"","I am bringing on that victory, it is not far off, my salvation shall not tarry; I will put salvation within Zion, give to Israel my glory.","I bring near my righteousness; it shall not be far off, and my salvation shall not tarry: and I will place salvation in Zion for Israel my glory.","I am bringing my righteousness near, it is not far away; and my salvation will not be delayed. I will grant salvation to Zion, my splendor to Israel.","Prope feci iustitiam meam, non elongabitur; et salus mea non morabitur: et dabo in Sion salutem et Israeli gloriam meam.","קרבתי צדקתי לא תרחק ותשועתי לא תאחר ונתתי בציון תשועה לישראל תפארתי׃"],["29","47","1","처녀 딸 바빌론아 내려와 먼지 위에 앉아라. 딸 칼데아야 왕좌가 없으니, 땅바닥에 앉아라. 사람들이 너를 더 이상 부드러운 여인이라고, 상냥한 여인이라고 부르지 않으리라.","처녀야, 딸 바빌론아, 땅바닥에 내려앉아라. 딸 갈대아야, 용상에서 내려와 땅에 앉아라. 누가 다시 너를 다정다감하고 애교가 넘치는 여인이라 하랴?","처녀 딸 바벨론이여 내려와서 티끌에 앉으라 딸 갈대아여 보좌가 없어졌으니 땅에 앉으라 네가 다시는 곱고 아리땁다 일컬음을 받지 못할 것임이라","처녀 딸 바벨론이여 내려 티끌에 앉으라 딸 갈대아여 보좌가 없어졌으니 땅에 앉으라 네가 다시는 곱고 아리땁다 칭함을 받지 못할 것임이니라","세계를 정복하고 여왕처럼 화려하게 영화를 누리는 수도 바벨론에게 여호와께서 이렇게 말씀하셨다. \"갈대아의 가장 아름다운 딸 바벨론아, 네가 이제 전란을 당하여 처녀처럼 무참히 유린을 당할 것이니 그 왕좌에서 내려와 땅바닥에 앉아라. 네 왕좌는 이미 사라졌으니 땅바닥에 앉아 비천한 종노릇을 하여라. 네가 다시는 곱게 단장하고 아름다운 모습을 뽑내지 못할 것이다.","Come down, sit in the dust, virgin daughter Babylon; Sit on the ground, dethroned, daughter of the Chaldeans. No longer shall you be called dainty and delicate.","Come down, and sit in the dust, O virgin daughter of Babylon, sit on the ground: there is no throne, O daughter of the Chaldeans: for thou shalt no more be called tender and delicate.","\"Go down, sit in the dust, Virgin Daughter of Babylon; sit on the ground without a throne, Daughter of the Babylonians. No more will you be called tender or delicate.","Descende, sede in pulvere, virgo filia Babylon; sede in terra sine solio, filia Chaldaeorum, quia ultra non vocaberis mollis et tenera.","רדי ושבי על עפר בתולת בת בבל שבי לארץ אין כסא בת כשדים כי לא תוסיפי יקראו לך רכה וענגה׃"],["29","47","2","맷돌을 돌려 가루를 내어라. 너울을 벗고 치맛자락을 걷어 올려 다리를 드러낸 채 강을 건너라.","맷돌이나 잡고 밀이나 갈아라. 너울을 벗고 치맛자락을 걷어 올려 허벅다리를 드러내고 강물을 건너라.","맷돌을 가지고 가루를 갈고 너울을 벗으며 치마를 걷어 다리를 드러내고 강을 건너라","맷돌을 취하여 가루를 갈라 면박을 벗으며 치마를 걷어 다리를 드러내고 강을 건너라","너는 이제 하녀의 목숨을 부지하기 위해 맷돌을 들어다가 올려놓고 곡식을 갈아 요리를 하고 너울도 걷고 긴 치마도 벗어 던지고 허벅다리를 드러내고 시냇물과 강물을 건너서 먼 곳으로 끌려갈 것이다.","Take the millstone and grind flour, remove your veil; Strip off your skirt, bare your legs, cross through the streams.","Take the millstones, and grind meal: uncover thy locks, make bare the leg, uncover the thigh, pass over the rivers.","Take millstones and grind flour; take off your veil. Lift up your skirts, bare your legs, and wade through the streams.","Tolle molam et mole farinam; depone velum tuum, subleva stolam, revela crura, transi flumina.","קחי רחים וטחני קמח גלי צמתך חשפי שבל גלי שוק עברי נהרות׃"],["29","47","3","네 알몸이 드러나고 네 치부까지 보이게 하여라. 나는 복수하리라. 어떤 인간도 그냥 두지 않으리라.","홀랑 벗기어 속살까지 드러내어라. 내가 원수를 갚는데 누가 막으랴?\"","네 속살이 드러나고 네 부끄러운 것이 보일 것이라 내가 보복하되 사람을 아끼지 아니하리라","네 살이 드러나고 네 부끄러운 것이 보일 것이라 내가 보수하되 사람을 아끼지 아니하리라","네가 알몸을 드러내고 네 부끄러운 곳까지 드러내리라. 내가 억울한 분을 푸는데 누가 감히 막을 수 있겠느냐?\"","Your nakedness shall be uncovered, and your shame be seen; I will take vengeance, I will yield to no entreaty, says","Thy nakedness shall be uncovered, yea, thy shame shall be seen: I will take vengeance, and I will not meet thee as a man.","Your nakedness will be exposed and your shame uncovered. I will take vengeance; I will spare no one.\"","Revelabitur ignominia tua, et videbitur opprobrium tuum.  “Ultionem capiam, nemini parcam “,","תגל ערותך גם תראה חרפתך נקם אקח ולא אפגע אדם׃"],["29","47","4","우리의 구원자 그 이름 만군의 주님 그분은 이스라엘의 거룩하신 분이시다.","우리의 구세주, 그 이름 만군의 야훼, 이스라엘의 거룩하신 이께서 말씀하신다.","우리의 구원자는 그의 이름이 만군의 여호와 이스라엘의 거룩한 이시니라","(우리의 구속자는 그 이름이 만군의 여호와 이스라엘의 거룩한 자시니라)","이분이 바로 우리 이스라엘의 해방주 여호와이시다. 세상의 모든 권세를 굴복시키시는 이스라엘의 거룩하신 분께서 말씀하셨다.","our redeemer, Whose name is the LORD of hosts, the Holy One of Israel.","As for our redeemer, the LORD of hosts is his name, the Holy One of Israel.","Our Redeemer--the LORD Almighty is his name--is the Holy One of Israel.","dicit Redemptor noster, Dominus exercituum nomen illius, Sanctus Israel.","גאלנו יהוה צבאות שמו קדוש ישראל׃"],["29","47","5","딸 칼데아야 잠자코 앉아 있다 어둠 속으로 들어가거라. 사람들이 너를 더 이상 만국의 여왕이라 부르지 않으리라.","\"딸 갈대아야, 말문이 막혀 그냥 앉았다가 어둠 속으로 꺼져라. 누가 다시 너를 만방의 여왕이라 부르랴?","딸 갈대아여 잠잠히 앉으라 흑암으로 들어가라 네가 다시는 여러 왕국의 여주인이라 일컬음을 받지 못하리라","딸 갈대아여 잠잠히 앉으라 흑암으로 들어가라 네가 다시는 열국의 주모라 칭함을 받지 못하리라","\"갈대아 족속의 딸 바벨론아, 너는 캄캄한 감옥으로 들어가서 조용히 앉아 있어라. 네가 \"세계 만국의 여왕\"이라는 찬사를 다시는 받지 못할 것이다.","Go into darkness and sit in silence, daughter of the Chaldeans, No longer shall you be called sovereign mistress of kingdoms.","Sit thou silent, and get thee into darkness, O daughter of the Chaldeans: for thou shalt no more be called, The lady of kingdoms.","\"Sit in silence, go into darkness, Daughter of the Babylonians; no more will you be called queen of kingdoms.","Sede tacens et intra in tenebras, filia Chaldaeorum, quia non vocaberis ultra Domina regnorum.","שבי דומם ובאי בחשך בת כשדים כי לא תוסיפי יקראו לך גברת ממלכות׃"],["29","47","6","나는 내 백성에게 진노하여 내 재산을 내버렸다. 내가 그들을 네 손에 넘겼는데 너는 그들을 동정하지 않고 노인들에게도 네 멍에를 너무나 무겁게 짊어지웠다.","내가 나의 백성에게 진노하여 그들, 나의 유산을 천대하여 네 손에 넘겼는데 너는 그들을 가엾게 보기는커녕 노인들에게 묵직한 멍에마저 씌웠다.","전에 내가 내 백성에게 노하여 내 기업을 욕되게 하여 그들을 네 손에 넘겨 주었거늘 네가 그들을 긍휼히 여기지 아니하고 늙은이에게 네 멍에를 심히 무겁게 메우며","전에 내가 내 백성을 노함으로 내 기업을 욕되게 하여 그들을 네 손에 붙였거늘 네가 그들을 긍휼히 여기지 아니하고 늙은이에게 네 멍에를 심히 무겁게 메우며","내가 전에 내 백성의 죄악에 더하여 몹시 화를 내고 나의 소유지인 이스라엘 땅을 원수들에게 넘겨 주고 내 백성도 네게 넘겨 주었다. 그전에도 너는 그들을 불쌍하게 여기지 않고 노인들마저 가혹한 일을 시켰다.","Angry at my people, I profaned my heritage And gave them into your power; but you showed them no mercy; Upon the aged you laid a very heavy yoke.","I was wroth with my people, I have polluted mine inheritance, and given them into thine hand: thou didst shew them no mercy; upon the ancient hast thou very heavily laid thy yoke.","I was angry with my people and desecrated my inheritance; I gave them into your hand, and you showed them no mercy. Even on the aged you laid a very heavy yoke.","Iratus sum super populum meum, contaminavi hereditatem meam et dedi eos in manu tua; non posuisti eis misericordias, super senem aggravasti iugum tuum valde","קצפתי על עמי חללתי נחלתי ואתנם בידך לא שמת להם רחמים על זקן הכבדת עלך מאד׃"],["29","47","7","“나는 언제까지나 영원한 여왕이리라.” 너는 이렇게 말하면서 이런 일들을 네 마음에 두지도 않고 장래 일을 생각하지도 않았다.","언제까지나 내가 여왕이다.' 하고 흥얼거리다 보니, 이런 일은 염두에도 두지 아니하였고 너의 장래를 걱정하지도 않았었지.","말하기를 내가 영영히 여주인이 되리라 하고 이 일을 네 마음에 두지도 아니하며 그들의 종말도 생각하지 아니하였도다","말하기를 내가 영영히 주모가 되리라 하고 이 일을 네 마음에 두지도 아니하며 그 종말도 생각지 아니하였도다","오히려 너는 신이나 된 듯이 큰소리를 쳤다. \"나는 영원히 살며 끝없이 세계를 지배하는 여왕이다!\" 너는 그토록 잔인하고 교만하게 행동하면서도 네가 결국 어떻게 될 것인지는 생각해 보지도 않았다.","You said, “I shall remain always, a sovereign mistress forever!” You did not take these things to heart, but disregarded their outcome.","And thou saidst, I shall be a lady for ever: so that thou didst not lay these things to thy heart, neither didst remember the latter end of it.","You said, 'I will continue forever--the eternal queen!' But you did not consider these things or reflect on what might happen.","et dixisti:  “In sempiternum ero domina “. Non posuisti haec super cor tuum neque recordata es novissimi tui.","ותאמרי לעולם אהיה גברת עד לא שמת אלה על לבך לא זכרת אחריתה׃"],["29","47","8","그러나 이제 이것을 들어 보아라, 음탕한 여인아 태평스레 앉아 있는 여인아. 너는 마음속으로 ‘나뿐이다. 나밖에는 없다. 나는 과부로 나앉지도 않고 자녀들을 잃는 일도 겪지 않으리라.’ 생각하였다.","이제 내 말을 들어라. 마음놓고 향략을 누리는 여인아, 너는 말하기를 '이 세상에 나밖에 없다. 내가 과부 신세가 되다니, 내가 자식을 여의다니, 어림도 없다.'고 했었지.","그러므로 사치하고 평안히 지내며 마음에 이르기를 나뿐이라 나 외에 다른 이가 없도다 나는 과부로 지내지도 아니하며 자녀를 잃어버리는 일도 모르리라 하는 자여 너는 이제 들을지어다","그러므로 사치하고 평안히 지내며 마음에 이르기를 나 뿐이라 나 외에 다른이가 없도다 나는 과부로 지내지도 아니하며 자녀를 잃어버리는 일도 모르리라 하는 자여 너는 이제 들을찌어다","그러나 너는 이제 똑똑히 들어라. 너는 항상 호화롭고 태평하게 살면서 \"이 세상에는 나밖에 없다. 나와 겨룰 이가 아무도 없다. 나는 과부가 될 염려도 없고 자녀를 잃고 외롭게 살 염려도 없다.\"고 떵떵거렸으니 이제 똑똑히 들어라.","Now hear this, voluptuous one, enthroned securely, Saying in your heart, “I, and no one else! I shall never be a widow, bereft of my children”—","Therefore hear now this, thou that art given to pleasures, that dwellest carelessly, that sayest in thine heart, I am, and none else beside me; I shall not sit as a widow, neither shall I know the loss of children:","\"Now then, listen, you wanton creature, lounging in your security and saying to yourself, 'I am, and there is none besides me. I will never be a widow or suffer the loss of children.'","Et nunc audi haec, delicata, quae habitas confidenter et dicis in corde tuo:  “Ego, et praeter me non est altera, non sedebo vidua et orbitatem ignorabo “.","ועתה שמעי זאת עדינה היושבת לבטח האמרה בלבבה אני ואפסי עוד לא אשב אלמנה ולא אדע שכול׃"],["29","47","9","그러나 이 두 가지가 한날에 갑자기 너에게 들이닥치리라. 너의 그 많은 마술에도, 너의 그 강력한 주술에도 자녀들을 잃고 과부 신세가 되는 일이 여지없이 너에게 들이닥치리라.","그러나 너는 하루 아침에 이 두 가지 변을 당하리라. 자식을 여의고, 남편을 잃는 쓰라림이 한꺼번에 닥치리라. 재간껏 마술을 부려보아라. 힘껏 요술을 부려보아라. 모두 쓸데없으리라.","한 날에 갑자기 자녀를 잃으며 과부가 되는 이 두 가지 일이 네게 임할 것이라 네가 무수한 주술과 많은 주문을 빌릴지라도 이 일이 온전히 네게 임하리라","한 날에 홀연히 자녀를 잃으며 과부가 되는 이 두 일이 네게 임할 것이라 네가 무수한 사술과 많은 진언을 베풀찌라도 이 일이 온전히 네게 임하리라","네가 이제까지 누리던 권세와 영화를 하루에 갑자기 잃을 것이다. 남편도 잃고 자식도 모조리 잃고서 외롭고 처량한 신세가 될 것이다. 네가 아무리 신기하게 마술을 행하고 주문을 많이 외워도 아무 소용이 없을 것이다.","Both these things shall come to you suddenly, in a single day: Complete bereavement and widowhood shall come upon you Despite your many sorceries and the full power of your spells;","But these two things shall come to thee in a moment in one day, the loss of children, and widowhood: they shall come upon thee in their perfection for the multitude of thy sorceries, and for the great abundance of thine enchantments.","Both of these will overtake you in a moment, on a single day: loss of children and widowhood. They will come upon you in full measure, in spite of your many sorceries and all your potent spells.","Venient tibi duo haec subito in die una, orbitas et viduitas; repente venerunt super te propter multitudinem maleficiorum tuorum, propter abundantiam incantationum tuarum.","ותבאנה לך שתי אלה רגע ביום אחד שכול ואלמן כתמם באו עליך ברב כשפיך בעצמת חבריך מאד׃"],["29","47","10","너는 네 사악함으로 자신만만하여 “아무도 나를 보지 않는다.” 하고 말하였다. 너의 지혜와 너의 지식이 너를 현혹시켜 너는 마음속으로 ‘나뿐이다. 나밖에는 없다.’ 하고 생각하게 되었다.","네가 실컷 나쁜 짓을 하면서도 '나를 감시할 눈이 없다.' 하고 자신만만이구나. 너는 지혜로운 체, 세상 일을 다 아는 체하며 '이 세상엔 나밖에 없다.'고 하다가 제 꾀에 넘어가리라.","네가 네 악을 의지하고 스스로 이르기를 나를 보는 자가 없다 하나니 네 지혜와 네 지식이 너를 유혹하였음이라 네 마음에 이르기를 나뿐이라 나 외에 다른 이가 없다 하였으므로","네가 네 악을 의지하고 스스로 이르기를 나를 보는 자가 없다 하나니 네 지혜와 네 지식이 너를 유혹하였음이니라 네 마음에 이르기를 나 뿐이라 나 외에 다른이가 없다 하였으므로","또 너는 이렇게 주장하였다. \"내가 아무리 악한 일을 저질러도 벌받지는 않을 것이다. 나의 행동을 감시할 사람이 아무도 없기 때문이다.\" 네가 마술을 행하는 지혜가 많고 주문을 외우는 지식이 많기 때문에 아주 그릇된 길로 들어서서 오만하게 떵떵거렸다. \"이 세상에는 나밖에 없다! 나와 겨룰 이가 아무도 없다.\"","Secure in your wickedness, you said, “No one sees me.” Your wisdom and your knowledge led you astray, And you said in your heart, “I, and no one else!”","For thou hast trusted in thy wickedness: thou hast said, None seeth me. Thy wisdom and thy knowledge, it hath perverted thee; and thou hast said in thine heart, I am, and none else beside me.","You have trusted in your wickedness and have said, 'No one sees me.' Your wisdom and knowledge mislead you when you say to yourself, 'I am, and there is none besides me.'","Et fiduciam habuisti in malitia tua et dixisti:  “Non est qui videat me “. Sapientia tua et scientia tua, haec decepit te. Et dixisti in corde tuo:  “Ego, et praeter me non est altera “.","ותבטחי ברעתך אמרת אין ראני חכמתך ודעתך היא שובבתך ותאמרי בלבך אני ואפסי עוד׃"],["29","47","11","그러나 이제 불행이 너에게 들이닥치리니 너는 그것을 요술로도 막아 내지 못하리라. 이제 파멸이 너를 덮치리니 너는 그것에서 벗어나지 못하리라. 또 네가 알지도 못하는 멸망이 순식간에 너에게 들이닥치리라.","이제 불행이 덮쳐오는데 무슨 마술을 써서 네가 그것을 막아내랴? 이제 재난이 떨어지는데 무슨 방법을 써서 네가 그것을 물리치랴? 헤아려 미리 알 수 없는 재난이 갑자기 너에게 닥치리라.","재앙이 네게 임하리라 그러나 네가 그 근원을 알지 못할 것이며 손해가 네게 이르리라 그러나 이를 물리칠 능력이 없을 것이며 파멸이 홀연히 네게 임하리라 그러나 네가 알지 못할 것이니라","재앙이 네게 임하리라 그러나 네가 1)그 근본을 알지 못할 것이며 손해가 네게 이르리라 그러나 이를 물리칠 능이 없을 것이며 파멸이 홀연히 네게 임하리라 그러나 네가 헤아리지 못할 것이니라 술법으로 물리칠 줄을 알지 못할 것이며","그러나 네가 주문을 외워서 쫓아버릴 수 없는 재앙이 이미 네게로 가까이 몰려오고 있다. 무슨 제물로도 예방할 수 없는 멸망이 무슨 사고처럼 네게 떨어져 내리고 있다. 네가 무슨 마술로도 피할 수 없는 파멸이 이미 네게 덮쳐 오고 있다.","But upon you shall come an evil you will not be able to charm away; Upon you shall fall a disaster you cannot ward off. Upon you shall suddenly come a ruin you cannot imagine.","Therefore shall evil come upon thee; thou shalt not know from whence it riseth: and mischief shall fall upon thee; thou shalt not be able to put it off: and desolation shall come upon thee suddenly, which thou shalt not know.","Disaster will come upon you, and you will not know how to conjure it away. A calamity will fall upon you that you cannot ward off with a ransom; a catastrophe you cannot foresee will suddenly come upon you.","Veniet super te malum, et nescies avertere; et irruet super te calamitas, quam non poteris expiare; veniet super te repente miseria, quam nescies.","ובא עליך רעה לא תדעי שחרה ותפל עליך הוה לא תוכלי כפרה ותבא עליך פתאם שואה לא תדעי׃"],["29","47","12","그러니 네가 젊어서부터 애써 익혀 온 너의 그 주술들과 그 많은 마술들을 가지고 나서 보아라. 어쩌면 네가 도움을 얻을 수 있을지도 모르고 어쩌면 네가 위협하여 쫓아낼 수 있을지도 모르지.","네 재주껏 요술과 마술을 부려 맞서보아라. 네가 젊어서부터 애써 익힌 것들이 아니냐? 덕이라도 입게 될는지 혹시 아느냐? 상대편을 위압하게 될는지 혹시 아느냐?","이제 너는 젊어서부터 힘쓰던 주문과 많은 주술을 가지고 맞서 보라 혹시 유익을 얻을 수 있을는지, 혹시 놀라게 할 수 있을는지,","이제 너는 젊어서부터 힘쓰던 진언과 많은 사술을 가지고 서서 시험하여 보라 혹시 유익을 얻을 수 있을는지, 혹시 원수를 2)이길 수 있을는지, 놀라게 할 수","온갖 주문과 마술로 맞서 보아라. 젊은 시절부터 익힌 솜씨로 대결해 보아라. 혹시 그 효험이 있을지 혹시 재앙을 막을 수 있을지 어서 시험해 보아라!","Keep on with your spells and your many sorceries, at which you toiled from your youth. Perhaps you can prevail, perhaps you can strike terror!","Stand now with thine enchantments, and with the multitude of thy sorceries, wherein thou hast laboured from thy youth; if so be thou shalt be able to profit, if so be thou mayest prevail.","\"Keep on, then, with your magic spells and with your many sorceries, which you have labored at since childhood. Perhaps you will succeed, perhaps you will cause terror.","Sta cum incantationibus tuis et cum multitudine maleficiorum tuorum, in quibus laborasti ab adulescentia tua: forte poteris iuvari, forte terrebis.","עמדי נא בחבריך וברב כשפיך באשר יגעת מנעוריך אולי תוכלי הועיל אולי תערוצי׃"],["29","47","13","너는 너의 그 많은 의견들 때문에 지쳤구나. 자, 하늘을 연구하는 자들 별들을 관찰하는 자들 너에게 무슨 일이 닥칠지 매달 초에 알려 주는 자들 그들에게 나서서 너를 구해 보라고 하여라.","너는 그 많은 참모들에 지쳤다. 그러나 하늘을 살피고, 별들을 보며 점치는 점성가들, 매달 네가 당할 일을 미리 알려주는 점쟁이들, 그들이라도 나서서 너를 구원하라고 하여라.","네가 많은 계략으로 말미암아 피곤하게 되었도다 하늘을 살피는 자와 별을 보는 자와 초하룻날에 예고하는 자들에게 일어나 네게 임할 그 일에서 너를 구원하게 하여 보라","네가 많은 모략을 인하여 피곤케 되었도다 하늘을 살피는 자와 별을 보는 자와 월삭에 예고하는 자들로 일어나 네게 임할 그 일에서 너를 구원케 하여 보라","너는 항상 별들을 보며 점을 치다가 지치지 않았느냐? 항상 하늘을 보며 점을 치는 점성가들과 초하루마다 네 운세를 말해 주는 점쟁이들을 불러다가 너를 재앙에서 구원하도록 하여라.","You wore yourself out with so many consultations! Let the astrologers stand forth to save you, The stargazers who forecast at each new moon what would happen to you.","Thou art wearied in the multitude of thy counsels. Let now the astrologers, the stargazers, the monthly prognosticators, stand up, and save thee from these things that shall come upon thee.","All the counsel you have received has only worn you out! Let your astrologers come forward, those stargazers who make predictions month by month, let them save you from what is coming upon you.","Defecisti in multitudine consiliorum tuorum; stent et salvent te, qui metiuntur caelum, qui contemplantur sidera et annuntiant singulis noviluniis ventura tibi.","נלאית ברב עצתיך יעמדו נא ויושיעך הברו שמים החזים בכוכבים מודיעם לחדשים מאשר יבאו עליך׃"],["29","47","14","보라, 그들은 지푸라기처럼 되어 불이 그들을 살라 버리리라. 그들은 그 불길의 위력 앞에서 저 자신도 구해 내지 못한다. 그 불은 몸을 덥힐 숯불도 아니고 그 앞에 앉아 쬘 불도 아니다.","그러나 보아라, 그들은 검불처럼 불에 타리라. 불길에 휩싸이리라. 빵을 구울 숯불도 아니요 앉아서 쬘 아궁이불도 아닌 불길에 휩싸이리니 목숨을 건질 길 없으리라.","보라 그들은 초개 같아서 불에 타리니 그 불꽃의 세력에서 스스로 구원하지 못할 것이라 이 불은 덥게 할 숯불이 아니요 그 앞에 앉을 만한 불도 아니니라","보라 그들은 초개 같아서 불에 타리니 그 불꽃의 세력에서 스스로 구원치 못할 것이라 이 불은 더웁게 할 숯불이 아니요 그 앞에 앉을 만한 불도 아니니라","그러나 바벨론의 모든 점성가들이 마른 풀처럼 불길에 타버릴 것이다. 폭풍 같은 불길이 밀어닥치면 점쟁이들이 제 목숨조차 건지지 못할 것이다. 그 불은 아늑하게 둘러앉아서 쬘 수 있는 모닥불 같은 것이 아니다.","See, they are like stubble, fire consumes them; They cannot deliver themselves from the spreading flames. This is no warming ember, no fire to sit before!","Behold, they shall be as stubble; the fire shall burn them; they shall not deliver themselves from the power of the flame: there shall not be a coal to warm at, nor fire to sit before it.","Surely they are like stubble; the fire will burn them up. They cannot even save themselves from the power of the flame. Here are no coals to warm anyone; here is no fire to sit by.","Ecce facti sunt quasi stipula, ignis combussit eos. Non liberabunt seipsos de manu flammae; non sunt prunae, quibus calefiant, nec focus, ut sedeant ad eum.","הנה היו כקש אש שרפתם לא יצילו את נפשם מיד להבה אין גחלת לחמם אור לשבת נגדו׃"],["29","47","15","너와 함께 애써 온 자들, 젊어서부터 사귀어 온 자들이 너에게 바로 이러하다. 그들은 하나같이 어긋나서 너를 구할 자 하나도 없다.","네가 젊어서부터 지치도록 위하던 마술사들이 이 모양이 되리라. 저마다 도망칠 판인데 그 누가 과연 너를 구해 주랴!","네가 같이 힘쓰던 자들이 네게 이같이 되리니 어려서부터 너와 함께 장사하던 자들이 각기 제 길로 흩어지고 너를 구원할 자가 없으리라","너의 근로하던 것들이 네게 이같이 되리니 너 어려서부터 너와 함께 무역하던 자들이 각기 소향대로 유리하고 너를 구원할 자 없으리라","네가 젊은 시절부터 함께 무역해 오던 자들도 모두 그런 꼴이 되어서 저마다 제 갈길로 뿔뿔이 흩어져 너를 살려 줄 이는 아무도 없을 것이다.\"","Thus do your wizards serve you with whom you have toiled from your youth; They wander their separate ways, with none to save you.","Thus shall they be unto thee with whom thou hast laboured, even thy merchants, from thy youth: they shall wander every one to his quarter; none shall save thee.","That is all they can do for you--these you have labored with and trafficked with since childhood. Each of them goes on in his error; there is not one that can save you.","Sic fiunt tibi incantatores tui, in quibuscumque laborasti ab adulescentia tua; unusquisque in via sua errat, non est qui salvet te.","כן היו לך אשר יגעת סחריך מנעוריך איש לעברו תעו אין מושיעך׃"],["29","48","1","이 말을 들어라, 야곱 집안아 이스라엘이라는 이름으로 불리는 자들아 유다의 몸에서 나온 자들아 주님의 이름으로 맹세하고 이스라엘의 하느님을 기리기를 진실과 의로움으로 하지 않는 자들아.","이 말을 들어라. 야곱의 가문아, 이스라엘이라는 이름을 받은 자들아, 유다의 혈통을 이어받은 자들아, 야훼의 이름으로 맹세하는 자들아, 마음은 거짓으로 차 있고 생활은 비뚤어졌으면서도 이스라엘의 하느님을 부르는 자들아,","야곱의 집이여 이를 들을지어다 너희는 이스라엘의 이름으로 일컬음을 받으며 유다의 허리에서 나왔으며 여호와의 이름으로 맹세하며 이스라엘의 하나님을 기념하면서도 진실이 없고 공의가 없도다","야곱 집이여 이스라엘의 이름으로 일컬음을 받으며 유다의 근원에서 나왔으며 거룩한 성 백성이라 칭하며 그 이름이 만군의 여호와이신 이스라엘의 하나님을 의지하면서 성실치 아니하고 의로움이 없이 여호와의 이름으로 맹세하며 이스라엘의 하나님을 부르는 너희는 이를 들을지어다","너희 야곱의 백성들아, 유다의 샘물에서 흘러 나온 사람들아, 너희는 똑똑히 들어라. 너희는 이스라엘 백성이라는 존귀한 칭호를 지닌 자들이요 여호와의 이름으로 맹세하는 이들이요 이스라엘의 하나님이 이룩하신 위대한 일들을 찬양하는 이들이다. 너희는 주께서 선택하신 거룩한 도성의 주민들이라고 자칭을 하며 이스라엘의 하나님 곧 온 세계의 주인이신 여호와를 의지한다고 하는 백성들이다. 그러나 너희는 진심으로 주님을 사랑하지도 않고 주께 의리와 충성을 바치지도 않는다. 주께서 너희에게 하시는 말씀을 들어라.","Hear this, house of Jacob called by the name Israel, sprung from the stock of Judah, You who swear by the name of the LORD and invoke the God of Israel without sincerity, without justice,","Hear ye this, O house of Jacob, which are called by the name of Israel, and are come forth out of the waters of Judah, which swear by the name of the LORD, and make mention of the God of Israel, but not in truth, nor in righteousness.","\"Listen to this, O house of Jacob, you who are called by the name of Israel and come from the line of Judah, you who take oaths in the name of the LORD and invoke the God of Israel--but not in truth or righteousness--","Audite hoc, domus Iacob, qui vocamini nomine Israel et de aquis Iudae existis, qui iuratis in nomine Domini et Deum Israel invocatis non in veritate neque in iustitia.","שמעו זאת בית יעקב הנקראים בשם ישראל וממי יהודה יצאו הנשבעים בשם יהוה ובאלהי ישראל יזכירו לא באמת ולא בצדקה׃"],["29","48","2","이들은 거룩한 도성의 백성이라 자처하고 그 이름 만군의 주님이신 이스라엘의 하느님께 의지한다 하는구나.","그러면서도 스스로 거룩한 도시의 시민임을 자처하면서, 그 이름 만군의 야훼이신 이스라엘의 하느님께 의지한다는구나.","그들은 거룩한 성 출신이라고 스스로 부르며 이스라엘의 하나님을 의지한다 하며 그의 이름이 만군의 여호와라고 하나",null,"(1절에 포함되어 있음)","Though you are named after the holy city and rely on the God of Israel, whose name is the LORD of hosts.","For they call themselves of the holy city, and stay themselves upon the God of Israel; The LORD of hosts is his name.","you who call yourselves citizens of the holy city and rely on the God of Israel--the LORD Almighty is his name:","De civitate enim sancta vocati sunt et super Deum Israel constabiliti sunt; Dominus exercituum nomen eius.","כי מעיר הקדש נקראו ועל אלהי ישראל נסמכו יהוה צבאות שמו׃"],["29","48","3","나는 예전의 일들을 이미 예로부터 알려 주었다. 그것들은 내 입에서 나갔다. 내가 그것들을 들려주었다. 내가 순식간에 행하니 그것들이 이루어졌다.","지나간 일들을 내가 그보다 앞질러 일러주었고, 이 입으로 똑똑히 들려주지 않았더냐? 홀연히 나는 그것들을 이루었다.","내가 예로부터 처음 일들을 알게 하였고 내 입에서 그것들이 나갔으며 또 내가 그것들을 듣게 하였고 내가 홀연히 행하여 그 일들이 이루어졌느니라","여호와께서 가라사대 내가 옛적에 장래사를 고하였고 내 입에서 내어 보였고 내가 홀연히 그 일을 행하여 이루었느니라","\"내가 일어날 일을 이미 옛날에 알려 주었다. 너희가 내 말을 직접 다 들었다. 그런 다음에는 내가 그대로 행동하여 갑자기 그 일들이 이루어졌다.","Things of the past I declared long ago, they went forth from my mouth, I announced them; then suddenly I took action and they came to be.","I have declared the former things from the beginning; and they went forth out of my mouth, and I shewed them; I did them suddenly, and they came to pass.","I foretold the former things long ago, my mouth announced them and I made them known; then suddenly I acted, and they came to pass.","Priora ex tunc annuntiavi, et ex ore meo exierunt, et audita feci ea; repente operatus sum, et venerunt.","הראשנות מאז הגדתי ומפי יצאו ואשמיעם פתאם עשיתי ותבאנה׃"],["29","48","4","나는 정녕 네가 완고함을, 네 목이 쇠막대기임을, 네 이마가 구리임을 안다.","너희가 고집불통 무쇠 같은 목덜미에 청동 같은 얼굴을 하고 있는 것을 나는 알았다.","내가 알거니와 너는 완고하며 네 목은 쇠의 힘줄이요 네 이마는 놋이라","내가 알거니와 너는 완악하며 네 목의 힘줄은 무쇠요 네 이마는 놋이라","너희가 얼마나 완고한지 내가 잘 알고 있다. 너희의 목덜미는 무쇠 덩어리처럼 굳어 있고 너희의 이마는 청동처럼 단단하다.","Because I know that you are stubborn and that your neck is an iron sinew and your forehead bronze,","Because I knew that thou art obstinate, and thy neck is an iron sinew, and thy brow brass;","For I knew how stubborn you were; the sinews of your neck were iron, your forehead was bronze.","Scivi enim quia durus es tu, et nervus ferreus cervix tua, et frons tua aerea.","מדעתי כי קשה אתה וגיד ברזל ערפך ומצחך נחושה׃"],["29","48","5","내가 그것을 예로부터 알려 주었고 일어나기도 전에 너에게 들려주었으니 너는 “내 우상이 그 일들을 이루었고 깎아 만든 내 신상과 부어 만든 내 신상이 그것을 명령하였다.” 하고 말하지 못한다.","이것은 내 우상이 이루어놓은 일이다. 내가 깎아 세우고 내가 부어 만든 신상이 명령해서 된 일이다.' 이런 엉뚱한 소리를 못하게 하려고 나는 너희에게 장차 있을 일을 미리 알려주었고 앞질러 들려주었다.","그러므로 내가 이 일을 예로부터 네게 알게 하였고 일이 이루어지기 전에 그것을 네게 듣게 하였느니라 그것을 네가 듣게 하여 네가 이것을 내 신이 행한 바요 내가 새긴 신상과 부어 만든 신상이 명령한 바라 말하지 못하게 하였느니라","그러므로 내가 이 일을 옛적부터 네게 고하였고 성사하기 전에 그것을 네게 보였느니라 그렇지 않았더면 네 말이 내 신의 행한바요 내 새긴 신상과 부어만든 신상의 명한바라 하였으리라","그토록 고집 센 너희들이 엉뚱한 소리를 하지 못하도록 내가 모든 것을 미리 너희에게 알려 주었다. \"우리의 신상이 할 일이고 우리가 새기고 부어 만든 우상들이 명령해서 된 일들이다.\"라고 너희가 고집을 부리지 못하도록 내가 미리 알려 주었다.","I declared them to you of old; before they took place I informed you, That you might not say, “My idol did them, my statue, my molten image commanded them.”","I have even from the beginning declared it to thee; before it came to pass I shewed it thee: lest thou shouldest say, Mine idol hath done them, and my graven image, and my molten image, hath commanded them.","Therefore I told you these things long ago; before they happened I announced them to you so that you could not say, 'My idols did them; my wooden image and metal god ordained them.'","Praedixi tibi ex tunc; antequam venirent, indicavi tibi, ne forte diceres:  “Idolum meum operatum est haec, et sculptile meum et conflatile mandaverunt ista “.","ואגיד לך מאז בטרם תבוא השמעתיך פן תאמר עצבי עשם ופסלי ונסכי צום׃"],["29","48","6","네가 이미 들었으니 이 모든 것을 살펴보아라. 너희도 그것을 알려야 하지 않느냐? 내가 지금부터 너에게 새로운 일들을, 네가 모르던 감추어진 일들을 들려주겠다.","이렇게 일러준 대로 이루어지는 것을 너희는 보았다. 너희가 이것을 증언하지 않으려느냐? 이제 내가 새로운 일을 너희에게 들려준다. 이것은 너희가 알지 못하던 비밀이다.","네가 들었으니 이 모든 것을 보라 너희가 선전하지 아니하겠느냐 이제부터 내가 새 일 곧 네가 알지 못하던 은비한 일을 네게 듣게 하노니","네가 이미 들었으니 이것을 다 보라 너희가 선전치 아니하겠느뇨 이제부터 내가 새 일 곧 네가 알지 못하던 은비한 일을 네게 보이노니","너희가 그 말을 들었으니 다시 한 번 생각해 보아라. 너희가 그것을 인정하고 선전해야 옳지 않겠느냐? 내가 이제부터 너희에게 아주 새로운 일, 너희가 전혀 모르던 비밀을 알려 주겠다.","Now that you have heard, look at all this; must you not admit it? From now on I announce new things to you, hidden events you never knew.","Thou hast heard, see all this; and will not ye declare it? I have shewed thee new things from this time, even hidden things, and thou didst not know them.","You have heard these things; look at them all. Will you not admit them? \"From now on I will tell you of new things, of hidden things unknown to you.","Quae audisti, vide omnia; vos autem num annuntiabitis? Audita facio tibi nova ex nunc et occulta, quae nescis.","שמעת חזה כלה ואתם הלוא תגידו השמעתיך חדשות מעתה ונצרות ולא ידעתם׃"],["29","48","7","이것들은 옛적이 아니라 지금 창조되어 오늘 이전에는 네가 들어 본 적이 없으니 “나는 이미 알고 있었다.” 하고 말하지 못한다.","지금 비로소 되는 일, 일찍이 없었던 일이다. 바로 오늘까지, 너희가 듣지도 못하던 일이다. '진작부터 이럴 줄 알았다.'는 말을 너희는 못한다.","이 일들은 지금 창조된 것이요 옛 것이 아니라 오늘 이전에는 네가 듣지 못하였으니 이는 네가 말하기를 내가 이미 알았노라 하지 못하게 하려 함이라","이 일들은 이제 창조된 것이요 옛적 것이 아니라 오늘 이전에는 네가 듣지 못하였느니라 그렇지 않았더면 네가 말하기를 내가 이미 알았노라 하였으리라","내가 이제 바벨론의 포로민들을 해방시켜서 예루살렘을 재건하겠다. 이 일은 내가 지금 창조해 내는 새 역사로서 옛날부터 예고한 것이 아니다. 전에는 너희가 들어본 적도 없었던 일이다. \"우리가 이미 옛날부터 알고 있었다.\"는 말을 너희가 하지 못하도록 내가 이제 아주 새로운 일을 창조하였다.","Now, not from of old, they are created, before today you did not hear of them, so that you cannot claim, “I have known them.”","They are created now, and not from the beginning; even before the day when thou heardest them not; lest thou shouldest say, Behold, I knew them.","They are created now, and not long ago; you have not heard of them before today. So you cannot say, 'Yes, I knew of them.'","Nunc creata sunt et non ex tunc, et ante eorum diem, et non audisti ea, ne forte diceres:  “Ecce ego cognovi ea “.","עתה נבראו ולא מאז ולפני יום ולא שמעתם פן תאמר הנה ידעתין׃"],["29","48","8","너는 듣지도 못하였고 알지도 못하였다. 예로부터 네 귀가 열리지 않았으니 네가 배신만 하고 모태에서부터 반역자라 불릴 것임을 내가 알았기 때문이다.","듣지도 못하였으니 어찌 알겠느냐? 처음부터 나는 너희 귀를 열어주지 않았다. 너희가 괘씸한 배신자라는 것, 날 때부터 반역자라 불리어 마땅하다는 것을 나는 잘 알고 있었다.","네가 과연 듣지도 못하였고 알지도 못하였으며 네 귀가 옛적부터 열리지 못하였나니 이는 네가 정녕 배신하여 모태에서부터 네가 배역한 자라 불린 줄을 내가 알았음이라","네가 과연 듣지도 못하였고 알지도 못하였으며 네 귀가 옛적부터 열리지 못하였었나니 이는 네가 궤휼하고 궤휼하여 모태에서부터 패역한 자라 칭함을 입은 줄을 내가 알았음이라","과연 너희는 듣지도 못하고 알지도 못하였다. 오히려 너희는 옛날부터 귀를 열고 들으려고도 하지 않았다. 너희가 의리도 없이 배반도 잘하는 줄 내가 이미 알고 있었다. 너희는 처음부터 내게 대항하며 반역하는 백성으로 소문이 나 있었다.","You never heard, you never knew, they never reached your ears beforehand. Yes, I know you are utterly treacherous, a rebel you were named from the womb.","Yea, thou heardest not; yea, thou knewest not; yea, from that time that thine ear was not opened: for I knew that thou wouldest deal very treacherously, and wast called a transgressor from the womb.","You have neither heard nor understood; from of old your ear has not been open. Well do I know how treacherous you are; you were called a rebel from birth.","Neque audisti neque cognovisti, neque ex tunc aperta est auris tua; scio enim quia praevaricans praevaricaris et transgressor ex utero vocaris.","גם לא שמעת גם לא ידעת גם מאז לא פתחה אזנך כי ידעתי בגוד תבגוד ופשע מבטן קרא לך׃"],["29","48","9","나는 내 이름 때문에 노여움을 참고 내 명예 때문에 너에 대한 분노를 억눌러 너를 멸망시키지 않는다.","나는 나의 이름을 위하여 노여움을 참았고 나의 영광을 위하여 분노를 억제하였으며 너희를 멸하지 아니하였다.","내 이름을 위하여 내가 노하기를 더디 할 것이며 내 영광을 위하여 내가 참고 너를 멸절하지 아니하리라","내 이름을 위하여 내가 노하기를 더디 할 것이며 내 영예를 위하여 내가 참고 너를 멸절하지 아니하리라","내가 광야에서도 화가 나서 너희를 멸망시키고 싶었으나 나의 이름 때문에 오래 참았고 여기 바벨론에서도 나의 영광때문에 너희를 소멸시키지 않고 나의 분노를 억제하였다.","For the sake of my name I restrain my anger, for the sake of my renown I hold it back from you, lest I destroy you.","For my name's sake will I defer mine anger, and for my praise will I refrain for thee, that I cut thee not off.","For my own name's sake I delay my wrath; for the sake of my praise I hold it back from you, so as not to cut you off.","Propter nomen meum longe faciam furorem meum et propter laudem meam infrenabo me super te, ne perdam te.","למען שמי אאריך אפי ותהלתי אחטם לך לבלתי הכריתך׃"],["29","48","10","보라, 나는 너를 단련시켰으나 은을 녹이듯 하지는 않고 고난의 도가니 속에서 너를 시험하였다.","나는 너희를 은처럼 불 속에서 녹여내고 고생의 도가니 속에서 너희를 단련시켰다.","보라 내가 너를 연단하였으나 은처럼 하지 아니하고 너를 고난의 풀무 불에서 택하였노라","보라 내가 너를 연단하였으나 은처럼 하지 아니하고 너를 고난의 1)풀무에서 택하였노라 풀무로 시련하였노라","내가 너희에게 형벌을 내렸으나 다만 너희가 정신을 차리라고 그랬을 뿐이다. 나는 너희를 고난의 풀무 속에 집어 넣어서 마치 용광로에서 은을 정화시키듯이 너희를 정화시켰다.","See, I refined you, but not like silver; I tested you in the furnace of affliction.","Behold, I have refined thee, but not with silver; I have chosen thee in the furnace of affliction.","See, I have refined you, though not as silver; I have tested you in the furnace of affliction.","Ecce excoxi te, sed non quasi argentum; probavi te in camino paupertatis.","הנה צרפתיך ולא בכסף בחרתיך בכור עני׃"],["29","48","11","나 자신 때문에, 나 자신 때문에 내가 이 일을 하는데 어찌 내 이름이 더럽혀질 수 있겠느냐? 나는 내 영광을 남에게 넘겨주지 않는다.","내가 이렇게 한 것은 오로지 나 스스로를 위하는 마음에서였다. 어찌 나의 이름에 욕이 돌아오게 버려두랴? 어찌 나의 영광을 남에게 넘겨주랴?","나는 나를 위하며 나를 위하여 이를 이룰 것이라 어찌 내 이름을 욕되게 하리요 내 영광을 다른 자에게 주지 아니하리라","내가 나를 위하며 내가 나를 위하여 이를 이룰 것이라 어찌 내 이름을 욕되게 하리요 내 영광을 다른 자에게 주지 아니하리라","너희가 귀중하기 때문이 아니라 오직 나 자신의 영광 때문에 내가 너희를 해방시킬 것이다. 더 이상 내 이름이 세상에서 모욕을 당하지 않도록 하겠다. 어느 누구도 나의 영광을 빼앗지 못하도록 하겠다.\"","For my sake, for my own sake, I do this; why should my name be profaned? My glory I will not give to another.","For mine own sake, even for mine own sake, will I do it: for how should my name be polluted? and I will not give my glory unto another.","For my own sake, for my own sake, I do this. How can I let myself be defamed? I will not yield my glory to another.","Propter me, propter me faciam, ut non blasphemer; et gloriam meam alteri non dabo.","למעני למעני אעשה כי איך יחל וכבודי לאחר לא אתן׃"],["29","48","12","내 말을 들어라, 야곱아 나의 부름을 받은 이스라엘아. 내가 바로 그분이다. 나는 처음이며 나는 마지막이다.","내 말을 들어라. 야곱아! 내가 불러 세운 이스라엘아! 나는 한결같다. 1)내가 시작이요, 내가 마감이다. \"시작하는 것도 나요, 마감하는 것도 나다.\"라고 옮길 수도 있다.","야곱아 내가 부른 이스라엘아 내게 들으라 나는 그니 나는 처음이요 또 나는 마지막이라","야곱아 나의 부른 이스라엘아 나를 들으라 나는 그니 나는 처음이요 또 마지막이라","천지를 지으신 주께서 말씀하셨다. \"나를 섬기는 백성으로 내가 불러 세운 이스라엘아, 똑똑히 들어라! 나는 언제나 똑같은 하나님이다. 나는 처음과 마지막이다.","Listen to me, Jacob, Israel, whom I called! I, it is I who am the first, and am I the last.","Hearken unto me, O Jacob and Israel, my called; I am he; I am the first, I also am the last.","\"Listen to me, O Jacob, Israel, whom I have called: I am he; I am the first and I am the last.","Audi me, Iacob, et Israel, quem ego vocavi; ego, ego primus et ego novissimus.","שמע אלי יעקב וישראל מקראי אני הוא אני ראשון אף אני אחרון׃"],["29","48","13","내 손이 땅의 기초를 놓았고 내 오른손이 하늘을 펼쳤다. 내가 그들을 부르면 다 함께 일어선다.","이 손으로 땅의 기초를 놓았다. 이 오른손으로 하늘을 펼쳤다. 내가 부르면 나와 서지 않을 자 없다.","과연 내 손이 땅의 기초를 정하였고 내 오른손이 하늘을 폈나니 내가 그들을 부르면 그것들이 일제히 서느니라","과연 내 손이 땅의 기초를 정하였고 내 오른손이 하늘을 폈나니 내가 부르면 천지가 일제히 서느니라","내가 이 손으로 땅을 튼튼한 바탕 위에 세워 놓았고 나의 오른손으로 하늘을 천막처럼 펼쳐 놓았다. 내가 말 한마디만 선포하면 천지의 만물이 그대로 이루어졌다.","Yes, my hand laid the foundations of the earth; my right hand spread out the heavens. When I summon them, they stand forth at once.","Mine hand also hath laid the foundation of the earth, and my right hand hath spanned the heavens: when I call unto them, they stand up together.","My own hand laid the foundations of the earth, and my right hand spread out the heavens; when I summon them, they all stand up together.","Manus mea fundavit terram, et dextera mea expandit caelos; ego voco eos, et stant simul.","אף ידי יסדה ארץ וימיני טפחה שמים קרא אני אליהם יעמדו יחדו׃"],["29","48","14","너희 모두 모여 와 들어 보아라. 그들 가운데 누가 이 일들을 알려 주었느냐? 주님께서는 그를 사랑하시니 그가 바빌론을 거슬러, 칼데아 족속을 거슬러 그분의 뜻을 실행하리라.","모두들 모여와 내 말을 들어라. '나의 친구가 나의 뜻을 이루어 바빌론과 갈대아를 짓부수리라.' 그들 가운데 누가 이 일을 미리 알려주었더냐?","너희는 다 모여 들으라 나 여호와가 사랑하는 자는 나의 기뻐하는 뜻을 바벨론에 행하리니 그의 팔이 갈대아인에게 임할 것이라 그들 중에 누가 이 일들을 알게 하였느냐","너희는 다 모여 들으라 나 여호와의 사랑하는 자가 나의 뜻을 바벨론에 행하리니 그의 팔이 갈대아인에게 임할 것이라 그들 중에 누가 이 일을 예언하였느뇨","너희는 모두 내게로 와서 똑똑히 들어라! 내가 사랑하는 사람이 일어나서 내가 계획한 일을 바벨론에 행하고 갈대아 주민들에게 나의 권능을 보여 줄 것이다. 이런 일을 너희에게 이미 알려 준 신이 있었느냐? 나밖에 누가 있었느냐?","All of you assemble and listen: Who among you declared these things? The one the LORD loves shall do his will against Babylon and the offspring of Chaldea.","All ye, assemble yourselves, and hear; which among them hath declared these things? The LORD hath loved him: he will do his pleasure on Babylon, and his arm shall be on the Chaldeans.","\"Come together, all of you, and listen: Which of the idols has foretold these things? The LORD'S chosen ally will carry out his purpose against Babylon; his arm will be against the Babylonians.","Congregamini, omnes vos, et audite: Quis de eis annuntiavit haec? Dominus dilexit eum; faciet voluntatem suam in Babylone et brachium suum in Chaldaeis.","הקבצו כלכם ושמעו מי בהם הגיד את אלה יהוה אהבו יעשה חפצו בבבל וזרעו כשדים׃"],["29","48","15","내가, 바로 내가 그것을 이야기하고 그를 불렀으며 그를 오게 하였으니 그는 제 길을 성공으로 이끌리라.","나다, 내가 바로 그에게 이런 명령을 내렸다. 그를 불러온 것도 바로 나다. 그를 이끌어들이고 앞길을 터준 것도 나다.","나 곧 내가 말하였고 또 내가 그를 부르며 그를 인도하였나니 그 길이 형통하리라","나 곧 내가 말하였고 또 내가 그를 부르며 그를 인도하였나니 그 길이 형통하리라","바로 나만이 그 일을 예고하였고 그에게 그 임무를 맡긴 이도 바로 나였다. 고레스를 안샨의 외진 곳에서 바벨론으로 불러온 이가 바로 나이며 그가 가는 곳마다 싸워서 이기게 한 이도 바로 나이다.","I myself have spoken, I have summoned him, I have brought him, and his way succeeds!","I, even I, have spoken; yea, I have called him: I have brought him, and he shall make his way prosperous.","I, even I, have spoken; yes, I have called him. I will bring him, and he will succeed in his mission.","Ego, ego locutus sum et vocavi eum; adduxi eum, et prospera fuit via eius.","אני אני דברתי אף קראתיו הביאתיו והצליח דרכו׃"],["29","48","16","너희는 나에게 다가와 이 말을 들어라. 처음부터 나는 숨어서 이야기하지 않았고 이 일이 생길 때부터 나는 거기에 있었다. 이제 주 하느님께서는 나와 함께 당신의 영을 보내셨다.","이리로 가까이 와서 내 말을 들어라. 처음부터 나는 숨어서 수군거리지 않았다. 이 모든 일이 이루어질 때, 바로 현장에 나는 있었다.\" 이제 주 야훼께서 당신의 영을 주시어 나를 보내신다.","너희는 내게 가까이 나아와 이것을 들으라 내가 처음부터 비밀히 말하지 아니하였나니 그것이 있을 때부터 내가 거기에 있었노라 하셨느니라 이제는 주 여호와께서 나와 그의 영을 보내셨느니라","너희는 내게 가까이 나아와 이 말을 들으라 내가 처음부터 그것을 비밀히 말하지 아니하였나니 그 말이 있을 때부터 내가 거기 있었노라 하셨느니라 이제는 주 여호와께서 나와 그 신을 보내셨느니라","너희는 내게로 가까이 와서 내가 하는 말을 똑똑히 들어라! 나는 맨 처음부터 은밀하게 말하지 않고 공공연히 예고해 주었다. 이제 그 일이 그대로 이루어지면, 나의 권능이 증명될 것이다.\" 그래서 이제 주 여호와께서 나 고레스를 보내어 그 일들을 이루게 하시고 나에게 주님의 영을 주셔서 그의 권능을 행사하게 하셨다.","Come near to me and hear this! From the beginning I did not speak in secret; At the time it happens, I am there: “Now the Lord GOD has sent me, and his spirit.”","Come ye near unto me, hear ye this; I have not spoken in secret from the beginning; from the time that it was, there am I: and now the Lord GOD, and his Spirit, hath sent me.","\"Come near me and listen to this: \"From the first announcement I have not spoken in secret; at the time it happens, I am there.\" And now the Sovereign LORD has sent me, with his Spirit.","Accedite ad me et audite hoc: Non a principio in abscondito locutus sum; ex tempore, antequam fieret, ibi eram; et nunc Dominus Deus misit me cum spiritu suo.","קרבו אלי שמעו זאת לא מראש בסתר דברתי מעת היותה שם אני ועתה אדני יהוה שלחני ורוחו׃"],["29","48","17","이스라엘의 거룩하신 분 너의 구원자이신 주님께서 이렇게 말씀하신다. “나는 주 너의 하느님 너에게 유익하도록 너를 가르치고 네가 가야 할 길로 너를 인도하는 이다.","너를 구원하시는 야훼, 이스라엘의 거룩하신 이께서 말씀하신다. \"나 야훼가 너의 하느님이다. 네가 잘되도록 가르치는 너의 스승이요, 네가 걸어야 할 길로 인도하는 너의 길잡이다.","너희의 구속자시요 이스라엘의 거룩하신 이이신 여호와께서 이르시되 나는 네게 유익하도록 가르치고 너를 마땅히 행할 길로 인도하는 네 하나님 여호와라","너희의 구속자시요 이스라엘의 거룩하신 자이신 여호와께서 가라사대 나는 네게 유익하도록 가르치고 너를 마땅히 행할 길로 인도하는 너희 하나님 여호와라","이스라엘의 거룩하신 하나님, 너희의 해방주 여호와께서 말씀하셨다. \"너희의 하나님 나 여호와가 너희에게 유익한 것을 가르치고 너희가 어떻게 살아야 옳은가를 가르쳐 주겠다. 나의 가르침은 모두 너희에게 유익한 것이다.","Thus says the LORD, your redeemer, the Holy One of Israel: I am the LORD, your God, teaching you how to prevail, leading you on the way you should go.","Thus saith the LORD, thy Redeemer, the Holy One of Israel; I am the LORD thy God which teacheth thee to profit, which leadeth thee by the way that thou shouldest go.","This is what the LORD says--your Redeemer, the Holy One of Israel: \"I am the LORD your God, who teaches you what is best for you, who directs you in the way you should go.","Haec dicit Dominus, redemptor tuus, Sanctus Israel: Ego Dominus Deus tuus docens te utilia, gubernans te in via, qua ambulas.","כה אמר יהוה גאלך קדוש ישראל אני יהוה אלהיך מלמדך להועיל מדריכך בדרך תלך׃"],["29","48","18","아, 네가 내 계명들에 주의를 기울였다면 너의 평화가 강물처럼, 너의 의로움이 바다 물결처럼 넘실거렸을 것을.","네가 만일 나의 명령을 마음에 두었더라면 너의 평화는 강물처럼 넘쳐흐르고, 너의 정의는 바다 물결처럼 넘실거렸으리라.","네가 나의 명령에 주의하였더라면 네 평강이 강과 같았겠고 네 공의가 바다 물결 같았을 것이며","슬프다 네가 나의 명령을 듣지 아니하였도다 만일 들었더면 네 평강이 강과 같았겠고 네 의가 바다 물결 같았을 것이며","그러므로 너희가 내 모든 명령에 순종하기만 하면 얼마나 좋으랴! 그러면 너희가 평화와 번영을 누리고 부족한 것이 전혀 없으련만. 너희가 도도히 흘러 가는 강물처럼 번영하고 무슨 일을 하든 바다의 파도처럼 승리하리라.","If only you would attend to my commandments, your peace would be like a river, your vindication like the waves of the sea,","O that thou hadst hearkened to my commandments! then had thy peace been as a river, and thy righteousness as the waves of the sea:","If only you had paid attention to my commands, your peace would have been like a river, your righteousness like the waves of the sea.","Utinam attendisses mandata mea! Facta fuisset sicut flumen pax tua, et iustitia tua sicut gurgites maris;","לוא הקשבת למצותי ויהי כנהר שלומך וצדקתך כגלי הים׃"],["29","48","19","네 후손들이 모래처럼, 네 몸의 소생들이 모래알처럼 많았을 것을. 그들의 이름이 내 앞에서 끊어지지도 없어지지도 않았을 것을.”","너의 후예는 모래 벌판과 같고 너의 소생들은 모래알만큼 많아졌으리라. 네 이름이 내 앞에서 꺼지지도, 없어지지도 아니하였으리라.\"","네 자손이 모래 같았겠고 네 몸의 소생이 모래 알 같아서 그의 이름이 내 앞에서 끊어지지 아니하였겠고 없어지지 아니하였으리라 하셨느니라","네 자손이 모래 같았겠고 네 몸의 소생이 모래 알갱이 같아서 그 이름이 내 앞에서 끊어지지 아니하였겠고 없어지지 아니하였으리라 하셨느니라","그러면 너희의 자손들도 해변의 모래알처럼 많아지고 내가 절대로 그들에게서 떠나지 않고 그들을 멸망시키는 원수들의 손에 넘겨 주지도 않을 것이다.\"","Your descendants like the sand, the offspring of your loins like its grains, Their name never cut off or blotted out from my presence.","Thy seed also had been as the sand, and the offspring of thy bowels like the gravel thereof; his name should not have been cut off nor destroyed from before me.","Your descendants would have been like the sand, your children like its numberless grains; their name would never be cut off nor destroyed from before me.\"","et fuisset quasi arena semen tuum, et stirps uteri tui ut lapilli eius; non interisset et non fuisset attritum nomen eius a facie mea.","ויהי כחול זרעך וצאצאי מעיך כמעתיו לא יכרת ולא ישמד שמו מלפני׃"],["29","48","20","너희는 바빌론에서 나와라. 칼데아인들에게서 도망쳐라. 환호 소리 올리며 이 일을 알리고 전하여라. 땅 끝까지 퍼뜨려라. “주님께서 당신 종 야곱을 구원하셨다.” 하여라.","바빌론에서 빠져 나오너라. 갈대아 사람들을 뿌리치고 도망쳐라. 기쁜 소식을 전하여라, 선포하여라. 세상 끝까지 퍼뜨려라. \"야훼께서 당신의 종 야곱을 구원하신다.\"","너희는 바벨론에서 나와서 갈대아인을 피하고 즐거운 소리로 이를 알게 하여 들려 주며 땅 끝까지 반포하여 이르기를 여호와께서 그의 종 야곱을 구속하셨다 하라","너희는 바벨론에서 나와서 갈대아인을 피하고 즐거운 소리로 이를 선파하여 들리며 땅 끝까지 반포하여 이르기를 여호와께서 그 종 야곱을 구속하셨다 하라","나의 동족인 이스라엘 백성아, 너희는 바벨론의 종살이에서 벗어나라! 그 땅에서 탈출하여라! 너희는 기뻐 뛰며 즐거워하고 그 소식을 땅 끝까지 온 세상에 전하여라. \"여호와께서 자기 백성을 건져 주셨다. 야곱의 후손들을 해방시켜 주셨다!\"","Go forth from Babylon, flee from Chaldea! With shouts of joy declare this, announce it; Make it known to the ends of the earth, Say: “The LORD has redeemed his servant Jacob.","Go ye forth of Babylon, flee ye from the Chaldeans, with a voice of singing declare ye, tell this, utter it even to the end of the earth; say ye, The LORD hath redeemed his servant Jacob.","Leave Babylon, flee from the Babylonians! Announce this with shouts of joy and proclaim it. Send it out to the ends of the earth; say, \"The LORD has redeemed his servant Jacob.\"","Egredimini de Babylone, fugite a Chaldaeis, in voce exsultationis annuntiate; auditum facite hoc, efferte illud usque ad extrema terrae, dicite:  “Redemit Dominus servum suum Iacob “.","צאו מבבל ברחו מכשדים בקול רנה הגידו השמיעו זאת הוציאוה עד קצה הארץ אמרו גאל יהוה עבדו יעקב׃"],["29","48","21","그분께서 그들을 사막으로 인도하셨지만 그들은 목마르지 않았다. 그분께서는 그들을 위하여 바위에서 물이 솟게 하셨다. 그분께서 바위를 가르시자 물이 쏟아져 나왔다.","사람들은 그를 따라 사막을 지나가면서도 목마르지 아니하였다. 그가 그들을 위하여 바위에서 샘이 솟게 해주셨다. 바위를 쪼개시니 물이 터져 나왔다.","여호와께서 그들을 사막으로 통과하게 하시던 때에 그들이 목마르지 아니하게 하시되 그들을 위하여 바위에서 물이 흘러나게 하시며 바위를 쪼개사 물이 솟아나게 하셨느니라","여호와께서 그들을 사막으로 통과하게 하시던 때에 그들로 목마르지 않게 하시되 그들을 위하여 바위에서 물이 흘러나게 하시며 바위를 쪼개사 물로 솟아나게 하셨느니라","주께서 옛날에 이스라엘 백성을 광야로 인도하실 때 그들이 목말라 죽지 않았다. 주께서 바위를 갈라 물이 흘러 나오게 하셔서 항상 마실 물을 그들에게 주셨기 때문이다.","They did not thirst when he led them through dry lands; Water from the rock he set flowing for them; he cleft the rock, and waters welled forth.”","And they thirsted not when he led them through the deserts: he caused the waters to flow out of the rock for them: he clave the rock also, and the waters gushed out.","They did not thirst when he led them through the deserts; he made water flow for them from the rock; he split the rock and water gushed out.","Non sitierunt, cum per desertum duceret eos; aquam de petra produxit eis et scidit petram, et fluxerunt aquae.","ולא צמאו בחרבות הוליכם מים מצור הזיל למו ויבקע צור ויזבו מים׃"],["29","48","22","주님께서 말씀하신다. “악인들에게는 평화가 없다.”","야훼께서 불의한 자에게 이르신다 \"잘되려니 생각 마라.\"","여호와께서 말씀하시되 악인에게는 평강이 없다 하셨느니라","여호와께서 말씀하시되 악인에게는 평강이 없다 하셨느니라","그러므로 여호와께서 이렇게 말씀하셨다. \"누구든지 나에게 반역하는 악인들은 평안을 누리지 못하고 멸망할 것이다.\"","There is no peace for the wicked, says the LORD.","There is no peace, saith the LORD, unto the wicked.","\"There is no peace,\" says the LORD, \"for the wicked.\"","Non est pax impiis, dicit Dominus.","אין שלום אמר יהוה לרשעים׃"],["29","49","1","섬들아, 내 말을 들어라. 먼 곳에 사는 민족들아, 귀를 기울여라. 주님께서 나를 모태에서부터 부르시고 어머니 배 속에서부터 내 이름을 지어 주셨다.","바닷가에 사는 주민들아, 내 말을 들어라. 먼 곳에 사는 부족들아, 정신차려 들어라. 야훼께서 태중에 있는 나를 이미 부르셨고 내가 어머니의 뱃속에 있을 때에 이미 이름을 지어주셨다.","섬들아 내게 들으라 먼 곳 백성들아 귀를 기울이라 여호와께서 태에서부터 나를 부르셨고 내 어머니의 복중에서부터 내 이름을 기억하셨으며","섬들아 나를 들으라 원방 백성들아 귀를 기울이라 여호와께서 내가 태에서 나옴으로부터 나를 부르셨고 내가 어미 복중에서 나옴으로부터 내 이름을 말씀하셨으며","예언자가 바벨론에서 시온에 있는 동포들에게 전하였다. \"먼 해변과 섬들의 주민들에 이르기까지 온 세상의 만민들아, 이 말을 똑똑히 들어라! 내 어머니의 몸 속에 있을 때에 이미 여호와께서 나를 주님의 종으로 선택하여 예언자의 직책을 맡겨 주셨다.","Hear me, coastlands, listen, distant peoples. Before birth the LORD called me, from my mother’s womb he gave me my name.","Listen, O isles, unto me; and hearken, ye people, from far; The LORD hath called me from the womb; from the bowels of my mother hath he made mention of my name.","Listen to me, you islands; hear this, you distant nations: Before I was born the LORD called me; from my birth he has made mention of my name.","Audite me, insulae, et attendite, populi de longe; Dominus ab utero vocavit me, de ventre matris meae recordatus est nominis mei;","שמעו איים אלי והקשיבו לאמים מרחוק יהוה מבטן קראני ממעי אמי הזכיר שמי׃"],["29","49","2","그분께서 내 입을 날카로운 칼처럼 만드시고 당신의 손 그늘에 나를 숨겨 주셨다. 나를 날카로운 화살처럼 만드시어 당신의 화살 통 속에 감추셨다.","내 입을 칼처럼 날세우셨고 당신의 손 그늘에 나를 숨겨주셨다. 날카로운 화살처럼 나를 벼리시어 당신의 화살통에 꽂아두시고","내 입을 날카로운 칼 같이 만드시고 나를 그의 손 그늘에 숨기시며 나를 갈고 닦은 화살로 만드사 그의 화살통에 감추시고","내 입을 날카로운 칼 같이 만드시고 나를 그 손 그늘에 숨기시며 나로 마광한 살을 만드사 그 전통에 감추시고","주께서 내 머리 위로 손을 펴서 항상 나를 보호해 주신다. 그리고 항상 필요할 때마다 주께서 내 입에 칼처럼 날카로운 말씀을 넣어 주시고 또 나를 먼 곳의 표적에까지 명중시키는 화살로 만들어 주의 화살통에 숨겨 놓으셨다.","He made my mouth like a sharp-edged sword, concealed me, shielded by his hand. He made me a sharpened arrow, in his quiver he hid me.","And he hath made my mouth like a sharp sword; in the shadow of his hand hath he hid me, and made me a polished shaft; in his quiver hath he hid me;","He made my mouth like a sharpened sword, in the shadow of his hand he hid me; he made me into a polished arrow and concealed me in his quiver.","et posuit os meum quasi gladium acutum, in umbra manus suae protexit me et posuit me sicut sagittam electam, in pharetra sua abscondit me","וישם פי כחרב חדה בצל ידו החביאני וישימני לחץ ברור באשפתו הסתירני׃"],["29","49","3","그분께서 나에게 말씀하셨다. “너는 나의 종이다. 이스라엘아, 너에게서 내 영광이 드러나리라.”","나에게 말씀하셨다. \"너는 나의 종, 너에게서 나의 영광이 빛나리라.\"","내게 이르시되 너는 나의 종이요 내 영광을 네 속에 나타낼 이스라엘이라 하셨느니라","내게 이르시되 너는 나의 종이요 내 영광을 나타낼 이스라엘이라 하셨느니라","주께서 나를 예언자로 세우시면서 \"네가 나의 종이다! 내 일을 네게 맡겼으니, 내가 네게서 나의 영광을 드러내겠다!\" 하고 말씀하셨다. 그러므로 주님의 종이 된 백성 이스라엘이 결국 세계 만방에서 주님의 영광을 드러낼 것이다.","He said to me, You are my servant, in you, Israel, I show my glory.","And said unto me, Thou art my servant, O Israel, in whom I will be glorified.","He said to me, \"You are my servant, Israel, in whom I will display my splendor.\"","et dixit mihi:  “Servus meus es tu, Israel, in quo gloriabor “.","ויאמר לי עבדי אתה ישראל אשר בך אתפאר׃"],["29","49","4","그러나 나는 말하였다. “나는 쓸데없이 고생만 하였다. 허무하고 허망한 것에 내 힘을 다 써 버렸다. 그러나 내 권리는 나의 주님께 있고 내 보상은 나의 하느님께 있다.”","그러나 나는 생각하였다. \"나는 헛수고만 하였다. 공연히 힘만 빼었다.\" 그런데도 야훼만은 나를 바로 알아주시고 나의 하느님만은 나의 품삯을 셈해 주신다.","그러나 나는 말하기를 내가 헛되이 수고하였으며 무익하게 공연히 내 힘을 다하였다 하였도다 참으로 나에 대한 판단이 여호와께 있고 나의 보응이 나의 하나님께 있느니라","그러나 나는 말하기를 내가 헛되이 수고하였으며 무익히 공연히 내 힘을 다하였다 하였도다 정녕히 나의 신원이 여호와께 있고 나의 보응이 나의 하나님께 있느니라","그런데도 나는 전에 이런 탄식을 하였다. \"내가 헛수고만 하였다. 내가 있는 힘을 다 쏟았으나 얻은 것은 하나도 없다!\" 그러나 주께서 내 억울한 사정을 풀어 주셨고, 나의 수고에 대하여 갚아 주셨다.","Though I thought I had toiled in vain, for nothing and for naught spent my strength, Yet my right is with the LORD, my recompense is with my God.","Then I said, I have laboured in vain, I have spent my strength for nought, and in vain: yet surely my judgment is with the LORD, and my work with my God.","But I said, \"I have labored to no purpose; I have spent my strength in vain and for nothing. Yet what is due me is in the LORD'S hand, and my reward is with my God.\"","Et ego dixi:  “In vacuum laboravi, sine causa et vane fortitudinem meam consumpsi; verumtamen iudicium meum cum Domino, et merces mea cum Deo meo “.","ואני אמרתי לריק יגעתי לתהו והבל כחי כליתי אכן משפטי את יהוה ופעלתי את אלהי׃"],["29","49","5","이제 주님께서 말씀하신다. 그분께서는 야곱을 당신께 돌아오게 하시고 이스라엘이 당신께 모여들게 하시려고 나를 모태에서부터 당신 종으로 빚어 만드셨다. 나는 주님의 눈에 소중하게 여겨졌고 나의 하느님께서 나의 힘이 되어 주셨다.","야훼께서 나를 지극히 귀하게 보시고 나의 하느님께서 나의 힘이 되어주신다. 야곱을 당신께로 돌아오게 하시려고 이스라엘을 당신께로 모여들게 하시려고 나를 태중에 지어 당신의 종으로 삼으신 야훼께서 이제 말씀하신다.","이제 여호와께서 말씀하시나니 그는 태에서부터 나를 그의 종으로 지으신 이시요 야곱을 그에게로 돌아오게 하시는 이시니 이스라엘이 그에게로 모이는도다 그러므로 내가 여호와 보시기에 영화롭게 되었으며 나의 하나님은 나의 힘이 되셨도다","나는 여호와의 보시기에 존귀한 자라 나의 하나님이 나의 힘이 되셨도다 다시 야곱을 자기에게로 돌아오게 하시며 이스라엘을 자기에게로 모이게 하시려고 나를 태에서 나옴으로부터 자기 종을 삼으신 여호와께서 말씀하시니라","이미 나를 모태에서부터 선택하여 종으로 삼으시고 야곱의 후손인 이스라엘 백성을 모아서 주께로 데려오게 하시고 나를 존귀하게 높여 주시며 권능을 주신 여호와께서 이제는 나에게 이와 같이 말씀하셨다.","For now the LORD has spoken who formed me as his servant from the womb, That Jacob may be brought back to him and Israel gathered to him; I am honored in the sight of the LORD, and my God is now my strength!","And now, saith the LORD that formed me from the womb to be his servant, to bring Jacob again to him, Though Israel be not gathered, yet shall I be glorious in the eyes of the LORD, and my God shall be my strength.","And now the LORD says--he who formed me in the womb to be his servant to bring Jacob back to him and gather Israel to himself, for I am honored in the eyes of the LORD and my God has been my strength--","Et nunc dicit Dominus, qui formavit me ex utero servum sibi, ut reducerem Iacob ad eum, et Israel ei congregaretur; et glorificatus sum in oculis Domini, et Deus meus factus est fortitudo mea.","ועתה אמר יהוה יצרי מבטן לעבד לו לשובב יעקב אליו וישראל לא יאסף ואכבד בעיני יהוה ואלהי היה עזי׃"],["29","49","6","그분께서 말씀하신다. “네가 나의 종이 되어 야곱의 지파들을 다시 일으키고 이스라엘의 생존자들을 돌아오게 하는 것만으로는 충분하지 않다. 나의 구원이 땅 끝까지 다다르도록 나는 너를 민족들의 빛으로 세운다.”","\"네가 나의 종으로서 할 일은 야곱의 지파들을 다시 일으키고 살아 남은 이스라엘 사람을 돌아오게 하는 것으로 그치지 않는다. 나는 너를 만국의 빛으로 세운다. 너는 땅 끝까지 나의 구원이 이르게 하여라.\"","그가 이르시되 네가 나의 종이 되어 야곱의 지파들을 일으키며 이스라엘 중에 보전된 자를 돌아오게 할 것은 매우 쉬운 일이라 내가 또 너를 이방의 빛으로 삼아 나의 구원을 베풀어서 땅 끝까지 이르게 하리라","그가 가라사대 네가 나의 종이 되어 야곱의 지파들을 일으키며 이스라엘 중에 보전된 자를 돌아오게 할 것은 오히려 경한 일이라 내가 또 너로 이방의 빛을 삼아 나의 구원을 베풀어서 땅 끝까지 이르게 하리라","\"내가 네게 맡겨 준 일은 이스라엘 지파들을 다시 회복시키고 야곱의 후손들 가운데서 살아남은 이들을 모두 고향 땅으로 데려오는 것만이 아니다. 나는 너를 세계 만민의 빛으로 세워서 온 세상의 어둠과 혼란을 없애고 땅끝까지 이르는 세계 만민이 너를 통하여 나의 구원과 해방이 무엇인지 분명히 알게 하겠다.\"","It is too little, he says, for you to be my servant, to raise up the tribes of Jacob, and restore the survivors of Israel; I will make you a light to the nations, that my salvation may reach to the ends of the earth.","And he said, It is a light thing that thou shouldest be my servant to raise up the tribes of Jacob, and to restore the preserved of Israel: I will also give thee for a light to the Gentiles, that thou mayest be my salvation unto the end of the earth.","he says: \"It is too small a thing for you to be my servant to restore the tribes of Jacob and bring back those of Israel I have kept. I will also make you a light for the Gentiles, that you may bring my salvation to the ends of the earth.\"","Et dixit:  “Parum est ut sis mihi servus ad suscitandas tribus Iacob et reliquias Israel reducendas: dabo te in lucem gentium, ut sit salus mea usque ad extremum terrae “.","ויאמר נקל מהיותך לי עבד להקים את שבטי יעקב ונצירי ישראל להשיב ונתתיך לאור גוים להיות ישועתי עד קצה הארץ׃"],["29","49","7","이스라엘의 구원자, 그의 거룩하신 분 주님께서 심한 멸시를 받는 이, 민족들에게 경멸을 받는 이, 지배자들의 종이 된 이에게 말씀하신다. “임금들이 보고 일어서며 제후들이 땅에 엎드리리니 이는 신실한 주, 너를 선택한 이스라엘의 거룩한 분 때문이다.”","만국이 꺼려하여 가까이하지 아니하므로 지배자들의 기막힌 멸시를 받으며 종살이하는 너에게 이스라엘을 건지신 거룩한 이, 야훼께서 말씀하신다. 성실하신 야훼, 이스라엘의 거룩하신 이께서 너를 뽑아 세우셨다. 왕들은 네 앞에서 일어서고 수령들은 땅에 엎드리리라.","이스라엘의 구속자 이스라엘의 거룩한 이이신 여호와께서 사람에게 멸시를 당하는 자, 백성에게 미움을 받는 자, 관원들에게 종이 된 자에게 이같이 이르시되 왕들이 보고 일어서며 고관들이 경배하리니 이는 이스라엘의 거룩하신 이 신실하신 여호와 그가 너를 택하였음이니라","이스라엘의 구속자, 이스라엘의 거룩한 자이신 여호와께서 사람에게 멸시를 당하는 자, 백성에게 미움을 받는 자, 관원들에게 종이 된 자에게 이같이 이르시되 너를 보고 열왕이 일어서며 방백들이 경배하리니 이는 너를 택한바 신실한 나 여호와 이스라엘의 거룩한 자를 인함이니라","지금 바벨론에서 폭군들을 섬기며 모든 사람들에게 멸시와 천대를 받는 이스라엘 백성에게 그들의 구세주이신 거룩한 하나님 여호와께서 이렇게 말씀하셨다. \"네가 해방될 때에 세상의 왕들이 모두 바라보고 네 앞에서 일어설 것이다. 세상의 지배자들이 일어나 네게 경배할 것이다.\" 이스라엘을 선택하여 자기의 백성으로 삼으신 여호와께서 이스라엘의 거룩한 하나님으로서 언제나 약속을 지켜 주시기 때문에 이 모든 일이 그대로 이루어질 것이다.","Thus says the LORD, the redeemer, the Holy One of Israel, To the one despised, abhorred by the nations, the slave of rulers: When kings see you, they shall stand up, and princes shall bow down Because of the LORD who is faithful, the Holy One of Israel who has chosen you.","Thus saith the LORD, the Redeemer of Israel, and his Holy One, to him whom man despiseth, to him whom the nation abhorreth, to a servant of rulers, Kings shall see and arise, princes also shall worship, because of the LORD that is faithful, and the Holy One of Israel, and he shall choose thee.","This is what the LORD says--the Redeemer and Holy One of Israel--to him who was despised and abhorred by the nation, to the servant of rulers: \"Kings will see you and rise up, princes will see and bow down, because of the LORD, who is faithful, the Holy One of Israel, who has chosen you.\"","Haec dicit Dominus, redemptor Israel, Sanctus eius, ad contemptum in anima, ad abominatum in gente, ad servum dominorum:  “Reges videbunt et consurgent, principes quoque et adorabunt, propter Dominum, quia fidelis est, Sanctum Israel, qui elegit te “.","כה אמר יהוה גאל ישראל קדושו לבזה נפש למתעב גוי לעבד משלים מלכים יראו וקמו שרים וישתחוו למען יהוה אשר נאמן קדש ישראל ויבחרך׃"],["29","49","8","주님께서 이렇게 말씀하신다. 은혜의 때에 내가 너에게 응답하고 구원의 날에 내가 너를 도와주었다. 내가 너를 빚어내어 백성을 위한 계약으로 삼았으니 땅을 다시 일으키고 황폐해진 재산을 다시 나누어 주기 위함이며","야훼께서 말씀하신다. \"너의 소원을 기쁘게 들어줄 때가 온다. 너를 도와주고 구원해 줄 날이 온다. 그 날 내가 손수 빚은 너를 사이에 두고 나의 백성과 계약을 맺으리라. 그 날 너는 쑥밭이 되었던 유산을 되찾아 나라를 재건하여라.","여호와께서 이같이 이르시되 은혜의 때에 내가 네게 응답하였고 구원의 날에 내가 너를 도왔도다 내가 장차 너를 보호하여 너를 백성의 언약으로 삼으며 나라를 일으켜 그들에게 그 황무하였던 땅을 기업으로 상속하게 하리라","여호와께서 또 가라사대 은혜의 때에 내가 네게 응답하였고 구원의 날에 내가 너를 도왔도다 내가 장차 너를 보호하여 너로 백성의 언약을 삼으며 1)나라를 일으켜 그들로 그 황무하였던 땅을 기업으로 상속케 하리라 땅","여호와께서 이렇게 말씀하셨다. \"내가 너희를 불쌍히 여기는 때가 오면 너희가 부르짖는 소리를 내가 들어주겠다. 내가 너희를 해방시키는 그날이 오면 너희를 구원하겠다. 너희가 멸망하지 않도록 너희를 보호하겠다. 내가 너희를 보내어 세계 만민과 계약을 맺으려고 하기 때문이다. 그래서 내가 너희를 다시 고향 땅으로 보내 주겠다. 너희가 두고 온 땅을 되찾아 다시 나누어 가질 것이다.","Thus says the LORD: In a time of favor I answer you, on the day of salvation I help you; I form you and set you as a covenant for the people, To restore the land and allot the devastated heritages,","Thus saith the LORD, In an acceptable time have I heard thee, and in a day of salvation have I helped thee: and I will preserve thee, and give thee for a covenant of the people, to establish the earth, to cause to inherit the desolate heritages;","This is what the LORD says: \"In the time of my favor I will answer you, and in the day of salvation I will help you; I will keep you and will make you to be a covenant for the people, to restore the land and to reassign its desolate inheritances,","Haec dicit Dominus:  “In tempore beneplaciti exaudivi te et in die salutis auxiliatus sum tui; et servavi te et dedi te in foedus populi, ut suscitares terram et distribueres hereditates dissipatas;","כה אמר יהוה בעת רצון עניתיך וביום ישועה עזרתיך ואצרך ואתנך לברית עם להקים ארץ להנחיל נחלות שממות׃"],["29","49","9","갇힌 이들에게는 ‘나와라.’ 하고 어둠 속에 있는 이들에게는 ‘모습을 드러내어라.’ 하고 말하기 위함이다.” 그들은 가는 길마다 풀을 뜯고 민둥산마다 그들을 위한 초원이 있으리라.","감옥에 갇혀 있는 자들에게 일러라. '어서 나오너라.' 캄캄한 곳에 웅크리고 있는 자들에게 일러라. '나와 몸을 드러내어라.' 그들은 가는 길에서마다 풀을 뜯으리니 돌아가는 길가 어디든지 뜯을 풀이 있고 사는 곳에서마다 푸른 풀로 덮인 언덕을 만나리라.","내가 잡혀 있는 자에게 이르기를 나오라 하며 흑암에 있는 자에게 나타나라 하리라 그들이 길에서 먹겠고 모든 헐벗은 산에도 그들의 풀밭이 있을 것인즉","내가 잡혀 있는 자에게 이르기를 나오라 하며 흑암에 있는 자에게 나타나라 하리라 그들이 길에서 먹겠고 모든 자산에도 그들의 풀밭이 있을 것인즉","그때에는 바벨론의 포로민들에게 내가 해방을 선언하겠다. \"너희는 모두 감옥에서 나오너라!\" 캄캄한 곳에 숨어 사는 이들에게는 \"밝은 곳으로 나오너라!\" 하고 외치겠다. 너희가 바벨론에서 팔레스타인으로 돌아가는 광야의 길에서도 내가 언제나 너희를 돌보아주겠다. 내가 너희를 항상 보호하여 너희가 거친 황무지에서도 초원을 찾아 다니는 양 떼처럼 늘 배불리 먹도록 하겠다.","To say to the prisoners: Come out! To those in darkness: Show yourselves! Along the roadways they shall find pasture, on every barren height shall their pastures be.","That thou mayest say to the prisoners, Go forth; to them that are in darkness, Shew yourselves. They shall feed in the ways, and their pastures shall be in all high places.","to say to the captives, 'Come out,' and to those in darkness, 'Be free!' \"They will feed beside the roads and find pasture on every barren hill.","ut diceres his, qui vincti sunt:  “Exite “, et his, qui in tenebris:  “Revelamini “. Super vias pascentur, et in omnibus collibus decalvatis pascua eorum;","לאמר לאסורים צאו לאשר בחשך הגלו על דרכים ירעו ובכל שפיים מרעיתם׃"],["29","49","10","그들은 배고프지도 않고 목마르지도 않으며 열풍도 태양도 그들을 해치지 못하리니 그들을 가엾이 여기시는 분께서 그들을 이끄시며 샘터로 그들을 인도해 주시기 때문이다.","그들은 결코 배고프거나 목마르지 아니하리라. 열풍에 쓰러지고 햇볕에 넘어지는 일도 없으리라. 내가 그들을 가엾게 여겨 이끌어주고 샘이 솟는 곳으로 인도해 주리라.","그들이 주리거나 목마르지 아니할 것이며 더위와 볕이 그들을 상하지 아니하리니 이는 그들을 긍휼히 여기는 이가 그들을 이끌되 샘물 근원으로 인도할 것임이라","그들이 주리거나 목마르지 아니할 것이며 더위와 볕이 그들을 상하지 아니하리니 이는 그들을 긍휼히 여기는 자가 그들을 이끌되 샘물 근원으로 인도할 것임이니라","그래서 너희가 도중에 굶주림이나 목마름으로 고생하지도 않고 사막의 뜨거운 바람이나 뙤약볕 때문에 해를 입지도 않을 것이다. 내가 너희를 항상 불쌍히 여기고 시원한 샘터로 인도해 줄 것이기 때문이다.","They shall not hunger or thirst; nor shall scorching wind or sun strike them; For he who pities them leads them and guides them beside springs of water.","They shall not hunger nor thirst; neither shall the heat nor sun smite them: for he that hath mercy on them shall lead them, even by the springs of water shall he guide them.","They will neither hunger nor thirst, nor will the desert heat or the sun beat upon them. He who has compassion on them will guide them and lead them beside springs of water.","non esurient neque sitient, et non percutiet eos aestus vel sol, quia miserator eorum reget eos et ad fontes aquarum adducet eos.","לא ירעבו ולא יצמאו ולא יכם שרב ושמש כי מרחמם ינהגם ועל מבועי מים ינהלם׃"],["29","49","11","나는 나의 모든 산들을 길로 만들고 큰길들은 돋우어 주리라.","첩첩산중에 길을 닦고 굽이굽이 큰길을 돋우어주리라.","내가 나의 모든 산을 길로 삼고 나의 대로를 돋우리니","내가 나의 모든 산을 길로 삼고 나의 대로를 돋우리니","너희 갈 길을 가로막는 산들을 내가 모두 평평하게 허물어 버리겠다. 내가 깊은 골짜기들을 모두 메워서 탄탄대로를 뚫어 놓겠다.","I will turn all my mountains into roadway, and make my highways level.","And I will make all my mountains a way, and my highways shall be exalted.","I will turn all my mountains into roads, and my highways will be raised up.","Et ponam omnes montes meos in viam, et semitae meae exaltabuntur.","ושמתי כל הרי לדרך ומסלתי ירמון׃"],["29","49","12","보라, 이들이 먼 곳에서 온다. 보라, 이들이 북녘과 서녘에서 오며 또 시님족의 땅에서 온다.","먼 곳에서 돌아가는 이 사람들을 보아라. 북에서도 서에서도 돌아가고 시님족의 나라에서도 돌아간다.\"","어떤 사람은 먼 곳에서, 어떤 사람은 북쪽과 서쪽에서, 어떤 사람은 시님 땅에서 오리라","혹자는 원방에서, 혹자는 북방과 서방에서, 혹자는 시님 땅에서 오리라","바벨론의 포로민들만이 아니라 온 세상에 흩어진 내 백성이 멀리 세상의 사방에서 돌아오는 것을 보아라! 북쪽에서도 오고, 서쪽에서도 오고, 애굽 최남단의 시님 땅에서도 모두 내게로 돌아오는 것을 보아라!\"","See, these shall come from afar: some from the north and the west, others from the land of Syene.","Behold, these shall come from far: and, lo, these from the north and from the west; and these from the land of Sinim.","See, they will come from afar--some from the north, some from the west, some from the region of Aswan.\"","Ecce isti de longe venient, et ecce illi ab aquilone et mari, et isti de terra Sinim “.","הנה אלה מרחוק יבאו והנה אלה מצפון ומים ואלה מארץ סינים׃"],["29","49","13","하늘아, 환성을 올려라. 땅아, 기뻐 뛰어라. 산들아, 기뻐 소리쳐라. 주님께서 당신 백성을 위로하시고 당신의 가련한 이들을 가엾이 여기셨다.","하늘아, 환성을 올려라. 땅아, 기뻐 뛰어라. 산들아, 기뻐 소리를 질러라. 야훼께서 당신의 백성을 위로하시고 그 천대받는 자들을 극진히 사랑하셨다.","하늘이여 노래하라 땅이여 기뻐하라 산들이여 즐거이 노래하라 여호와께서 그의 백성을 위로하셨은즉 그의 고난 당한 자를 긍휼히 여기실 것임이라","하늘이여 노래하라 땅이여 기뻐하라 산들이여 즐거이 노래하라 여호와가 그 백성을 위로하였은즉 그 고난 당한 자를 긍휼히 여길 것임이니라","하늘아, 환호성을 질러라. 땅아, 기뻐 찬양하여라. 산들아, 기뻐 소리를 질러라! 보아라, 여호와께서 자기 백성을 해방시키시고 짓눌려 살던 자기 백성을 불쌍히 여겨 위로해 주셨다.","Sing out, heavens, and rejoice, earth, break forth into song, you mountains, For the LORD comforts his people and shows mercy to his afflicted.","Sing, O heavens; and be joyful, O earth; and break forth into singing, O mountains: for the LORD hath comforted his people, and will have mercy upon his afflicted.","Shout for joy, O heavens; rejoice, O earth; burst into song, O mountains! For the LORD comforts his people and will have compassion on his afflicted ones.","Laudate, caeli, et exsulta, terra; iubilate, montes, laudem, quia consolatur Dominus populum suum et pauperum suorum miseretur.","רנו שמים וגילי ארץ יפצחו הרים רנה כי נחם יהוה עמו ועניו ירחם׃"],["29","49","14","그런데 시온은 “주님께서 나를 버리셨다. 나의 주님께서 나를 잊으셨다.” 하고 말하였지.","\"'야훼께서 나를 버리셨다. 나의 주께서 나를 잊으셨다.'고 너 시온은 말하였었지.","오직 시온이 이르기를 여호와께서 나를 버리시며 주께서 나를 잊으셨다 하였거니와","오직 시온이 이르기를 여호와께서 나를 버리시며 주께서 나를 잊으셨다 하였거니와","바벨론 군대가 예루살렘을 멸망시키고 주민들을 포로로 잡아갔을 때에, 시온이 이렇게 탄식하였다. \"우리의 하나님 여호와께서 우리를 완전히 버리고 떠나셨으며 불쌍히 남아 있는 우리들까지 완전히 잊어버리셨다!\"","But Zion said, “The LORD has forsaken me; my Lord has forgotten me.”","But Zion said, The LORD hath forsaken me, and my Lord hath forgotten me.","But Zion said, \"The LORD has forsaken me, the Lord has forgotten me.\"","Et dixit Sion:  “Dereliquit me Dominus, et Dominus oblitus est mei “.","ותאמר ציון עזבני יהוה ואדני שכחני׃"],["29","49","15","여인이 제 젖먹이를 잊을 수 있느냐? 제 몸에서 난 아기를 가엾이 여기지 않을 수 있느냐? 설령 여인들은 잊는다 하더라도 나는 너를 잊지 않는다.","여인이 자기의 젖먹이를 어찌 잊으랴! 자기가 낳은 아이를 어찌 가엾게 여기지 않으랴! 어미는 혹시 잊을지 몰라도 나는 결코 너를 잊지 아니하리라.","여인이 어찌 그 젖 먹는 자식을 잊겠으며 자기 태에서 난 아들을 긍휼히 여기지 않겠느냐 그들은 혹시 잊을지라도 나는 너를 잊지 아니할 것이라","여인이 어찌 그 젖먹는 자식을 잊겠으며 자기 태에서 난 아들을 긍휼히 여기지 않겠느냐 그들은 혹시 잊을찌라도 나는 너를 잊지 아니할 것이라","그러나 주께서 이렇게 말씀하셨다. \"과연 어머니가 젖먹는 자식을 잊어버릴 수 있느냐? 자기 태에서 나온 자식을 불쌍히 여기지 않는 어머니가 세상에 있느냐? 만일 세상의 어머니들이 자기 자식을 잊어버릴 수 있다고 하여도 나만은 너를 결코 잊을 수가 없다!","Can a mother forget her infant, be without tenderness for the child of her womb? Even should she forget, I will never forget you.","Can a woman forget her sucking child, that she should not have compassion on the son of her womb? yea, they may forget, yet will I not forget thee.","\"Can a mother forget the baby at her breast and have no compassion on the child she has borne? Though she may forget, I will not forget you!","Numquid oblivisci potest mulier infantem suum, ut non misereatur filio uteri sui? Et si illa oblita fuerit, ego tamen non obliviscar tui.","התשכח אשה עולה מרחם בן בטנה גם אלה תשכחנה ואנכי לא אשכחך׃"],["29","49","16","보라, 나는 너를 내 손바닥에 새겼고 너의 성벽은 늘 내 앞에 서 있다.","너는 나의 두 손바닥에 새겨져 있고 너 시온의 성벽은 항상 나의 눈앞에 있다.","내가 너를 내 손바닥에 새겼고 너의 성벽이 항상 내 앞에 있나니","내가 너를 내 손바닥에 새겼고 너의 성벽이 항상 내 앞에 있나니","예루살렘아, 나는 너를 내 손바닥에 새겨 놓았다. 네 무너진 성벽들이 항상 내 눈앞에 어른거린다. 너는 지울 수 없는 문신처럼 언제나 내 마음에서 떠나지 않는구나.","See, upon the palms of my hands I have engraved you; your walls are ever before me.","Behold, I have graven thee upon the palms of my hands; thy walls are continually before me.","See, I have engraved you on the palms of my hands; your walls are ever before me.","Ecce in manibus meis descripsi te; muri tui coram me semper.","הן על כפים חקתיך חומתיך נגדי תמיד׃"],["29","49","17","너를 다시 세우려는 이들이 서두르니 너를 허물던 자들과 너를 부수던 자들이 너에게서 물러간다.","너를 다시 일으킬 자들이 서둘러 모이니 너를 허물고 짓밟던 자들이 달아나리라.","네 자녀들은 빨리 걸으며 너를 헐며 너를 황폐하게 하던 자들은 너를 떠나가리라","네 자녀들은 속히 돌아오고 너를 헐며 너를 황폐케 하던 자들은 너를 떠나가리라","너를 재건할 사람들이 이미 오고 있으니 그들은 너를 허물던 이들보다도 더 빨리 너를 재건할 것이다. 너를 허물고 압제하던 바벨론 군대와 지배자들은 영영 네게서 떠날 것이다.","Your children hasten— your levelers, your destroyers go forth from you;","Thy children shall make haste; thy destroyers and they that made thee waste shall go forth of thee.","Your sons hasten back, and those who laid you waste depart from you.","Festinant structores tui; destruentes te et dissipantes a te exibunt.","מהרו בניך מהרסיך ומחרביך ממך יצאו׃"],["29","49","18","네 눈을 들어 주위를 둘러보아라. 그들이 모두 너에게로 모여 온다. 주님의 말씀이다. 내가 살아 있는 한 너는 그들을 모두 패물처럼 걸치고 그들로 신부처럼 치장하리라.","고개를 들어 둘러보아라. 모두들 너에게로 모여오고 있다. 내가 목숨을 걸고 맹세한다.\" 야훼의 말씀이시다. \"그들은 네 몸에 걸친 패물과 같으리니 네가 신부처럼 아름다우리라.","네 눈을 들어 사방을 보라 그들이 다 모여 네게로 오느니라 나 여호와가 이르노라 내가 나의 삶으로 맹세하노니 네가 반드시 그 모든 무리를 장식처럼 몸에 차며 그것을 띠기를 신부처럼 할 것이라","네 눈을 들어 사방을 보라 그들이 다 모여 네게로 오느니라 나 여호와가 이르노라 내가 나의 삶으로 맹세하노니 네가 반드시 그 모든 무리로 장식을 삼아 몸에 차며 띠기를 신부처럼 할 것이라","시온아, 너는 사방을 둘러보아라! 시온성에 살 사람들이 이미 떼를 지어 네게로 몰려온다. 나 여호와가 확실히 살아있음을 두고 맹세하지만 너는 그들을 맞이하여 기뻐하고 그들을 자랑할 것이다. 그들은 네 몸을 장식하는 귀중한 패물과도 같아 쓸쓸한 과부와 같던 네가 혼례식장으로 들어가는 신부와 같이 아름답게 될 것이다.","Look about and see, they are all gathering and coming to you. As I live—oracle of the LORD— you shall don them as jewels, bedeck yourself like a bride.","Lift up thine eyes round about, and behold: all these gather themselves together, and come to thee. As I live, saith the LORD, thou shalt surely clothe thee with them all, as with an ornament, and bind them on thee, as a bride doeth.","Lift up your eyes and look around; all your sons gather and come to you. As surely as I live,\" declares the LORD, \"you will wear them all as ornaments; you will put them on, like a bride.","Leva in circuitu oculos tuos et vide: omnes isti congregati sunt, venerunt tibi.  “Vivo ego, dicit Dominus, quia omnibus his velut ornamento vestieris et circumdabis tibi eos quasi sponsa “.","שאי סביב עיניך וראי כלם נקבצו באו לך חי אני נאם יהוה כי כלם כעדי תלבשי ותקשרים ככלה׃"],["29","49","19","너의 폐허와 너의 황무지 황폐해진 너의 땅이 네가 살기에는 이제 너무 비좁게 되고 너를 집어삼키던 자들은 멀어져 가리라.","짓밟혀 쑥밭이 되고 폐허가 되었던 땅이, 이제는 비좁아 사람들이 살 수 없게 되어 너를 괴롭히던 자들이 모두 물러가리라.","이는 네 황폐하고 적막한 곳들과 네 파멸을 당하였던 땅이 이제는 주민이 많아 좁게 될 것이며 너를 삼켰던 자들이 멀리 떠날 것이니라","대저 네 황폐하고 적막한 곳들과 네 파멸을 당하였던 땅이 이제는 거민이 많으므로 좁게 될 것이며 너를 삼켰던 자들이 멀리 떠날 것이니라","너는 오래전부터 폐허가 되고 네 땅은 사방으로 무인지경의 황무지가 되었지만, 이제는 비좁아서 더 이상 사람들이 살 수 없을 만큼 되고 시온을 파괴하고 짓밟던 이들은 먼 곳으로 떠날 것이다.","Though you were waste and desolate, a land of ruins, Now you shall be too narrow for your inhabitants, while those who swallowed you up will be far away.","For thy waste and thy desolate places, and the land of thy destruction, shall even now be too narrow by reason of the inhabitants, and they that swallowed thee up shall be far away.","\"Though you were ruined and made desolate and your land laid waste, now you will be too small for your people, and those who devoured you will be far away.","Quia ruinae tuae et solitudines tuae et terra eversa: nunc angusta eris prae habitatoribus; et longe erunt, qui devorabant te.","כי חרבתיך ושממתיך וארץ הרסתיך כי עתה תצרי מיושב ורחקו מבלעיך׃"],["29","49","20","잃었던 네 자식들이 너의 귀에다 대고 “이곳은 너무 비좁으니 제가 살 수 있도록 자리를 넓혀 주셔요.” 하고 말하리라.","여읜 줄로 알았던 자식들이 돌아와, 이 곳은 살기 좁으니 자리를 넓혀달라고 떼쓰는 소리를 네 귀로 들으며,","자식을 잃었을 때에 낳은 자녀가 후일에 네 귀에 말하기를 이곳이 내게 좁으니 넓혀서 내가 거주하게 하라 하리니","고난 중에 낳은 자녀가 후일에 네 귀에 말하기를 이곳이 우리에게 좁으니 넓혀서 우리로 거처하게 하라 하리니","네 자식들이 포로로 끌려가서 네가 자식이 없는 과부처럼 탄식하였지만 이제 곧 네 자식들이 돌아와서 이렇게 부탁할 것이다. \"이곳은 우리 모두가 살기에 너무 좁으니 우리가 다 살 수 있도록 도시를 더 넓혀 주시오!\"","The children of whom you were bereft shall yet say in your hearing, “This place is too narrow for me, make room for me to live in.”","The children which thou shalt have, after thou hast lost the other, shall say again in thine ears, The place is too strait for me: give place to me that I may dwell.","The children born during your bereavement will yet say in your hearing, 'This place is too small for us; give us more space to live in.'","Adhuc dicent in auribus tuis filii orbitatis tuae:  “Angustus est mihi locus; fac spatium mihi, ut habitem “.","עוד יאמרו באזניך בני שכליך צר לי המקום גשה לי ואשבה׃"],["29","49","21","그러면 너는 마음속으로 이렇게 생각하리라. ‘누가 나에게 이 아이들을 낳아 주었지? 나는 자식들을 잃고 다시 낳을 수도 없는 몸이 되어 유배당하고 쫓겨났었는데 이 아이들을 누가 키워 주었지? 나 혼자 남아 있었는데 이 아이들은 도대체 어디에서 왔을까?’","너는 속으로 이렇게 생각하리라. '이것들을 누가 나에게 낳아주었을까? 나는 자식을 여의고 다시 낳을 수도 없는 몸이었는데 누가 이것들을 이렇게 키워주었을까? 나 혼자만 살아 남았었는데 이것들이 다 어디에서 왔을까?'\"","그 때에 네가 네 마음에 이르기를 누가 나를 위하여 이들을 낳았는고 나는 자녀를 잃고 외로워졌으며 사로잡혀 유리하였거늘 이들을 누가 양육하였는고 나는 홀로 남았거늘 이들은 어디서 생겼는고 하리라","그 때에 네 심중에 이르기를 누가 나를 위하여 이 무리를 낳았는고 나는 자녀를 잃고 외로와졌으며 사로잡혔으며 유리하였거늘 이 무리를 누가 양육하였는고 나는 홀로 되었거늘 이 무리는 어디서 생겼는고 하리라","그때에 너는 감격해서 이렇게 말할 것이다. \"이토록 많은 자녀들을 누가 나에게 낳아 주었을까! 내가 친자식들은 다 잃어버리고 더 자식을 낳지도 못하는 몸이 되고 포로로 끌려가 내쫓긴 신세가 되었었는데 누가 이토록 많은 자녀들을 나 대신에 키워놓았을까? 나는 완전히 혼자 남은 몸이었는데 이들은 도대체 어디서 생겨난 사람들인가!\"","You shall ask yourself: “Who has borne me these, when I was bereft and barren? Exiled and repudiated, who has reared them? I was left all alone; where then do these come from?”","Then shalt thou say in thine heart, Who hath begotten me these, seeing I have lost my children, and am desolate, a captive, and removing to and fro? and who hath brought up these? Behold, I was left alone; these, where had they been?","Then you will say in your heart, 'Who bore me these? I was bereaved and barren; I was exiled and rejected. Who brought these up? I was left all alone, but these--where have they come from?'\"","Et dices in corde tuo:  “Quis genuit mihi istos? Ego orbata et non pariens, transmigrata et captiva; et istos quis enutrivit? Ecce ego relicta eram sola; et isti ubi erant? “.","ואמרת בלבבך מי ילד לי את אלה ואני שכולה וגלמודה גלה וסורה ואלה מי גדל הן אני נשארתי לבדי אלה איפה הם׃"],["29","49","22","주 하느님께서 이렇게 말씀하신다. “보라, 내가 민족들에게 내 손을 쳐들고 겨레들에게 내 깃발을 올리리라. 그러면 그들은 네 아들들을 품에 안아 데려오고 네 딸들을 어깨에 메고 오리라.","주 야훼께서 말씀하신다. \"내가 손을 들어 만국을 부르리라. 백성들을 향하여 나의 깃발을 날리리라. 그러면 그들은 너의 아들들을 품에 안고 너의 딸들을 목말태워 오리라.","주 여호와가 이같이 이르노라 내가 뭇 나라를 향하여 나의 손을 들고 민족들을 향하여 나의 기치를 세울 것이라 그들이 네 아들들을 품에 안고 네 딸들을 어깨에 메고 올 것이며","나 주 여호와가 이르노라 내가 열방을 향하여 나의 손을 들고 민족들을 향하여 나의 기호를 세울 것이라 그들이 네 아들들을 품에 안고 네 딸들을 어깨에 메고 올것이며","그러나 주 여호와께서 이렇게 말씀하셨다. \"시온성아, 똑똑히 보아라! 내가 세계 만민에게 오른손을 들어 보이고 뭇 백성에게 나의 군기를 세워 놓겠다. 그러면 그들이 네 자녀들을 품에 안기도 하고 등에 업기도 해서 네게로 데려올 것이다.","Thus says the Lord GOD: See, I will lift up my hand to the nations, and to the peoples raise my signal; They shall bring your sons in their arms, your daughters shall be carried on their shoulders.","Thus saith the Lord GOD, Behold, I will lift up mine hand to the Gentiles, and set up my standard to the people: and they shall bring thy sons in their arms, and thy daughters shall be carried upon their shoulders.","This is what the Sovereign LORD says: \"See, I will beckon to the Gentiles, I will lift up my banner to the peoples; they will bring your sons in their arms and carry your daughters on their shoulders.","Haec dicit Dominus Deus:  “Ecce levabo ad gentes manum meam et ad populos exaltabo signum meum; et afferent filios tuos in ulnis, et filiae tuae super umeros portabuntur.","כה אמר אדני יהוה הנה אשא אל גוים ידי ואל עמים ארים נסי והביאו בניך בחצן ובנתיך על כתף תנשאנה׃"],["29","49","23","임금들은 너의 시종이 되고 그들의 왕비들은 너의 보모가 되리라. 그들은 얼굴을 땅에 대고 너에게 경배하며 네 발의 먼지를 핥으리라. 그때에 너는 내가 주님임을, 나를 고대하는 이들은 부끄러운 일을 당하지 않음을 알게 되리라.”","왕들은 너의 양아버지가 되고 공주들은 너의 유모가 되리라. 그들은 땅에 이마를 대고 너에게 경배하며 네 발의 먼지를 핥으리라. 그 때 비로소 너는 알리라, 내가 야훼인 줄을, 나에게 걸었던 희망은 하나도 어긋나지 않는 줄을.\"","왕들은 네 양부가 되며 왕비들은 네 유모가 될 것이며 그들이 얼굴을 땅에 대고 네게 절하고 네 발의 티끌을 핥을 것이니 네가 나를 여호와인 줄을 알리라 나를 바라는 자는 수치를 당하지 아니하리라","열왕은 네 양부가 되며 왕비들은 네 유모가 될 것이며 그들이 얼굴을 땅에 대고 네게 절하고 네 발의 티끌을 핥을 것이니 네가 나를 여호와인줄 알리라 나를 바라는 자는 수치를 당하지 아니하리라","그 왕들은 네 자녀들을 보호하는 양아버지가 되고 그 왕비들은 유모가 될 것이다. 그러면서도 그들은 얼굴을 땅에 대고 네게 큰절을 올리며 네 발의 먼지에 입맞추며 네게 경의를 표할 것이다. 그러면 나 여호와가 바로 세계의 주인이며 나에게 희망을 두고 사는 사람은 결코 부끄러움을 당하지 않는다는 것을 네가 깨달아 알 것이다.\"","Kings shall be your guardians, their princesses your nursemaids; Face to the ground, they shall bow down before you and lick the dust at your feet. Then you shall know that I am the LORD, none who hope in me shall be ashamed.","And kings shall be thy nursing fathers, and their queens thy nursing mothers: they shall bow down to thee with their face toward the earth, and lick up the dust of thy feet; and thou shalt know that I am the LORD: for they shall not be ashamed that wait for me.","Kings will be your foster fathers, and their queens your nursing mothers. They will bow down before you with their faces to the ground; they will lick the dust at your feet. Then you will know that I am the LORD; those who hope in me will not be disappointed.\"","Et erunt reges nutricii tui, et reginae nutrices tuae; vultu in terram demisso adorabunt te et pulverem pedum tuorum lingent. Et scies quia ego Dominus: non confundentur, qui sperant in me “.","והיו מלכים אמניך ושרותיהם מיניקתיך אפים ארץ ישתחוו לך ועפר רגליך ילחכו וידעת כי אני יהוה אשר לא יבשו קוי׃"],["29","49","24","용사에게서 전리품을 빼앗을 수 있느냐? 폭군에게서 포로들을 빼낼 수 있느냐?","적장에게 사로잡힌 사람을 빼낼 수 있느냐? 폭군의 손에서 포로를 건져낼 수 있느냐?","용사가 빼앗은 것을 어떻게 도로 빼앗으며 승리자에게 사로잡힌 자를 어떻게 건져낼 수 있으랴","용사의 빼앗은 것을 어떻게 도로 빼앗으며 2)승리자에게 사로잡힌 자를 어떻게 건져낼 수 있으랴마는 히, 의인","강대국 바벨론을 바라보며 이스라엘 사람들이 탄식하였다. \"용사가 약탈한 것을 또 약탈할 용사가 어디에 있을까? 세계를 지배하는 폭군이 가두어 놓은 감옥에서 누가 우리를 석방시킬 수가 있을까?\"","Can plunder be taken from a warrior, or captives rescued from a tyrant?","Shall the prey be taken from the mighty, or the lawful captive delivered?","Can plunder be taken from warriors, or captives rescued from the fierce?","Numquid tolletur a forti praeda, aut, quod captum fuerit, a robusto salvari poterit?","היקח מגבור מלקוח ואם שבי צדיק ימלט׃"],["29","49","25","그러나 주님께서는 이렇게 말씀하신다. “용사에게서 포로들을 빼앗을 수도 있으며 폭군에게서 전리품을 빼낼 수도 있다. 너를 대적하는 자에게 내가 대적하여 너의 자식들을 내가 구해 내리라.","야훼께서 말씀하신다. \"적장에게서 포로를 빼낼 수 있다. 폭군에게 사로잡힌 사람도 건져낼 수 있다. 너와 다투던 자를 내가 몸소 치고 너의 아들들을 내가 몸소 건져내리라.","여호와가 이같이 말하노라 용사의 포로도 빼앗을 것이요 두려운 자의 빼앗은 것도 건져낼 것이니 이는 내가 너를 대적하는 자를 대적하고 네 자녀를 내가 구원할 것임이라","나 여호와가 이같이 말하노라 용사의 포로도 빼앗을 것이요 강포자의 빼앗은 것도 건져낼 것이니 이는 내가 너를 대적하는 자를 대적하고 네 자녀를 구원할 것임이라","그러나 여호와께서 이렇게 말씀하셨다. \"바로 그 일이 이제 이루어질 것이다. 폭군이 끌어다가 가두어 놓은 이들이, 전리품으로 끌려간 이들이 석방된 것이다. 내가 직접 네 원수들과 싸워서 너를 풀어 주고 내가 직접 네 자녀들을 살려내 주겠다.","Thus says the LORD: Yes, captives can be taken from a warrior, and plunder rescued from a tyrant; Those who oppose you I will oppose, and your sons I will save.","But thus saith the LORD, Even the captives of the mighty shall be taken away, and the prey of the terrible shall be delivered: for I will contend with him that contendeth with thee, and I will save thy children.","But this is what the LORD says: \"Yes, captives will be taken from warriors, and plunder retrieved from the fierce; I will contend with those who contend with you, and your children I will save.","Quia haec dicit Dominus:  “Equidem et captivus a forti tolletur, et, quod ablatum fuerit a robusto, salvabitur; cum his, qui contendebant tecum, ego contendam et filios tuos ego salvabo.","כי כה אמר יהוה גם שבי גבור יקח ומלקוח עריץ ימלט ואת יריבך אנכי אריב ואת בניך אנכי אושיע׃"],["29","49","26","나는 너의 압제자들에게 제 살을 먹게 하고 제 피를 새 포도주처럼 마셔 취하게 하리라. 그러면 모든 인간이 나 주님이 너를 구해 주는 이요 너의 구원자가 야곱의 장사임을 알게 되리라.”","그리하여 너를 박해하던 자들은 제 살코기를 먹고 제 피를 술처럼 마시고 취하리라. 그 때에 모든 인생은 알리라. 나 야훼가 너의 구원자임을, 너의 원수를 갚는 야곱의 강한 자임을.\"","내가 너를 억압하는 자들에게 자기의 살을 먹게 하며 새 술에 취함 같이 자기의 피에 취하게 하리니 모든 육체가 나 여호와는 네 구원자요 네 구속자요 야곱의 전능자인 줄 알리라","내가 너를 학대하는 자로 자기의 고기를 먹게 하며 새 술에 취함 같이 자기의 피에 취하게 하리니 모든 육체가 나 여호와는 네 구원자요 네 구속자요 야곱의 전능자인줄 알리라","너를 짓밟던 이들이 서로 싸워서 죽이고, 살기를 띠고 서로 살해할 것이다. 그때에는 나 여호와가 네 구원자요 내가 이스라엘의 권능 있는 하나님으로서 너를 해방시켜 준 자임을 모든 사람이 깨달아 알 것이다.\"","I will make your oppressors eat their own flesh, and they shall be drunk with their own blood as though with new wine. All flesh shall know that I, the LORD, am your savior, your redeemer, the Mighty One of Jacob.","And I will feed them that oppress thee with their own flesh; and they shall be drunken with their own blood, as with sweet wine: and all flesh shall know that I the LORD am thy Saviour and thy Redeemer, the mighty One of Jacob.","I will make your oppressors eat their own flesh; they will be drunk on their own blood, as with wine. Then all mankind will know that I, the LORD, am your Savior, your Redeemer, the Mighty One of Jacob.\"","Et cibabo hostes tuos carnibus suis, et quasi musto sanguine suo inebriabuntur; et sciet omnis caro quia ego Dominus salvator tuus, et redemptor tuus Fortis Iacob “.","והאכלתי את מוניך את בשרם וכעסיס דמם ישכרון וידעו כל בשר כי אני יהוה מושיעך וגאלך אביר יעקב׃"],["29","50","1","주님께서 이렇게 말씀하신다. “내가 너희 어미를 쫓아내며 써 준 이혼 증서가 어디 있기라도 하더냐? 네 빚쟁이들 가운데 누구에게 내가 너희를 팔아넘겼단 말이냐? 바로 너희 죄 때문에 너희가 팔려 갔고 너희 죄악 때문에 너희 어미가 쫓겨 갔다.","야훼께서 말씀하신다. \"나는 너희 어미를 쫓아내며 이혼장을 써준 일이 없다. 나는 너희를 채권자에게 판 일이 없다. 너희는 너희의 잘못으로 팔려간 것이다. 너희가 못되게 굴었으므로 너희 어미가 쫓겨난 것이다.","나 여호와가 이같이 말하노라 내가 너희의 어미를 내보낸 이혼 증서가 어디 있느냐 내가 어느 채주에게 너희를 팔았느냐 보라 너희는 너희의 죄악으로 말미암아 팔렸고 너희의 어미는 너희의 배역함으로 말미암아 내보냄을 받았느니라","나 여호와가 이같이 이르노라 내가 너희 어미를 내어보낸 이혼서가 어디 있느냐 내가 어느 채주에게 너희를 팔았느냐 오직 너희는 너희의 죄악을 인하여 팔렸고 너희 어미는 너희의 허물을 인하여 내어 보냄을 입었느니라","포로생활에 지친 이스라엘 사람들은 하나님을 원망하고 예언의 말씀을 믿지 않았다. 하나님이 그들을 버리고 잊으셨거나 더 이상 구원할 능력이 없을 것이라고 주장하였다. 이에 대하여 여호와께서 이렇게 답변하셨다. \"내가 너희의 어머니 이스라엘을 버렸느냐? 예루살렘을 잊어버렸느냐? 내가 시온의 백성과 결혼하고도 이혼한 일이 있더냐? 이혼 증서가 있으면 내놓아라! 또 내가 누구에게 빚을 져서 자식들을 노예로 판 것도 아니다. 너희 자신의 허물때문에 너희가 지금 노예로 팔려 와서 고생하고 너희가 범죄하였기 때문에 너희의 어미인 이스라엘이 쫓겨나서 포로로 잡혀간 것이다.","Thus says the LORD: Where is the bill of divorce with which I dismissed your mother? Or to which of my creditors have I sold you? It was for your sins you were sold, for your rebellions your mother was dismissed.","Thus saith the LORD, Where is the bill of your mother's divorcement, whom I have put away? or which of my creditors is it to whom I have sold you? Behold, for your iniquities have ye sold yourselves, and for your transgressions is your mother put away.","This is what the LORD says: \"Where is your mother's certificate of divorce with which I sent her away? Or to which of my creditors did I sell you? Because of your sins you were sold; because of your transgressions your mother was sent away.","Haec dicit Dominus:  “Ubinam est liber repudii matris vestrae, quo dimisi eam? Aut quis est creditor meus, cui vendidi vos? Ecce in iniquitatibus vestris venditi estis, et in sceleribus vestris dimissa est mater vestra.","כה אמר יהוה אי זה ספר כריתות אמכם אשר שלחתיה או מי מנושי אשר מכרתי אתכם לו הן בעונתיכם נמכרתם ובפשעיכם שלחה אמכם׃"],["29","50","2","내가 왔을 때 왜 아무도 없었느냐? 내가 불렀을 때 왜 아무도 대답하지 않았느냐? 내 손이 너무 짧아 구해 낼 수가 없다는 말이냐? 아니면 내가 힘이 없어 구원할 수가 없다는 말이냐? 보라, 나는 호령 한마디로 바다를 말리고 강들을 광야로 만든다. 물고기들은 물이 없어 썩어 가고 목말라 죽어 간다.","내가 찾아왔는데 어찌하여 아무도 반기지 않느냐? 내가 부르는데 어찌하여 아무도 대답하지 않느냐? 내 팔이 짧아서 너희를 구출할 수 없단 말이냐? 내가 힘이 없어서 너희를 구원하지 못한단 말이냐? 내 호령 한마디에 바다가 마르고 강들은 사막이 된다. 고기들은 물이 없어 마르고 목이 타 죽는다.","내가 왔어도 사람이 없었으며 내가 불러도 대답하는 자가 없었음은 어찌 됨이냐 내 손이 어찌 짧아 구속하지 못하겠느냐 내게 어찌 건질 능력이 없겠느냐 보라 내가 꾸짖어 바다를 마르게 하며 강들을 사막이 되게 하며 물이 없어졌으므로 그 물고기들이 악취를 내며 갈하여 죽으리라","내가 왔어도 사람이 없었으며 내가 불러도 대답하는 자가 없었음은 어찜이뇨 내 손이 어찌 짧아 구속하지 못하겠느냐 내게 어찌 건질 능력이 없겠느냐 보라 내가 꾸짖은즉 바다가 마르며 하수가 광야가 될것이며 거기 물이 없어졌으므로 어족이 갈하여 죽어 악취를 발하게 되느니라","왜 아무도 내 앞에 나서지 못하느냐? 너희가 왜 대답하지 못하느냐? 내가 너무 힘이 없어서 너희를 구원하지 못하거나 나의 팔이 너무 짧아서 너희를 해방시키지 못하겠느냐? 내가 한번 꾸짖으면 바다도 마르고 세상의 모든 강물도 잦아들어서 물고기들이 떼죽음을 당한다.","Why was no one there when I came? Why did no one answer when I called? Is my hand too short to ransom? Have I not the strength to deliver? See, with my rebuke I dry up the sea, I turn rivers into wilderness; Their fish rot for lack of water, and die of thirst.","Wherefore, when I came, was there no man? when I called, was there none to answer? Is my hand shortened at all, that it cannot redeem? or have I no power to deliver? behold, at my rebuke I dry up the sea, I make the rivers a wilderness: their fish stinketh, because there is no water, and dieth for thirst.","When I came, why was there no one? When I called, why was there no one to answer? Was my arm too short to ransom you? Do I lack the strength to rescue you? By a mere rebuke I dry up the sea, I turn rivers into a desert; their fish rot for lack of water and die of thirst.","Cur veni, et non erat vir, vocavi, et non erat qui responderet? Numquid abbreviata est manus mea, ut non possim redimere? Aut non est in me virtus ad liberandum? Ecce in increpatione mea exsiccabo mare, ponam flumina in siccum; computrescent pisces sine aqua et morientur in siti.","מדוע באתי ואין איש קראתי ואין עונה הקצור קצרה ידי מפדות ואם אין בי כח להציל הן בגערתי אחריב ים אשים נהרות מדבר תבאש דגתם מאין מים ותמת בצמא׃"],["29","50","3","나는 흑암으로 하늘을 입히고 자루옷으로 그 덮개를 만든다.”","나는 하늘을 먹구름으로 입히고 굵은 베를 겉옷 삼아 둘러준다.\"","내가 흑암으로 하늘을 입히며 굵은 베로 덮느니라","내가 흑암으로 하늘을 입히며 굵은 베로 덮느니라","나는 드넓은 하늘도 캄캄하게 가리워 하늘이 마치 검은 보자기로 가리워진 것처럼 어둡게 할 수도 있다.\"","I clothe the heavens in black, and make sackcloth their covering.","I clothe the heavens with blackness, and I make sackcloth their covering.","I clothe the sky with darkness and make sackcloth its covering.\"","Induam caelos luctu et saccum ponam operimentum eorum “.","אלביש שמים קדרות ושק אשים כסותם׃"],["29","50","4","주 하느님께서는 나에게 제자의 혀를 주시어 지친 이를 말로 격려할 줄 알게 하신다. 그분께서는 아침마다 일깨워 주신다. 내 귀를 일깨워 주시어 내가 제자들처럼 듣게 하신다.","주 야훼께서 나에게 말솜씨를 익혀주시며 고달픈 자를 격려할 줄 알게 다정한 말을 가르쳐주신다. 아침마다 내 귀를 일깨워주시어 배우는 마음으로 듣게 하신다.","주 여호와께서 학자들의 혀를 내게 주사 나로 곤고한 자를 말로 어떻게 도와 줄 줄을 알게 하시고 아침마다 깨우치시되 나의 귀를 깨우치사 학자들 같이 알아듣게 하시도다","주 여호와께서 1)학자의 혀를 내게 주사 나로 곤핍한 자를 말로 어떻게 도와 줄줄을 알게 하시고 아침마다 깨우치시되 나의 귀를 깨우치사 학자 같이 알아듣게 하시도다 제자","여호와의 종이 바벨론의 멸망과 이스라엘의 회복을 예언하자 바벨론의 관리들이 그를 체포하여 구금하였다. 주의 종이 유죄 판결을 받고 옥고를 치르면서 이렇게 노래하였다. \"나의 주 여호와께서 나의 혀를 마음대로 사용하신다. 바벨론의 포로생활 속에서 지친 동포들을 격려하도록 항상 새로운 말씀을 주께서 나에게 가르쳐 주신다. 아침마다 주의 말씀을 들으라고 나를 깨우신다. 제자가 스승의 말씀을 듣고 싶어하듯이 나는 항상 주님의 말씀을 듣고 싶어한다.","The Lord GOD has given me a well-trained tongue, That I might know how to answer the weary a word that will waken them. Morning after morning he wakens my ear to hear as disciples do;","The Lord GOD hath given me the tongue of the learned, that I should know how to speak a word in season to him that is weary: he wakeneth morning by morning, he wakeneth mine ear to hear as the learned.","The Sovereign LORD has given me an instructed tongue, to know the word that sustains the weary. He wakens me morning by morning, wakens my ear to listen like one being taught.","Dominus Deus dedit mihi linguam eruditam, ut sciam sustentare eum, qui lassus est, verbo; excitat mane, mane excitat mihi aurem, ut audiam quasi discipulus.","אדני יהוה נתן לי לשון למודים לדעת לעות את יעף דבר יעיר בבקר בבקר יעיר לי אזן לשמע כלמודים׃"],["29","50","5","주 하느님께서 내 귀를 열어 주시니 나는 거역하지도 않고 뒤로 물러서지도 않았다.","주 야훼께서 나의 귀를 열어주시니 나는 거역하지도 아니하고 꽁무니를 빼지도 아니한다.","주 여호와께서 나의 귀를 여셨으므로 내가 거역하지도 아니하며 뒤로 물러가지도 아니하며","주 여호와께서 나의 귀를 열으셨으므로 내가 거역지도 아니하며 뒤로 물러가지도 아니하며","내가 할 일은 오직 주님의 말씀을 듣고 글로 전하는 것뿐이다. 주께서 나를 그런 사람으로 만드셨다. 그 일로 내가 갇히고 고문을 당하여도 나는 거역하지 아니하며 무슨 사명을 받아도 두려워 피하지 않는다.","The Lord GOD opened my ear; I did not refuse, did not turn away.","The Lord GOD hath opened mine ear, and I was not rebellious, neither turned away back.","The Sovereign LORD has opened my ears, and I have not been rebellious; I have not drawn back.","Dominus Deus aperuit mihi aurem; ego autem non rebellavi, retrorsum non abii.","אדני יהוה פתח לי אזן ואנכי לא מריתי אחור לא נסוגתי׃"],["29","50","6","나는 매질하는 자들에게 내 등을, 수염을 잡아 뜯는 자들에게 내 뺨을 내맡겼고 모욕과 수모를 받지 않으려고 내 얼굴을 가리지도 않았다.","나는 때리는 자들에게 등을 맡기며 수염을 뽑는 자들에게 턱을 내민다. 나는 욕설과 침뱉음을 받지 않으려고 얼굴을 가리지도 않는다.","나를 때리는 자들에게 내 등을 맡기며 나의 수염을 뽑는 자들에게 나의 뺨을 맡기며 모욕과 침 뱉음을 당하여도 내 얼굴을 가리지 아니하였느니라","나를 때리는 자들에게 내 등을 맡기며 나의 수염을 뽑는 자들에게 나의 뺨을 맡기며 수욕과 침 뱉음을 피하려고 내 얼굴을 가리우지 아니하였느니라","나를 때리는 이들에게 내 등을 내주며 턱수염을 뽑는 이들에게 내 두 빰을 내주었다. 나를 고문하는 이들이 나에게 욕하고 침을 뱉어도 나는 얼굴을 가리며 피하지 않았다.","I gave my back to those who beat me, my cheeks to those who tore out my beard; My face I did not hide from insults and spitting.","I gave my back to the smiters, and my cheeks to them that plucked off the hair: I hid not my face from shame and spitting.","I offered my back to those who beat me, my cheeks to those who pulled out my beard; I did not hide my face from mocking and spitting.","Dorsum meum dedi percutientibus et genas meas vellentibus: faciem meam non averti ab increpationibus et sputis.","גוי נתתי למכים ולחיי למרטים פני לא הסתרתי מכלמות ורק׃"],["29","50","7","그러나 주 하느님께서 나를 도와주시니 나는 수치를 당하지 않는다. 그러기에 나는 내 얼굴을 차돌처럼 만든다. 나는 부끄러운 일을 당하지 않을 것임을 안다.","주 야훼께서 나를 도와주시니, 나 조금도 부끄러울 것 없어 차돌처럼 내 얼굴빛 변치 않는다. 나는 수치를 당하지 않을 줄 알고 있다.","주 여호와께서 나를 도우시므로 내가 부끄러워하지 아니하고 내 얼굴을 부싯돌 같이 굳게 하였으므로 내가 수치를 당하지 아니할 줄 아노라","주 여호와께서 나를 도우시므로 내가 부끄러워 아니하고 내 얼굴을 부싯돌 같이 굳게 하였은즉 내가 수치를 당치 아니할줄 아노라","내가 이렇게 고문을 당하면 패배한 것으로 원수들은 생각하겠지만 나의 주 하나님께서 내 편에 서 계신다. 그래서 나는 내 얼굴을 차돌처럼 굳게 하였다. 모든 고난과 수모를 견뎌 내었다.","The Lord GOD is my help, therefore I am not disgraced; Therefore I have set my face like flint, knowing that I shall not be put to shame.","For the Lord GOD will help me; therefore shall I not be confounded: therefore have I set my face like a flint, and I know that I shall not be ashamed.","Because the Sovereign LORD helps me, I will not be disgraced. Therefore have I set my face like flint, and I know I will not be put to shame.","Dominus Deus auxiliator meus; ideo non sum confusus, ideo posui faciem meam ut petram durissimam et scio quoniam non confundar.","ואדני יהוה יעזר לי על כן לא נכלמתי על כן שמתי פני כחלמיש ואדע כי לא אבוש׃"],["29","50","8","나를 의롭다 하시는 분께서 가까이 계시는데 누가 나에게 대적하려는가? 우리 함께 나서 보자. 누가 나의 소송 상대인가? 내게 다가와 보아라.","하느님께서 나의 죄없음을 알아주시고 옆에 계시는데, 누가 나를 걸어 송사하랴? 법정으로 가자. 누가 나와 시비를 가리려느냐? 겨루어보자.","나를 의롭다 하시는 이가 가까이 계시니 나와 다툴 자가 누구냐 나와 함께 설지어다 나의 대적이 누구냐 내게 가까이 나아올지어다","나를 의롭다 하시는 이가 가까이 계시니 나와 다툴 자가 누구뇨 나와 함께 설찌어다 나의 대적이 누구뇨 내게 가까이 나아올찌어다","내게는 나의 무죄를 증명해 주실 분이 계신다. 그분이 이미 나를 변호하러 나에게 가까이 오셨다. 그런데도 감히 나를 고발할 사람이 있느냐? 그런 사람이 있으면 나하고 함께 법정으로 가자. 나를 고소해서 이길 사람이 있으면, 어서 내 앞으로 나와 보아라!","He who declares my innocence is near. Who will oppose me? Let us appear together. Who will dispute my right? Let them confront me.","He is near that justifieth me; who will contend with me? let us stand together: who is mine adversary? let him come near to me.","He who vindicates me is near. Who then will bring charges against me? Let us face each other! Who is my accuser? Let him confront me!","Iuxta est qui iustificat me; quis contradicet mihi? Stemus simul. Quis est adversarius meus? Accedat ad me.","קרוב מצדיקי מי יריב אתי נעמדה יחד מי בעל משפטי יגש אלי׃"],["29","50","9","보라, 주 하느님께서 나를 도와주시는데 나를 단죄하는 자 누구인가? 보라, 그들은 모두 옷처럼 해지고 좀이 그들을 먹어 버리리라.","주 야훼께서 이렇게 나를 도와주시는데 누가 감히 나를 그르다고 하느냐? 그들은 모두 낡은 옷처럼 좀이 쓸어 삭아 떨어지리라.","보라 주 여호와께서 나를 도우시리니 나를 정죄할 자 누구냐 보라 그들은 다 옷과 같이 해어지며 좀이 그들을 먹으리라","주 여호와께서 나를 도우시리니 나를 정죄할 자 누구뇨 그들은 다 옷과 같이 해어지며 좀에게 먹히리라","똑똑히 보아라! 나의 주님 여호와께서 나를 도우러 가까이 오셨다! 그런데도 나에게 유죄 판결을 내릴 자가 누구냐? 똑똑히 두고 보아라! 나에게 죄를 씌우는 이들이 모두 멸망할 것이다. 그들은 모두 좀먹은 옷이 헤어지듯이 멸망할 것이다.\"","See, the Lord GOD is my help; who will declare me guilty? See, they will all wear out like a garment, consumed by moths.","Behold, the Lord GOD will help me; who is he that shall condemn me? lo, they all shall wax old as a garment; the moth shall eat them up.","It is the Sovereign LORD who helps me. Who is he that will condemn me? They will all wear out like a garment; the moths will eat them up.","Ecce Dominus Deus auxiliator meus; quis est qui condemnet me? Ecce omnes quasi vestimentum conterentur, tinea comedet eos.","הן אדני יהוה יעזר לי מי הוא ירשיעני הן כלם כבגד יבלו עש יאכלם׃"],["29","50","10","너희 가운데 누가 주님을 경외하고 그분 종의 말에 순종하느냐? 빛이 없이 어둠 속을 걷는 자는 주님의 이름을 신뢰하고 자기 하느님께 의지하여라.","너희 가운데 야훼를 두려워하는 자가 있거든 그의 종이 하는 말을 들어라. 한 가닥 빛도 받지 못하고 암흑 속을 헤매는 자가 있거든 야훼의 이름에 희망을 걸 일이다. 자기 하느님을 의지할 일이다.","너희 중에 여호와를 경외하며 그의 종의 목소리를 청종하는 자가 누구냐 흑암 중에 행하여 빛이 없는 자라도 여호와의 이름을 의뢰하며 자기 하나님께 의지할지어다","너희 중에 여호와를 경외하며 그 종의 목소리를 청종하는 자가 누구뇨 흑암 중에 행하여 빛이 없는 자라도 여호와의 이름을 의뢰하며 자기 하나님께 의지할찌어다","포로생활 속에서 절망하지 않고 여호와를 경외하는 자가 누구냐? 너희 가운데서 여호와의 종의 목소리를 듣는 자가 누구냐? 그런 사람은 이 사실을 똑똑히 알아두어라. 그가 비록 캄캄한 길을 걸어가는 어느 곳에서도 희망의 빛을 찾지 못하여도 여호와의 구원만은 확실하게 믿을 수가 있다. 그가 의지하는 하나님이 틀림없이 그를 붙들어 주시고 인도하여 주신다!","Who among you fears the LORD, heeds his servant’s voice? Whoever walk in darkness, without any light, Yet trust in the name of the LORD and rely upon their God!","Who is among you that feareth the LORD, that obeyeth the voice of his servant, that walketh in darkness, and hath no light? let him trust in the name of the LORD, and stay upon his God.","Who among you fears the LORD and obeys the word of his servant? Let him who walks in the dark, who has no light, trust in the name of the LORD and rely on his God.","Quis ex vobis timet Dominum, audiens vocem servi sui? Qui ambulavit in tenebris, et non est lumen ei, speret in nomine Domini et innitatur super Deum suum.","מי בכם ירא יהוה שמע בקול עבדו אשר הלך חשכים ואין נגה לו יבטח בשם יהוה וישען באלהיו׃"],["29","50","11","그러나 스스로 불을 피우고 불화살에 불을 당기는 너희는 모두 자기가 피운 불 속으로, 자기가 댕긴 불화살 속으로 들어가거라. 이것이 너희가 내 손에서 받아야 할 바이니 너희는 고통 속에 드러누워야 하리라.","그런데 너희는 하나같이 불을 피우고 화살을 달구는구나. 너희는 모두 스스로 피운 불 속에 뛰어들어라. 스스로 달군 화살이 날아오는 속으로 들어가거라. 너희는 이것을 내 손에서 받아야 한다. 그리하여 견딜 수 없는 괴로움으로 뒹굴리라.","보라 불을 피우고 횃불을 둘러 띤 자여 너희가 다 너희의 불꽃 가운데로 걸어가며 너희가 피운 횃불 가운데로 걸어갈지어다 너희가 내 손에서 얻을 것이 이것이라 너희가 고통이 있는 곳에 누우리라","불을 피우고 횃불을 둘러 띤 자여 너희가 다 너희의 불꽃 가운데로 들어가며 너희의 피운 횃불 가운데로 들어갈찌어다 너희가 내 손에서 얻을 것이 이것이라 너희가 슬픔 중에 누우리라","그러나 불을 피우고 인두를 달궈 주님의 종들을 고문하는 것들아, 너희가 판 그 불구덩이에 너희가 들어가 죽고 너희가 달궈 놓은 그 쇠고챙이에 너희가 찔려 죽을 것이다. 너희가 고통을 당하며 죽도록 여호와께서 세계 역사를 바꾸어 놓으실 것이다.","All you who kindle flames and set flares alight, Walk by the light of your own fire and by the flares you have burnt! This is your fate from my hand: you shall lie down in a place of torment.","Behold, all ye that kindle a fire, that compass yourselves about with sparks: walk in the light of your fire, and in the sparks that ye have kindled. This shall ye have of mine hand; ye shall lie down in sorrow.","But now, all you who light fires and provide yourselves with flaming torches, go, walk in the light of your fires and of the torches you have set ablaze. This is what you shall receive from my hand: You will lie down in torment. ISA","Ecce vos omnes, qui accenditis ignem, accincti sagittis, ambulate in lumine ignis vestri et in sagittis, quas succendistis. De manu mea factum est hoc vobis; in doloribus recumbetis.","הן כלכם קדחי אש מאזרי זיקות לכו באור אשכם ובזיקות בערתם מידי היתה זאת לכם למעצבה תשכבון׃"],["29","51","1","내 말을 들어라, 의로움을 추구하는 이들아 주님을 찾는 이들아. 너희가 떨어져 나온 반석을 우러러보고 너희가 퍼내 올려진 저수 동굴을 쳐다보아라.","\"나의 말을 들어라. 정의를 추구하고 야훼를 찾는 자들아. 너희를 떼어낸 바위를 우러러보고 너희를 파낸 동굴을 쳐다보아라.","의를 따르며 여호와를 찾아 구하는 너희는 내게 들을지어다 너희를 떠낸 반석과 너희를 파낸 우묵한 구덩이를 생각하여 보라","의를 좇으며 여호와를 찾아 구하는 너희는 나를 들을찌어다 너희를 떠낸 반석과 너희를 파낸 우묵한 구덩이를 생각하여 보라","바벨론의 포로생활 속에서 여호와께 충성을 하면서도 그들의 숫자가 너무 적어서 고향으로 돌아간다고 하여도 무슨 소용이 있겠느냐고 절망하는 이들에게 주께서 위로해 주셨다. 민족의 해방을 기다리며 나 여호와에게 도움을 구하는 모든 이들아, 내 말을 똑똑히 들어라! 너희가 본래 어떤 조상에게서 태어났는가를 생각해 보아라. 너희를 떼어 낸 바위는 아브라함이 아니냐? 너희를 길어 올린 샘물은 사라가 아니냐?","Listen to me, you who pursue justice, who seek the LORD; Look to the rock from which you were hewn, to the quarry from which you were taken;","Hearken to me, ye that follow after righteousness, ye that seek the LORD: look unto the rock whence ye are hewn, and to the hole of the pit whence ye are digged.","\"Listen to me, you who pursue righteousness and who seek the LORD: Look to the rock from which you were cut and to the quarry from which you were hewn;","Audite me, qui sequimini iustitiam, qui quaeritis Dominum; attendite ad petram, unde excisi estis, et ad cavernam laci, de qua praecisi estis.","שמעו אלי רדפי צדק מבקשי יהוה הביטו אל צור חצבתם ואל מקבת בור נקרתם׃"],["29","51","2","너희 조상 아브라함과 너희를 낳은 사라를 우러러보아라. 내가 그를 부를 때 그는 혼자였으나 나는 그에게 복을 내려 그의 자손을 번성하게 하였다.","너희 조상 아브라함을 우러러보고 너희를 낳아준 사라를 쳐다보아라. 내가 부를 때 그는 혼자였으나 나는 그에게 복을 내려 자손이 번성하게 하였다.","너희의 조상 아브라함과 너희를 낳은 사라를 생각하여 보라 아브라함이 혼자 있을 때에 내가 그를 부르고 그에게 복을 주어 창성하게 하였느니라","너희 조상 아브라함과 너희를 생산한 사라를 생각하여 보라 아브라함이 혈혈단신으로 있을 때에 내가 부르고 그에게 복을 주어 창성케 하였느니라","너희의 조상 아브라함과 너희를 낳은 사라를 생각해 보아라! 내가 아브라함 한 사람을 불러 그에게 복을 주어 그의 후손이 큰 백성을 이루게 하였다.","Look to Abraham, your father, and to Sarah, who gave you birth; Though he was but one when I called him, I blessed him and made him many.","Look unto Abraham your father, and unto Sarah that bare you: for I called him alone, and blessed him, and increased him.","look to Abraham, your father, and to Sarah, who gave you birth. When I called him he was but one, and I blessed him and made him many.","Attendite ad Abraham patrem vestrum et ad Saram, quae peperit vos; quia unum vocavi eum et benedixi ei et multiplicavi eum.","הביטו אל אברהם אביכם ואל שרה תחוללכם כי אחד קראתיו ואברכהו וארבהו׃"],["29","51","3","주님께서는 정녕 시온을 위로하시고 그 모든 폐허를 위로하신다. 그 광야를 에덴처럼, 그 황무지를 주님의 동산처럼 만드시니 그 안에는 기쁨과 즐거움이, 감사와 찬미 노랫소리가 깃들리라.","그렇다, 야훼가 시온을 불쌍하게 보고 다 허물어진 그 모습을 가엾게 여기리라. 그리하여 그 황무지를 에덴처럼 만들고 그 벌판을 야훼의 동산처럼 만들어 흥겨움과 즐거움이 넘치고 감사의 노랫가락이 울려 퍼지게 하리라.","나 여호와가 시온의 모든 황폐한 곳들을 위로하여 그 사막을 에덴 같게, 그 광야를 여호와의 동산 같게 하였나니 그 가운데에 기뻐함과 즐거워함과 감사함과 창화하는 소리가 있으리라","대저 나 여호와가 시온을 위로하되 그 모든 황폐한 곳을 위로하여 그 광야로 에덴 같고 그 사막으로 여호와의 동산 같게 하였나니 그 가운데 기뻐함과 즐거워함과 감사함과 창화하는 소리가 있으리라","지금도 주께서 그때와 똑같이 행하실 것이다. 주께서 예루살렘으로 다시 오셔서 폐허가 된 도성을 다시 건설하게 하실 것이다. 사막처럼 황폐하게 된 국토를 주께서 에덴 동산처럼 아름답게 바꾸어 주시고 주님의 동산처럼 꽃이 피고 오곡백과가 풍성하게 하실 것이다. 그러면 사람들이 즐거워하고 기뻐하는 소리가 온 땅에 울려 퍼지고 모든 사람이 여호와께 감사하며 찬양할 것이다.","Yes, the LORD shall comfort Zion, shall comfort all her ruins; Her wilderness he shall make like Eden, her wasteland like the garden of the LORD; Joy and gladness shall be found in her, thanksgiving and the sound of song.","For the LORD shall comfort Zion: he will comfort all her waste places; and he will make her wilderness like Eden, and her desert like the garden of the LORD; joy and gladness shall be found therein, thanksgiving, and the voice of melody.","The LORD will surely comfort Zion and will look with compassion on all her ruins; he will make her deserts like Eden, her wastelands like the garden of the LORD. Joy and gladness will be found in her, thanksgiving and the sound of singing.","Consolatur enim Dominus Sion, consolatur omnes ruinas eius; et ponit desertum eius quasi Eden et solitudinem eius quasi hortum Domini. Gaudium et laetitia invenietur in ea, gratiarum actio et vox laudis.","כי נחם יהוה ציון נחם כל חרבתיה וישם מדברה כעדן וערבתה כגן יהוה ששון ושמחה ימצא בה תודה וקול זמרה׃"],["29","51","4","내 백성아, 내 말을 들어라. 내 겨레야, 내게 귀를 기울여라. 나에게서 가르침이 나가리라. 나의 공정을 내가 민족의 빛으로 만들리라.","뭇 백성들아, 똑바로 나를 쳐다보아라. 부족들아, 내 말에 귀를 기울여라. 훈계가 나에게서 나간다. 나의 법이 뭇 백성의 빛이 되리라.","내 백성이여 내게 주의하라 내 나라여 내게 귀를 기울이라 이는 율법이 내게서부터 나갈 것임이라 내가 내 공의를 만민의 빛으로 세우리라","내 백성이여 내게 주의하라 내 나라여 내게 귀를 기울이라 이는 율법이 내게서부터 발할 것임이라 내가 내 공의를 만민의 빛으로 세우리라","여호와께서 말씀하신다. \"세상의 모든 백성들아, 내 말을 똑똑히 들어라! 세계 만민들아, 내가 하는 말을 잘 들어라! 세계 만민에게 율법으로 가르치는 자가 바로 나 여호와이다! 내가 나의 법질서를 세계 만민의 빛으로 높이 세워 놓겠다.","Be attentive to me, my people; my nation, give ear to me. For teaching shall go forth from me, and my judgment, as light to the peoples.","Hearken unto me, my people; and give ear unto me, O my nation: for a law shall proceed from me, and I will make my judgment to rest for a light of the people.","\"Listen to me, my people; hear me, my nation: The law will go out from me; my justice will become a light to the nations.","Attendite ad me, popule meus; et nationes, me audite, quia lex a me exiet, et iudicium meum in lucem populorum statuam.","הקשיבו אלי עמי ולאומי אלי האזינו כי תורה מאתי תצא ומשפטי לאור עמים ארגיע׃"],["29","51","5","내가 재빠르게 나의 정의를 가까이 가져오리니 나의 구원이 나아가고 나의 팔이 민족들을 심판하리라. 섬들이 나를 고대하며 나의 팔에 희망을 걸리라.","내가 세울 정의가 홀연히 닥쳐오고 내가 베풀 구원이 빛처럼 쏟아져 오리라. 내가 팔을 휘둘러 뭇 백성을 재판하면, 바닷가 주민이 나에게 희망을 두고 나의 팔에 기대를 걸리라.","내 공의가 가깝고 내 구원이 나갔은즉 내 팔이 만민을 심판하리니 섬들이 나를 앙망하여 내 팔에 의지하리라","내 의가 가깝고 내 구원이 나갔은즉 내 팔이 만민을 심판하리니 섬들이 나를 앙망하여 내 팔에 의지하리라","이제 내가 가서 압제자들을 무찌르고 억눌린 자들을 해방시켜 주겠다. 내가 두 팔을 휘둘러 민족들의 싸움을 해결하겠다. 먼 섬들도 내가 오기를 고대하며 내가 강한 팔로 도와주기를 기다리고 있다. 세계 만민들아, 너희가 세상에서 의지하는 것이 무엇이냐?","I will make my victory come swiftly; my salvation shall go forth and my arm shall judge the nations; In me the coastlands shall hope, and my arm they shall await.","My righteousness is near; my salvation is gone forth, and mine arms shall judge the people; the isles shall wait upon me, and on mine arm shall they trust.","My righteousness draws near speedily, my salvation is on the way, and my arm will bring justice to the nations. The islands will look to me and wait in hope for my arm.","Prope est iustitia mea, egressa est salus mea, et brachia mea populos iudicabunt; in me insulae sperabunt et ad brachium meum attendent.","קרוב צדקי יצא ישעי וזרעי עמים ישפטו אלי איים יקוו ואל זרעי ייחלון׃"],["29","51","6","너희는 하늘로 눈을 들어라. 아래로 땅을 바라보아라. 하늘은 연기처럼 스러지고 땅은 옷처럼 해지며 그 주민들은 모기 떼처럼 죽어 가리라. 그러나 나의 구원은 영원하고 나의 의로움은 꺾이지 않으리라.","눈을 들어 하늘을 바라보아라. 땅을 굽어보아라. 하늘은 연기처럼 스러지고, 땅은 옷처럼 해어져 주민이 하루살이처럼 꺼지리라. 그러나 내가 베풀 구원은 영원하고 내가 세울 정의는 넘어지지 않는다.","너희는 하늘로 눈을 들며 그 아래의 땅을 살피라 하늘이 연기 같이 사라지고 땅이 옷 같이 해어지며 거기에 사는 자들이 하루살이 같이 죽으려니와 나의 구원은 영원히 있고 나의 공의는 폐하여지지 아니하리라","너희는 하늘로 눈을 들며 그 아래의 땅을 살피라 하늘이 연기 같이 사라지고 땅이 옷 같이 해어지며 거기 거한 자들이 1)하루살이 같이 죽으려니와 나의 구원은 영원히 있고 나의 의는 폐하여지지 아니하리라 한결같이","그것이 하늘이면 위로 하늘을 바라보아라! 하늘이 연기처럼 사라질 것이다. 너희가 의지하는 것이 땅이면 너희가 땅을 딛고 사는 땅을 내려다 보아라! 땅이 헌옷처럼 헤어지고 사람들은 하루살이처럼 쓰러져 죽을 것이다. 그러나 내가 이제 세울 평화는 끝없이 계속되고 내가 세우는 나라는 아무도 뒤엎지 못할 것이다.\"","Raise your eyes to the heavens, look at the earth below; Though the heavens vanish like smoke, the earth wear out like a garment and its inhabitants die like flies, My salvation shall remain forever and my victory shall always be firm.","Lift up your eyes to the heavens, and look upon the earth beneath: for the heavens shall vanish away like smoke, and the earth shall wax old like a garment, and they that dwell therein shall die in like manner: but my salvation shall be for ever, and my righteousness shall not be abolished.","Lift up your eyes to the heavens, look at the earth beneath; the heavens will vanish like smoke, the earth will wear out like a garment and its inhabitants die like flies. But my salvation will last forever, my righteousness will never fail.","Levate in caelum oculos vestros et inspicite in terram deorsum, quia caeli sicut fumus liquescent, et terra sicut vestimentum atteretur, et habitatores eius sicut haec interibunt. Salus autem mea in sempiternum erit, et iustitia mea non deficiet.","שאו לשמים עיניכם והביטו אל הארץ מתחת כי שמים כעשן נמלחו והארץ כבגד תבלה וישביה כמו כן ימותון וישועתי לעולם תהיה וצדקתי לא תחת׃"],["29","51","7","내 말을 들어라, 의로움을 아는 이들아 내 가르침을 마음속에 간직한 백성아. 사람들의 모욕을 두려워하지 말고 그들의 악담에 낙심하지 마라.","나의 말을 들어라. 정의를 익히 아는 자들아, 나의 훈계를 마음속 깊이 간직하는 자들아. 사람들의 욕설을 두려워하지 마라. 비방을 받더라도 낙담하지 마라.","의를 아는 자들아, 마음에 내 율법이 있는 백성들아, 너희는 내게 듣고 그들의 비방을 두려워하지 말라 그들의 비방에 놀라지 말라","의를 아는 자들아, 마음에 내 율법이 있는 백성들아, 너희는 나를 듣고 사람의 훼방을 두려워 말라 사람의 비방에 놀라지 말라","바벨론의 포로생활 속에서 수치와 고난을 당하는 유다인, 특히 예언자 이사야의 말씀을 따르는 소수의 제자들에게 주께서 이렇게 위로하여 주셨다. \"나의 진실함을 알고 있는 사람들아, 나의 말씀을 가슴에 품고 사는 사람들아, 너희는 똑똑히 들어라! 누가 너희를 비웃고 조롱하더라도 너희는 두려워하지 말아라! 사람들이 아무리 너희를 깔보고 멸시하여도 너희는 겁을 내거나 무서워하지 말아라!","Hear me, you who know justice, you people who have my teaching at heart: Do not fear the reproach of others; remain firm at their revilings.","Hearken unto me, ye that know righteousness, the people in whose heart is my law; fear ye not the reproach of men, neither be ye afraid of their revilings.","\"Hear me, you who know what is right, you people who have my law in your hearts: Do not fear the reproach of men or be terrified by their insults.","Audite me, qui scitis iustitiam, popule, in cuius corde est lex mea: nolite timere opprobrium hominum et blasphemias eorum ne metuatis.","שמעו אלי ידעי צדק עם תורתי בלבם אל תיראו חרפת אנוש ומגדפתם אל תחתו׃"],["29","51","8","그들을 옷인 양 좀이 먹어 버리고 그들을 양털인 양 벌레가 먹어 버릴 것이다. 그러나 나의 의로움은 영원하고 나의 구원은 대대에 미치리라.","그들은 좀에 쓸려 떨어지는 옷이요, 빈대좀에 먹혀 삭아지는 양털이다. 내가 세울 정의는 영원하고 내가 베풀 구원은 대대에 미친다.\"","옷 같이 좀이 그들을 먹을 것이며 양털 같이 좀벌레가 그들을 먹을 것이나 나의 공의는 영원히 있겠고 나의 구원은 세세에 미치리라","그들은 옷 같이 좀에게 먹힐 것이며 그들은 양털 같이 벌레에게 먹힐 것이로되 나의 의는 영원히 있겠고 나의 구원은 세세에 미치리라","너희를 조롱하는 원수들은 좀먹은 털옷처럼 해어질 것이지만 내가 이제 너희에게 줄 평화는 끝없이 계속되고 내가 너희에게 세워 줄 나라는 대대로 이어질 것이다.\"","They shall be like a garment eaten by moths, like wool consumed by grubs; But my victory shall remain forever, my salvation, for all generations.","For the moth shall eat them up like a garment, and the worm shall eat them like wool: but my righteousness shall be for ever, and my salvation from generation to generation.","For the moth will eat them up like a garment; the worm will devour them like wool. But my righteousness will last forever, my salvation through all generations.\"","Sicut enim vestimentum sic comedet eos vermis, et sicut lanam sic devorabit eos tinea; iustitia autem mea in sempiternum erit, et salus mea in generationes generationum.","כי כבגד יאכלם עש וכצמר יאכלם סס וצדקתי לעולם תהיה וישועתי לדור דורים׃"],["29","51","9","깨어나소서, 깨어나소서, 힘을 입으소서, 주님의 팔이시여. 옛날처럼, 오래전 그 시절처럼 깨어나소서. 라합을 베어 쓰러뜨리시고 용을 꿰찌르신 이가 당신이 아니십니까?","야훼여, 당신의 팔을 벌떡 일으키십시오. 그 팔에 힘을 내십시오. 옛날 옛적에 하셨듯이 팔을 일으키십시오. 1)라합을 찢던 그 팔을, 용을 찔러 죽이던 그 팔을 일으키십시오. 바다를 혼돈시키는 괴물을 가리킨다.","여호와의 팔이여 깨소서 깨소서 능력을 베푸소서 옛날 옛시대에 깨신 것 같이 하소서 라합을 저미시고 용을 찌르신 이가 어찌 주가 아니시며","여호와의 팔이여 깨소서 깨소서 능력을 베푸소서 옛날 옛시대에 깨신것 같이 하소서 라합을 저미시고 용을 찌르신이가 어찌 주가 아니시며","예언자가 포로생활을 하는 동족을 위하여 탄식하며 기도하였다. \"여호와여, 깨어 일어나 용사처럼 무장하소서! 어서 깨어나 옛날 옛적처럼 권능을 베풀어 주소서! 바다의 괴물 라합을 찢어 죽이고 용을 찔러 죽이듯이, 애굽과 바로를 처단하신 분이 바로 주님이 아니셨습니까?","Awake, awake, put on strength, arm of the LORD! Awake as in the days of old, in ages long ago! Was it not you who crushed Rahab, you who pierced the dragon?","Awake, awake, put on strength, O arm of the LORD; awake, as in the ancient days, in the generations of old. Art thou not it that hath cut Rahab, and wounded the dragon?","Awake, awake! Clothe yourself with strength, O arm of the LORD; awake, as in days gone by, as in generations of old. Was it not you who cut Rahab to pieces, who pierced that monster through?","Consurge, consurge, induere fortitudinem, brachium Domini; consurge sicut in diebus antiquis, in generationibus saeculorum. Numquid non tu percussisti Rahab, vulnerasti draconem?","עורי עורי לבשי עז זרוע יהוה עורי כימי קדם דרות עולמים הלוא את היא המחצבת רהב מחוללת תנין׃"],["29","51","10","바다를, 그 큰 심연의 물을 말리신 이가 당신이 아니십니까? 구원받은 이들이 건너가도록 당신께서 깊은 바다를 길로 만드셨습니다.","바다 깊은 물구렁을 말리던 그 팔을, 깊은 바다에 길을 내어 구원받은 백성을 건너게 하던 그 팔을 일으키십시오.","바다를, 넓고 깊은 물을 말리시고 바다 깊은 곳에 길을 내어 구속 받은 자들을 건너게 하신 이가 어찌 주가 아니시니이까","바다를, 넓고 깊은 물을 말리시고 바다 깊은 곳에 길을 내어 구속 얻은 자들로 건너게 하신이가 어찌 주가 아니시니이까","홍해의 넓고 깊은 물을 말리고 그 깊은 바닷속으로 대로를 뚫어 해방된 민족을 건너가게 하지 않으셨습니까?\"","Was it not you who dried up the sea, the waters of the great deep, You who made the depths of the sea into a way for the redeemed to pass through?","Art thou not it which hath dried the sea, the waters of the great deep; that hath made the depths of the sea a way for the ransomed to pass over?","Was it not you who dried up the sea, the waters of the great deep, who made a road in the depths of the sea so that the redeemed might cross over?","Numquid non tu siccasti mare, aquam abyssi vehementis, qui posuisti profundum maris viam, ut transirent liberati?","הלוא את היא המחרבת ים מי תהום רבה השמה מעמקי ים דרך לעבר גאולים׃"],["29","51","11","주님께서 구해 내신 이들이 돌아오리이다. 환호 소리와 함께 시온으로 들어서리이다. 끝없는 즐거움이 그들의 머리 위에 넘치고 기쁨과 즐거움이 그들과 함께하여 슬픔과 탄식이 사라지리이다.","야훼께서 구해 내신 백성이 돌아올 것입니다. 환성을 올리며 시온으로 돌아올 것입니다. 즐거움이 길이 머리 위를 감돌고, 흥겨움과 즐거움을 주체할 수 없으리니 걱정과 한숨은 이내 스러질 것입니다.","여호와께 구속 받은 자들이 돌아와 노래하며 시온으로 돌아오니 영원한 기쁨이 그들의 머리 위에 있고 즐거움과 기쁨을 얻으리니 슬픔과 탄식이 달아나리이다","여호와께 구속된 자들이 돌아와서 노래하며 시온으로 들어와서 그 머리 위에 영영한 기쁨을 쓰고 즐거움과 기쁨을 얻으리니 슬픔과 탄식이 달아나리이다","주께서 응답하셨다. \"지금 이 포로생활 속에서 신음하는 백성들을 내가 다시 해방시키겠다. 이제 곧 그들이 모두 고국으로 돌아갈 것이다. 그들의 얼굴이 기쁨으로 빛나고 그 기쁨이 언제까지나 사라지지 않을 것이다. 그들의 삶이 기쁨과 행복으로 가득 차고 슬픔과 탄식이 사라질 것이다.\"","Those whom the LORD has ransomed will return and enter Zion singing, crowned with everlasting joy; They will meet with joy and gladness, sorrow and mourning will flee.","Therefore the redeemed of the LORD shall return, and come with singing unto Zion; and everlasting joy shall be upon their head: they shall obtain gladness and joy; and sorrow and mourning shall flee away.","The ransomed of the LORD will return. They will enter Zion with singing; everlasting joy will crown their heads. Gladness and joy will overtake them, and sorrow and sighing will flee away.","Et redempti a Domino revertentur et venient in Sion laudantes; et laetitia sempiterna super capita eorum, gaudium et laetitiam obtinebunt; fugiet dolor et gemitus.","ופדויי יהוה ישובון ובאו ציון ברנה ושמחת עולם על ראשם ששון ושמחה ישיגון נסו יגון ואנחה׃"],["29","51","12","내가, 바로 내가 너희의 위로자이다. 그런데 죽을 인생을 두려워하고 풀 같은 운명을 타고난 인간의 아들을 두려워하는 너는 누구냐?","\"너희를 위로할 자, 나밖에 또 누가 있으랴? 어찌하여 너희는 죽을 인생을 겁내느냐? 말라버릴 풀 같은 인생을 겁내느냐?","이르시되 너희를 위로하는 자는 나 곧 나이니라 너는 어떠한 자이기에 죽을 사람을 두려워하며 풀 같이 될 사람의 아들을 두려워하느냐","가라사대 너희를 위로하는 자는 나여늘 나여늘 너는 어떠한 자이기에 죽을 사람을 두려워하며 풀같이 될 인자를 두려워하느냐","예언자가 대언한 이스라엘 백성의 탄식을 듣고 하나님이 이렇게 대답하셨다. \"너희를 위로하는 이는 바로 나 여호와이다! 내가 직접 너희가 당하는 고난을 끝내겠다. 내가 이미 너희와 함께 있다. 그런데도 너희는 어찌하여 죽을 수밖에 없는 인간들을 두려워하며, 풀잎처럼 시들어 갈 사람들을 무서워하느냐? 너희를 지은 나 여호와를 어떻게 잊을 수 있느냐?","I, it is I who comfort you. Can you then fear mortals who die, human beings who are just grass,","I, even I, am he that comforteth you: who art thou, that thou shouldest be afraid of a man that shall die, and of the son of man which shall be made as grass;","\"I, even I, am he who comforts you. Who are you that you fear mortal men, the sons of men, who are but grass,","Ego, ego ipse consolator vester. Quis tu, ut timeas ab homine mortali et a filio hominis, qui quasi fenum ita arescet?","אנכי אנכי הוא מנחמכם מי את ותיראי מאנוש ימות ומבן אדם חציר ינתן׃"],["29","51","13","너는 잊었다, 너를 만드신 주님을 하늘을 펼치시고 땅의 기초를 놓으신 분을. 압제자가 너를 멸망시키기로 작정하였다고 너는 날마다 그의 노여움 앞에서 줄곧 겁을 내고 있다. 그러나 압제자의 노여움이 어디 있느냐?","너희가 잊었구나, 너희를 지은 이, 하늘을 펼치고 땅을 세운 야훼를. 때려부술 듯이 화를 내며 너희를 괴롭히던 자들이 두려워 너희는 부들부들 떨고만 있었지. 그런데 그 화를 내며 너희를 괴롭히던 자들이 지금은 모두 어디 있느냐?","하늘을 펴고 땅의 기초를 정하고 너를 지은 자 여호와를 어찌하여 잊어버렸느냐 너를 멸하려고 준비하는 저 학대자의 분노를 어찌하여 항상 종일 두려워하느냐 학대자의 분노가 어디 있느냐","하늘을 펴고 땅의 기초를 정하고 너를 지은 자 여호와를 어찌하여 잊어버렸느냐 너를 멸하려고 예비하는 저 학대자의 분노를 어찌하여 항상 종일 두려워하느냐 학대자의 분노가 어디 있느냐","나는 하늘을 펼쳐 놓고 땅을 든든한 기초 위에 만들어 놓은 자가 아니냐? 그런데도 너희는 어찌하여 압제자들의 분노 때문에 항상 끊임없이 죽게 되었다고 벌벌 떠느냐? 그들이 아무리 화를 내어도 너희에게 무슨 해를 끼칠 수 있겠느냐?","And forget the LORD, your maker, who stretched out the heavens and laid the foundations of earth? All the day you are in constant dread of the fury of the oppressor When he prepares himself to destroy; but where is the oppressor’s fury?","And forgettest the LORD thy maker, that hath stretched forth the heavens, and laid the foundations of the earth; and hast feared continually every day because of the fury of the oppressor, as if he were ready to destroy? and where is the fury of the oppressor?","that you forget the LORD your Maker, who stretched out the heavens and laid the foundations of the earth, that you live in constant terror every day because of the wrath of the oppressor, who is bent on destruction? For where is the wrath of the oppressor?","Et oblitus es Domini factoris tui, qui tetendit caelos et fundavit terram; et formidasti iugiter tota die a facie furoris eius, qui te tribulabat, cum parabat ad perdendum. Ubi nunc est furor tribulantis?","ותשכח יהוה עשך נוטה שמים ויסד ארץ ותפחד תמיד כל היום מפני חמת המציק כאשר כונן להשחית ואיה חמת המציק׃"],["29","51","14","사슬에 묶인 이들이 곧 풀려나리니 그들은 죽지도, 구렁으로 내려가지도 않고 그들에게는 양식이 모자라지도 않으리라.","사슬에 묶인 자들이 곧 풀려나고 땅굴에서 살아 나오며 양식도 떨어지지 아니하리라.","결박된 포로가 속히 놓일 것이니 죽지도 아니할 것이요 구덩이로 내려가지도 아니할 것이며 그의 양식이 부족하지도 아니하리라","결박된 포로가 속히 놓일 것이니 죽지도 아니할 것이요 구덩이로 내려가지도 아니할 것이며 그 양식이 핍절하지도 아니하리라","쇠사슬에 결박되어 허리를 굽히고 사는 포로민들이 곧 해방되어 돌아올 것이다! 그들이 감옥에서 죽어 구덩이에 묻히지도 않을 것이며 먹을 것이 없어서 굶어 죽지도 않을 것이다!","The captives shall soon be released; they shall not die and go down into the pit, nor shall they want for bread.","The captive exile hasteneth that he may be loosed, and that he should not die in the pit, nor that his bread should fail.","The cowering prisoners will soon be set free; they will not die in their dungeon, nor will they lack bread.","Cito captivus liberabitur et non morietur in fovea, nec deficiet panis eius.","מהר צעה להפתח ולא ימות לשחת ולא יחסר לחמו׃"],["29","51","15","나는 주 너의 하느님 바다를 뒤흔들어 파도를 울부짖게 하는 이 그 이름 만군의 주님이다.","나 야훼가 너희 하느님이다. 파도 소리도 요란하게 바다를 뒤흔드는, 나의 이름은 만군의 야훼이다.","나는 네 하나님 여호와라 바다를 휘저어서 그 물결을 뒤흔들게 하는 자이니 그의 이름은 만군의 여호와니라","나는 네 하나님 여호와라 바다를 저어서 그 물결로 흉용케 하는 자니 2)내 이름은 만군의 여호와니라 히, 그","나 여호와가 너희의 하나님이기 때문이다. 나 만유의 주 여호와는 세상의 모든 권세를 지배하는 자이다! 저 드넓은 바다를 휘저어 끝없이 파도가 밀려오게 하는 이도 바로 나 여호와이다.","For I am the LORD, your God, who stirs up the sea so that its waves roar; the LORD of hosts by name.","But I am the LORD thy God, that divided the sea, whose waves roared: The LORD of hosts is his name.","For I am the LORD your God, who churns up the sea so that its waves roar--the LORD Almighty is his name.","Ego enim sum Dominus Deus tuus, qui conturbo mare, et intumescunt fluctus eius; Dominus exercituum nomen eius.","ואנכי יהוה אלהיך רגע הים ויהמו גליו יהוה צבאות שמו׃"],["29","51","16","나는 네 입에 내 말을 담아 주고 내 손 그늘에 너를 숨겨 준다. 나는 하늘을 심고 땅의 기초를 놓으며 시온에게 말한다. “너는 나의 백성이다.”","나는 너희 입에 나의 말을 담아주고 나의 손그늘에 너희를 숨겨준다. 하늘을 펴고 땅을 세우면서 시온을 향해 선포한다. '너는 나의 백성이다.'\"","내가 내 말을 네 입에 두고 내 손 그늘로 너를 덮었나니 이는 내가 하늘을 펴며 땅의 기초를 정하며 시온에게 이르기를 너는 내 백성이라 말하기 위함이니라","내가 내 말을 네 입에 두고 내 손 그늘로 너를 덮었나니 이는 내가 하늘을 펴며 땅의 기초를 정하며 시온에게 이르기를 너는 내 백성이라 하려 하였음이니라","나는 하늘을 펼쳐 놓고 땅을 든든한 기초 위에 세워 놓은 자로서 예루살렘 주민들에게 약속한다. \"너희는 나의 백성이다! 너희는 내가 일러준 모든 일을 온 세상에 전파할 사람들이다. 그러므로 내가 너희를 나의 손바닥 그늘 밑에 항상 보호해 주겠다!\"","I have put my words into your mouth, I covered you, shielded by my hand, Stretching out the heavens, laying the foundations of the earth, saying to Zion: You are my people.","And I have put my words in thy mouth, and I have covered thee in the shadow of mine hand, that I may plant the heavens, and lay the foundations of the earth, and say unto Zion, Thou art my people.","I have put my words in your mouth and covered you with the shadow of my hand--I who set the heavens in place, who laid the foundations of the earth, and who say to Zion, 'You are my people.'\"","Posui verba mea in ore tuo et in umbra manus meae protexi te, cum extendebam caelos et fundabam terram et dicebam ad Sion:  “Populus meus es tu “.","ואשים דברי בפיך ובצל ידי כסיתיך לנטע שמים וליסד ארץ ולאמר לציון עמי אתה׃"],["29","51","17","깨어라, 깨어라 일어나라, 예루살렘아. 주님의 손에서 진노의 잔을 받아 마신 너, 비틀거리게 하는 술잔을 바닥까지 마신 너.","깨어라, 깨어라. 너 야훼의 손에서 진노의 잔을 받아 마신 예루살렘아, 일어나거라. 네가 그 어지럽게 하는 술잔을 들이켰구나.","여호와의 손에서 그의 분노의 잔을 마신 예루살렘이여 깰지어다 깰지어다 일어설지어다 네가 이미 비틀걸음 치게 하는 큰 잔을 마셔 다 비웠도다","여호와의 손에서 그 분노의 잔을 마신 예루살렘이여 깰찌어다 깰찌어다 일어설찌어다 네가 이미 비틀걸음 치게 하는 큰 잔을 마셔 다하였도다","이스라엘이 우연히 멸망하여 침략자들의 압제를 받는 것이 아니라, 하나님의 심판을 받아 고난을 당하게 된 것임을 예언자가 깨우쳐 주었다. 예루살렘아, 어서 깨어라! 어서 깨어 일어나라! 네가 여호와의 진노의 잔을 마셨기 때문이다. 네가 진노의 잔을 찌꺼기까지 다 마시고 비틀거리며 멸망하게 된 것이다.","Wake up, wake up! Arise, Jerusalem, You who drank at the LORD’s hand the cup of his wrath; Who drained to the dregs the bowl of staggering!","Awake, awake, stand up, O Jerusalem, which hast drunk at the hand of the LORD the cup of his fury; thou hast drunken the dregs of the cup of trembling, and wrung them out.","Awake, awake! Rise up, O Jerusalem, you who have drunk from the hand of the LORD the cup of his wrath, you who have drained to its dregs the goblet that makes men stagger.","Elevare, elevare, consurge, Ierusalem, quae bibisti de manu Domini calicem irae eius; poculum soporis bibisti, epotasti.","התעוררי התעוררי קומי ירושלם אשר שתית מיד יהוה את כוס חמתו את קבעת כוס התרעלה שתית מצית׃"],["29","51","18","제가 낳은 모든 자식들 가운데 저를 인도해 줄 자 하나도 없고 제가 키운 모든 자식들 가운데 손을 붙잡아 주는 자 하나도 없는 신세.","제가 낳은 모든 자식들 중에 저를 인도해 줄 자가 하나도 없고 제 손으로 길러낸 자식들 중에 손으로 잡아주는 자 하나도 없는 신세,","네가 낳은 모든 아들 중에 너를 인도할 자가 없고 네가 양육한 모든 아들 중에 그 손으로 너를 이끌 자도 없도다","2)네가 낳은 모든 아들 중에 너를 인도할 자가 없고 너의 양육한 모든 아들 중에 그 손으로 너를 이끌 자도 없도다 히, 그","네가 낳아서 키운 자식들이 모두 전사해서 지금 너를 도와줄 이는 하나도 남아 있지 않고 네 손을 붙잡아 줄 자식이 하나도 남아 있지 않다.","She has no one to guide her of all the children she bore; She has no one to take her by the hand, of all the children she reared!—","There is none to guide her among all the sons whom she hath brought forth; neither is there any that taketh her by the hand of all the sons that she hath brought up.","Of all the sons she bore there was none to guide her; of all the sons she reared there was none to take her by the hand.","Non est qui sustentet eam ex omnibus filiis, quos genuit; et non est qui apprehendat manum eius ex omnibus filiis, quos enutrivit.","אין מנהל לה מכל בנים ילדה ואין מחזיק בידה מכל בנים גדלה׃"],["29","51","19","이 두 가지가 너에게 닥쳐왔건만 누가 너를 동정하리오? 파멸과 파괴, 굶주림과 칼이 닥쳐왔건만 누가 너를 위로하리오?","네가 이 두 가지 봉변을 당하였건만 누가 있어 너를 동정하더냐? 침략과 파괴, 기근과 전쟁을 겪었지만 누가 있어 너를 위로하더냐?","이 두 가지 일이 네게 닥쳤으니 누가 너를 위하여 슬퍼하랴 곧 황폐와 멸망이요 기근과 칼이라 누가 너를 위로하랴","이 두가지 일이 네게 당하였으니 누가 너를 위하여 슬퍼하랴 곧 황폐와 멸망이요 기근과 칼이라 내가 어떻게 너를 위로하랴","네가 이중으로 재앙을 당하였으나 너를 동정하고 위로할 사람이 하나도 없다! 도시와 국토가 황폐화되고 백성들은 전란과 기근으로 몰살을 당하는데 위로할 사람이 어디에 있겠느냐?","Your misfortunes are double; who is there to grieve with you? Desolation and destruction, famine and sword! Who is there to comfort you?","These two things are come unto thee; who shall be sorry for thee? desolation, and destruction, and the famine, and the sword: by whom shall I comfort thee?","These double calamities have come upon you--who can comfort you?--ruin and destruction, famine and sword--who can console you?","Duo sunt quae occurrerunt tibi; quis contristabitur super te? Vastitas et contritio et fames et gladius; quis consolabitur te?","שתים הנה קראתיך מי ינוד לך השד והשבר והרעב והחרב מי אנחמך׃"],["29","51","20","네 아들들은 주님의 노여움을, 네 하느님의 질책을 가득 입어 그물에 걸린 영양처럼 실신하여 길모퉁이마다 쓰러져 있구나.","너의 자식들은 야훼의 크신 노여움을 사, 네 하느님의 책망을 듣고, 마치 그물에 걸린 노루처럼 거리의 모퉁이마다 맥없이 쓰러져 있구나.","네 아들들이 곤비하여 그물에 걸린 영양 같이 온 거리 모퉁이에 누웠으니 그들에게 여호와의 분노와 네 하나님의 견책이 가득하도다","네 아들들이 곤비하여 그물에 걸린 영양 같이 온 거리 모퉁이에 누웠으니 그들에게 여호와의 분노와 네 하나님의 견책이 가득하였도다","네 자식들이 기진맥진해서 길거리마다 쓰러져 있고 그물에 걸린 사슴처럼 길모퉁이마다 쓰러져서 더 이상 기어가지도 못한다. 여호와의 진노가 그토록 무섭게 온 나라에 가득 찼고 네 하나님의 채찍이 온 백성을 후려쳤다.","Your children lie helpless at every street corner like antelopes in a net. They are filled with the wrath of the LORD, the rebuke of your God.","Thy sons have fainted, they lie at the head of all the streets, as a wild bull in a net: they are full of the fury of the LORD, the rebuke of thy God.","Your sons have fainted; they lie at the head of every street, like antelope caught in a net. They are filled with the wrath of the LORD and the rebuke of your God.","Filii tui defecerunt, iacent in capite omnium viarum sicut oryx illaqueatus, pleni indignatione Domini, increpatione Dei tui.","בניך עלפו שכבו בראש כל חוצות כתוא מכמר המלאים חמת יהוה גערת אלהיך׃"],["29","51","21","그러니 이 말을 들어라, 너 가련한 여인아 술을 마시지도 않았는데 취한 여인아.","그러니, 내 말을 들어라. 이 불쌍한 것아. 네가 술도 먹지 아니하고 비틀거리는구나.","그러므로 너 곤고하며 포도주가 아니라도 취한 자여 이 말을 들으라","그러므로 너 곤고하며 포도주가 아니라도 취한 자여 이 말을 들으라","그러므로 불쌍한 예루살렘 사람들아, 이 말씀을 똑똑히 들어라. 술을 마시지 않고서도 정신을 잃을 정도로 취한 시온의 백성들아,","But now, hear this, afflicted one, drunk, but not with wine,","Therefore hear now this, thou afflicted, and drunken, but not with wine:","Therefore hear this, you afflicted one, made drunk, but not with wine.","Idcirco audi hoc, paupercula et ebria, sed non a vino.","לכן שמעי נא זאת עניה ושכרת ולא מיין׃"],["29","51","22","너의 주인이신 주님이시며 당신 백성을 변호해 주시는 너의 하느님께서 이렇게 말씀하신다. “보라, 내가 네 손에서 비틀거리게 하는 그 술잔을 거두리니 너는 내 진노의 술잔을 다시는 마시지 않으리라.","당신의 백성을 감싸주시는, 너희 하느님, 너의 주, 야훼께서 말씀하신다. \"보아라, 내가 네 손에서 어지럽게 하는 그 술잔을 거두리라. 나의 진노의 잔을 거두리니 네가 다시는 마시지 아니하리라.","네 주 여호와, 그의 백성의 억울함을 풀어 주시는 네 하나님이 이같이 말씀하시되 보라 내가 비틀걸음 치게 하는 잔 곧 나의 분노의 큰 잔을 네 손에서 거두어서 네가 다시는 마시지 못하게 하고","네 주 여호와, 그 백성을 신원하시는 네 하나님이 이같이 말씀하시되 보라 내가 비틀걸음 치게 하는 잔 곧 나의 분노의 큰 잔을 네 손에서 거두어서 너로 다시는 마시지 않게 하고","너희가 섬기는 주 하나님, 자기 백성의 원통함을 풀어 주시는 여호와께서 이렇게 말씀하신다. \"너는 내가 내린 심판의 잔을 마시고 취하였으니 이제 그 잔을 네 손에서 내가 다시 가져가겠다. 내가 다시는 이 잔을 네게 주지 않겠다.","Thus says the LORD, your Master, your God, who defends his people: See, I am taking from your hand the cup of staggering; The bowl of my wrath you shall no longer drink.","Thus saith thy Lord the LORD, and thy God that pleadeth the cause of his people, Behold, I have taken out of thine hand the cup of trembling, even the dregs of the cup of my fury; thou shalt no more drink it again:","This is what your Sovereign LORD says, your God, who defends his people: \"See, I have taken out of your hand the cup that made you stagger; from that cup, the goblet of my wrath, you will never drink again.","Haec dicit dominator tuus, Dominus et Deus tuus, qui contendit pro populo suo:  “Ecce tuli de manu tua calicem soporis, poculum indignationis meae; non adicies, ut bibas illum ultra.","כה אמר אדניך יהוה ואלהיך יריב עמו הנה לקחתי מידך את כוס התרעלה את קבעת כוס חמתי לא תוסיפי לשתותה עוד׃"],["29","51","23","내가 너를 괴롭히는 자들의 손에 그 술잔을 놓으리라. 그들은 너에게 ‘엎드려라. 우리가 딛고 지나가겠다.’ 하였고 너는 네 등을 땅바닥처럼 만들어 그들이 바닥을 밟듯 그 위를 지나가게 하였다.”","내가 그 잔을 너를 괴롭히던 자들의 손에 넘겨주리라. '땅에 엎드려라. 우리가 디디고 지나가겠다.' 너에게 이렇게 기막힌 소리를 하며 너의 등을 땅바닥 밟듯 밟고 길바닥처럼 디디고 지나가던 자들의 손에 그 잔을 넘겨주리라.\"","그 잔을 너를 괴롭게 하던 자들의 손에 두리라 그들은 일찍이 네게 이르기를 엎드리라 우리가 넘어가리라 하던 자들이라 너를 넘어가려는 그들에게 네가 네 허리를 땅과 같게, 길거리와 같게 하였느니라 하시니라","그 잔을 너를 곤고케 하던 자들의 손에 두리라 그들은 일찌기 네게 이르기를 엎드리라 우리가 넘어가리라 하던 자들이라 너를 넘어가려는 그들의 앞에 네가 네 허리를 펴서 땅 같게, 거리 같게 하였느니라 하시니라","이제는 내가 이 잔을 네 원수들에게 넘겨 주겠다. \"우리가 지나가도록 땅바닥에 엎드리라\"고 명령하면서 너희 허리를 땅바닥처럼 밟고 지나간 바벨론의 압제자들에게 내가 이 잔을 넘겨 주겠다\"","I will put it into the hands of your tormentors, those who said to you, “Bow down, that we may walk over you.” So you offered your back like the ground, like the street for them to walk on.","But I will put it into the hand of them that afflict thee; which have said to thy soul, Bow down, that we may go over: and thou hast laid thy body as the ground, and as the street, to them that went over.","I will put it into the hands of your tormentors, who said to you, 'Fall prostrate that we may walk over you.' And you made your back like the ground, like a street to be walked over.\"","Et ponam illum in manu eorum, qui te humiliaverunt et dixerunt tibi:  “Incurvare, ut transeamus “; et ponebas ut terram dorsum tuum et quasi viam transeuntibus “.","ושמתיה ביד מוגיך אשר אמרו לנפשך שחי ונעברה ותשימי כארץ גוך וכחוץ לעברים׃"],["29","52","1","깨어나라, 깨어나라. 시온아, 힘을 입어라. 거룩한 도성 예루살렘아 네 영화의 옷을 입어라. 할례 받지 않은 자와 부정한 자가 다시는 너에게 들지 않으리라.","깨어라, 깨어라. 너 시온아, 힘을 내어라. 찬란하게 몸을 단장하여라. 거룩한 도성, 예루살렘아! 할례받지 않은 자와 부정한 자가 다시는 너에게 들지 못하리라.","시온이여 깰지어다 깰지어다 네 힘을 낼지어다 거룩한 성 예루살렘이여 네 아름다운 옷을 입을지어다 이제부터 할례 받지 아니한 자와 부정한 자가 다시는 네게로 들어옴이 없을 것임이라","시온이여 깰찌어다 깰찌어다 네 힘을 입을찌어다 거룩한 성 예루살렘이여 네 아름다운 옷을 입을찌어다 이제부터 할례 받지 않은 자와 부정한 자가 다시는 네게로 들어옴이 없을 것임이니라","시온아, 깨어라! 어서 깨어 일어나 힘을 내어라! 거룩한 도성 예루살렘아, 지극히 화려한 네 예복을 다시 입어라! 할례받지 않고 부정하기만 한 바벨론 군대가 이제부터 다시는 너를 짓밟지 못할 것이기 때문이다.","Awake, awake! Put on your strength, Zion; Put on your glorious garments, Jerusalem, holy city. Never again shall the uncircumcised or the unclean enter you.","Awake, awake; put on thy strength, O Zion; put on thy beautiful garments, O Jerusalem, the holy city: for henceforth there shall no more come into thee the uncircumcised and the unclean.","Awake, awake, O Zion, clothe yourself with strength. Put on your garments of splendor, O Jerusalem, the holy city. The uncircumcised and defiled will not enter you again.","Consurge, consurge, induere fortitudine tua, Sion; induere vestimentis gloriae tuae, Ierusalem, civitas sanctitatis, quia non adiciet ultra, ut pertranseat per te incircumcisus et immundus.","עורי עורי לבשי עזך ציון לבשי בגדי תפארתך ירושלם עיר הקדש כי לא יוסיף יבא בך עוד ערל וטמא׃"],["29","52","2","포로가 된 예루살렘아 먼지를 털고 일어나라. 포로가 된 딸 시온아 너의 목에서 굴레를 벗어 버려라.","먼지를 털고 일어나거라. 포로가 되었던 예루살렘아! 너의 목에서 쇠사슬을 끌러버려라. 포로가 되었던 내 딸 시온아!","너는 티끌을 털어 버릴지어다 예루살렘이여 일어나 앉을지어다 사로잡힌 딸 시온이여 네 목의 줄을 스스로 풀지어다","너는 티끌을 떨어버릴찌어다 예루살렘이여 일어나 보좌에 앉을찌어다 사로잡힌 딸 시온이여 네 목의 1)줄을 스스로 풀찌어다 줄이 풀렸도다","예루살렘아, 그러므로 네 몸에서 부끄러운 먼지를 털어 버리고 다시 네 보좌에 앉아라! 네 목을 묶었던 사슬이 이미 풀어졌으니 포로 되었던 딸 시온아, 너는 이제 더 이상 포로로 잡혀 있는 여인이 아니다!","Arise, shake off the dust, sit enthroned, Jerusalem; Loose the bonds from your neck, captive daughter Zion!","Shake thyself from the dust; arise, and sit down, O Jerusalem: loose thyself from the bands of thy neck, O captive daughter of Zion.","Shake off your dust; rise up, sit enthroned, O Jerusalem. Free yourself from the chains on your neck, O captive Daughter of Zion.","Excutere de pulvere, consurge, captiva Ierusalem; solve vincula colli tui, captiva filia Sion.","התנערי מעפר קומי שבי ירושלם התפתחו מוסרי צוארך שביה בת ציון׃"],["29","52","3","정녕 주님께서 이렇게 말씀하신다. “너희가 대가 없이 팔려 갔으니 돈을 내지 않고 구원을 받으리라.","그렇다, 야훼께서?이렇게 말씀하신다. \"너희가 값없이 팔려갔으니, 너희를 물러내는 데 돈을 내야 할 까닭이 없다.\"","여호와께서 이와 같이 말씀하시되 너희가 값 없이 팔렸으니 돈 없이 속량되리라","여호와께서 이같이 말씀하시되 너희가 값 없이 팔렸으니 돈 없이 속량되리라","주께서 이렇게 말씀하셨기 때문이다. \"내가 너희를 노예로 팔 때에 아무런 값을 받지 않았다. 그러므로 내가 이제 너희를 해방시킬 때에도 전혀 몸값을 줄 필요가 없다!\"","For thus says the LORD: For nothing you were sold, without money you shall be redeemed.","For thus saith the LORD, Ye have sold yourselves for nought; and ye shall be redeemed without money.","For this is what the LORD says: \"You were sold for nothing, and without money you will be redeemed.\"","Quia haec dicit Dominus:  “Gratis venumdati estis et sine argento redimemini “.","כי כה אמר יהוה חנם נמכרתם ולא בכסף תגאלו׃"],["29","52","4","#NAME?","그렇다, 주 야훼께서 이렇게 말씀하신다. \"나의 백성이 처음에는 이집트로 몸붙일 곳을 찾아 내려갔었고, 나중에는 아시리아한테 억눌려 큰 고생을 하였다.","주 여호와께서 이와 같이 말씀하시되 내 백성이 전에 애굽에 내려가서 거기에 거류하였고 앗수르인은 공연히 그들을 압박하였도다","주 여호와께서 이같이 말씀하시되 내 백성이 이왕에 애굽에 내려가서 거기 우거하였었고 앗수르인은 공연히 그들을 압박하였도다","나의 주 여호와께서 분명히 이렇게 말씀하신다. \"내 백성이 맨 처음에는 애굽으로 내려가서 이방인으로 체류하였고 맨 나중에는 앗수르 족속이 와서 이유도 없이 내 백성을 탄압하고 노예로 잡아갔다.","For thus says the Lord GOD: To Egypt long ago my people went down, to sojourn there; Assyria, too, oppressed them for nought.","For thus saith the Lord GOD, My people went down aforetime into Egypt to sojourn there; and the Assyrian oppressed them without cause.","For this is what the Sovereign LORD says: \"At first my people went down to Egypt to live; lately, Assyria has oppressed them.","Quia haec dicit Dominus Deus:  “In Aegyptum descendit populus meus in principio, ut colonus esset ibi; et Assur sine causa oppressit eum.","כי כה אמר אדני יהוה מצרים ירד עמי בראשנה לגור שם ואשור באפס עשקו׃"],["29","52","5","그런데 나는 지금 여기에서 무엇을 하고 있는가? 주님의 말씀이다. 내 백성이 대가 없이 붙잡혀 왔고 그 지배자들이 윽박지르며 내 이름은 날마다 끊임없이 멸시를 당하는데. 주님의 말씀이다.","그런데 내가 이러고만 있을 때가 아니지.\" 야훼의 말씀이시다. \"나의 백성은 억울하게 붙들려가 고생하고, 그들을 마구 부려먹는 자들은 개가를 부르는데,\" 야훼의 말씀이시다. \"나의 이름은 날이면 날마다 멸시당하고 있구나.","그러므로 이제 여호와께서 말씀하시되 내 백성이 까닭 없이 잡혀갔으니 내가 여기서 어떻게 하랴 여호와께서 말씀하시되 그들을 관할하는 자들이 떠들며 내 이름을 항상 종일토록 더럽히도다","여호와께서 말씀하시되 내 백성이 까닭 없이 잡혀갔으니 내가 여기서 어떻게 할꼬 여호와께서 말씀하시되 그들을 관할하는 자들이 떠들며 내 이름을 항상 종일 더럽히도다","그런데 내 백성이 지금은 어떤 처지에 있느냐? 나 여호와가 이르는 말이다. 바벨론 족속이 그들을 노예처럼 잡아가고 몸값도 전혀 치르지 않았다. 오히려 바벨론의 통치자들은 자만해져서 끊임없이 나를 조롱하고 내가 무능하기 때문에 내 백성이 멸망하였다고 종일 내 이름을 더럽힌다.","But now, what am I to do here? —oracle of the LORD. My people have been taken away for nothing; their rulers mock, oracle of the LORD; constantly, every day, my name is reviled.","Now therefore, what have I here, saith the LORD, that my people is taken away for nought? they that rule over them make them to howl, saith the LORD; and my name continually every day is blasphemed.","\"And now what do I have here?\" declares the LORD. \"For my people have been taken away for nothing, and those who rule them mock,\" declares the LORD. \"And all day long my name is constantly blasphemed.","Et nunc quid mihi est hic, dicit Dominus, quoniam ablatus est populus meus gratis? Dominatores eius ululant, dicit Dominus, et iugiter tota die nomen meum blasphematur.","ועתה מה לי פה נאם יהוה כי לקח עמי חנם משלו יהילילו נאם יהוה ותמיד כל היום שמי מנאץ׃"],["29","52","6","그리하여 내 백성은 나의 이름을 알게 되리라. 그날에 그들은 ‘나 여기 있다.’고 말한 이가 바로 나임을 알게 되리라.”","이제 나의 이름을 내 백성에게 알려주리라. 그 날 그들은 깨달으리라. '나 여기 있다.' 하고 말한 것이 바로 나임을.\"","그러므로 내 백성은 내 이름을 알리라 그러므로 그 날에는 그들이 이 말을 하는 자가 나인 줄을 알리라 내가 여기 있느니라","그러므로 내 백성은 내 이름을 알리라 그러므로 그 날에는 그들이 이 말을 하는 자가 나인줄 알리라 2)곧 내니라 내가 여기 있느니라","그러나 이제 해방의 여명이 밝아 오고 있다. 그러면 내 백성이 나의 권능을 깨달아 알 것이다. 내가 세계 역사에 간섭하는 날에는 내가 말할 대로 행하는 자인 줄을 이스라엘이 체험할 것이다. 보라. 내가 이미 그들을 해방하러 나섰다!\"","Therefore my people shall know my name on that day, that it is I who speaks: Here I am!","Therefore my people shall know my name: therefore they shall know in that day that I am he that doth speak: behold, it is I.","Therefore my people will know my name; therefore in that day they will know that it is I who foretold it. Yes, it is I.\"","Propter hoc sciet populus meus nomen meum in die illa, quia ego ipse, qui loquebar:  “Ecce adsum “ “.","לכן ידע עמי שמי לכן ביום ההוא כי אני הוא המדבר הנני׃"],["29","52","7","얼마나 아름다운가, 산 위에 서서 기쁜 소식을 전하는 이의 저 발! 평화를 선포하고 기쁜 소식을 전하며 구원을 선포하는구나. “너의 하느님은 임금님이시다.” 하고 시온에게 말하는구나.","반가워라, 기쁜 소식을 안고 산등성이를 달려오는 저 발길이여. 평화가 왔다고 외치며, 희소식을 전하는구나. 구원이 이르렀다고 외치며 \"너희 하느님께서 왕권을 잡으셨다.\"고 시온을 향해 이르는구나.","좋은 소식을 전하며 평화를 공포하며 복된 좋은 소식을 가져오며 구원을 공포하며 시온을 향하여 이르기를 네 하나님이 통치하신다 하는 자의 산을 넘는 발이 어찌 그리 아름다운가","좋은 소식을 가져오며 평화를 공포하며 복된 좋은 소식을 가져오며 구원을 공포하며 시온을 향하여 이르기를 네 하나님이 통치하신다 하는 자의 산을 넘는 발이 어찌 그리 아름다운고","승전의 기쁜 소식을 전하며 평화와 구원의 소식을 전하고 시온을 향하여 \"네 하나님께서 세계의 왕이 되셨다.\"고 외치면서 산등성이를 달려오는 이의 발길이 얼마나 아름다운가!","How beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of the one bringing good news, Announcing peace, bearing good news, announcing salvation, saying to Zion, “Your God is King!”","How beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of him that bringeth good tidings, that publisheth peace; that bringeth good tidings of good, that publisheth salvation; that saith unto Zion, Thy God reigneth!","How beautiful on the mountains are the feet of those who bring good news, who proclaim peace, who bring good tidings, who proclaim salvation, who say to Zion, \"Your God reigns!\"","Quam pulchri super montes pedes annuntiantis, praedicantis pacem, annuntiantis bonum, praedicantis salutem, dicentis Sion:  “Regnavit Deus tuus! “.","מה נאוו על ההרים רגלי מבשר משמיע שלום מבשר טוב משמיע ישועה אמר לציון מלך אלהיך׃"],["29","52","8","들어 보아라. 너의 파수꾼들이 목소리를 높인다. 다 함께 환성을 올린다. 주님께서 시온으로 돌아오심을 그들은 직접 눈으로 본다.","들어라, 저 소리, 보초의 외치는 소리. 시온으로 돌아오시는 야훼와 눈이 마주쳐 모두 함께 환성을 올리는구나.","네 파수꾼들의 소리로다 그들이 소리를 높여 일제히 노래하니 이는 여호와께서 시온으로 돌아오실 때에 그들의 눈이 마주 보리로다","들을찌어다 너의 파숫군들의 소리로다 그들이 소리를 높여 일제히 노래하니 이는 여호와께서 시온으로 돌아오실 때에 그들의 눈이 마주 봄이로다","망대 위의 파수꾼들이 먼저 보고 외치는 소리를 들어라! 그들은 기뻐서 이미 환호성을 외치고 있다. 여호와께서 시온산으로 돌아오시는 장엄한 모습을 그들은 이미 눈으로 직접 보고 있기 때문이다. 이스라엘의 파수꾼들은 예언자들이다!","Listen! Your sentinels raise a cry, together they shout for joy, For they see directly, before their eyes, the LORD’s return to Zion.","Thy watchmen shall lift up the voice; with the voice together shall they sing: for they shall see eye to eye, when the LORD shall bring again Zion.","Listen! Your watchmen lift up their voices; together they shout for joy. When the LORD returns to Zion, they will see it with their own eyes.","Vox speculatorum tuorum: levaverunt vocem, simul exsultabunt, quia oculo ad oculum videbunt, cum redierit Dominus ad Sion.","קול צפיך נשאו קול יחדו ירננו כי עין בעין יראו בשוב יהוה ציון׃"],["29","52","9","예루살렘의 폐허들아 다 함께 기뻐하며 환성을 올려라. 주님께서 당신 백성을 위로하시고 예루살렘을 구원하셨다.","예루살렘의 무너진 집터들아, 기쁜 소리로 함께 외쳐라. 야훼께서 당신의 백성을 위로하시고 예루살렘을 도로 찾으신다.","너 예루살렘의 황폐한 곳들아 기쁜 소리를 내어 함께 노래할지어다 이는 여호와께서 그의 백성을 위로하셨고 예루살렘을 구속하셨음이라","너 예루살렘의 황폐한 곳들아 기쁜 소리를 발하여 함께 노래할찌어다 이는 여호와께서 그 백성을 위로하셨고 예루살렘을 구속하셨음이라","예루살렘의 무너진 집터와 성벽의 돌덩이들도 모두 다 환호성을 외치며 기뻐하여라! 여호와께서 자기 백성을 위로하시고 예루살렘을 해방시켜 주시기 때문이다.","Break out together in song, O ruins of Jerusalem! For the LORD has comforted his people, has redeemed Jerusalem.","Break forth into joy, sing together, ye waste places of Jerusalem: for the LORD hath comforted his people, he hath redeemed Jerusalem.","Burst into songs of joy together, you ruins of Jerusalem, for the LORD has comforted his people, he has redeemed Jerusalem.","Gaudete et exsultate simul, deserta Ierusalem, quia consolatus est Dominus populum suum, redemit Ierusalem.","פצחו רננו יחדו חרבות ירושלם כי נחם יהוה עמו גאל ירושלם׃"],["29","52","10","주님께서 모든 민족들이 보는 앞에서 당신의 거룩한 팔을 걷어붙이시니 땅 끝들이 모두 우리 하느님의 구원을 보리라.","야훼께서 만국 앞에서 그 무서운 팔을 걷어붙이시니, 세상 구석구석이 우리 하느님의 승리를 보리라.","여호와께서 열방의 목전에서 그의 거룩한 팔을 나타내셨으므로 땅 끝까지도 모두 우리 하나님의 구원을 보았도다","여호와께서 열방의 목전에서 그 거룩한 팔을 나타내셨으므로 모든 땅 끝까지도 우리 하나님의 구원을 보았도다","주께서 거룩한 팔을 드러내시고 세계 만민이 보는 앞에서 이스라엘의 원수들을 칼로 무찌르셨다. 우리의 하나님이 승리하시고 자기 백성을 구원하시는 장엄한 모습을 땅 끝까지 모든 백성이 바라보았다.","The LORD has bared his holy arm in the sight of all the nations; All the ends of the earth can see the salvation of our God.","The LORD hath made bare his holy arm in the eyes of all the nations; and all the ends of the earth shall see the salvation of our God.","The LORD will lay bare his holy arm in the sight of all the nations, and all the ends of the earth will see the salvation of our God.","Nudavit Dominus brachium sanctum suum in oculis omnium gentium; et videbunt omnes fines terrae salutare Dei nostri.","חשף יהוה את זרוע קדשו לעיני כל הגוים וראו כל אפסי ארץ את ישועת אלהינו׃"],["29","52","11","떠나라, 떠나라, 거기에서 나와라. 부정한 것에 손대지 마라. 그 가운데에서 나와라, 몸을 정결하게 하여라, 주님의 기물들을 나르는 자들아.","어서 떠나거라. 어서 빠져 나가거라. 부정한 것은 아예 건드리지도 마라. 야훼의 그릇들을 받들고 갈 자들아, 부정을 탈까 두렵다, 어서 나가거라.","너희는 떠날지어다 떠날지어다 거기서 나오고 부정한 것을 만지지 말지어다 그 가운데에서 나올지어다 여호와의 기구를 메는 자들이여 스스로 정결하게 할지어다","너희는 떠날찌어다 떠날찌어다 거기서 나오고 부정한 것을 만지지 말찌어다 그 가운데서 나올찌어다 여호와의 기구를 메는 자여 스스로 정결케 할찌어다","떠나라. 떠나라. 여기서 빨리 떠나라! 이 더러운 바벨론에서 떠나라! 이 땅의 더러운 물건을 다 버리고 떠나라! 옛날에 느부갓네살이 예루살렘의 성전에서 훔쳐 간 주님의 물건들만을 메고 가도록 정결한 사람들이 되어라!","Depart, depart, go out from there, touch nothing unclean! Out from there! Purify yourselves, you who carry the vessels of the LORD.","Depart ye, depart ye, go ye out from thence, touch no unclean thing; go ye out of the midst of her; be ye clean, that bear the vessels of the LORD.","Depart, depart, go out from there! Touch no unclean thing! Come out from it and be pure, you who carry the vessels of the LORD.","Recedite, recedite, exite inde, pollutum nolite tangere; exite de medio eius, mundamini, qui fertis vasa Domini.","סורו סורו צאו משם טמא אל תגעו צאו מתוכה הברו נשאי כלי יהוה׃"],["29","52","12","너희는 황급히 나오지 않아도, 도망쳐 달아나지 않아도 되리니 주님께서 너희 앞에 서서 가시고 이스라엘의 하느님께서 너희 뒤를 지켜 주시기 때문이다.","그러나 너희는 쫓기듯 나가지도 말고 도망치듯 달아나지도 마라. 야훼께서 앞장서신다. 이스라엘의 하느님께서 너희를 호위하신다.","여호와께서 너희 앞에서 행하시며 이스라엘의 하나님이 너희 뒤에서 호위하시리니 너희가 황급히 나오지 아니하며 도망하듯 다니지 아니하리라","여호와께서 너희 앞에 행하시며 이스라엘의 하나님이 너희 뒤에 호위하시리니 너희가 황급히 나오지 아니하며 도망하여 행하지 아니하리라","그러나 이번에는 여호와께서 너희의 맨 앞에 서서 가시며 또 이와 동시에 너희의 맨 뒤에 서서 가실 것이기 때문에 너희가 추격을 당하듯이 서둘러서 떠날 필요도 없다. 도망치듯이 달아날 필요도 없다! 바벨론이 멸망해서 더 이상 존재하지도 않을 것이기 때문이다.","But not in hurried flight will you go out, nor leave in headlong haste, For the LORD goes before you, and your rear guard is the God of Israel.","For ye shall not go out with haste, nor go by flight: for the LORD will go before you; and the God of Israel will be your rereward.","But you will not leave in haste or go in flight; for the LORD will go before you, the God of Israel will be your rear guard.","Quoniam non in festinatione exibitis nec in fuga properabitis; praecedet enim vos Dominus, et colliget vos Deus Israel.","כי לא בחפזון תצאו ובמנוסה לא תלכון כי הלך לפניכם יהוה ומאספכם אלהי ישראל׃"],["29","52","13","보라, 나의 종은 성공을 거두리라. 그는 높이 올라 숭고해지고 더없이 존귀해지리라.","\"이제 나의 종은 할 일을 다 하였으니, 높이높이 솟아오르리라.","보라 내 종이 형통하리니 받들어 높이 들려서 지극히 존귀하게 되리라","여호와께서 가라사대 보라 내 종이 3)형통하리니 받들어 높이 들려서 지극히 존귀하게 되리라 지혜롭게 행하리니","여호와께서 말씀하신다. \"나의 종을 보아라! 그는 내가 시킨 대로 할 일을 다할 것이다. 이제 모든 사람이 그를 높이며 아주 높이 존경할 것이다.","See, my servant shall prosper, he shall be raised high and greatly exalted.","Behold, my servant shall deal prudently, he shall be exalted and extolled, and be very high.","See, my servant will act wisely; he will be raised and lifted up and highly exalted.","Ecce prospere aget servus meus; exaltabitur et elevabitur et sublimis erit valde.","הנה ישכיל עבדי ירום ונשא וגבה מאד׃"],["29","52","14","그의 모습이 사람 같지 않게 망가지고 그의 자태가 인간 같지 않게 망가져 많은 이들이 그를 보고 질겁하였다.","무리가 그를 보고 기막혀 했었지. 그의 몰골은 망가져 사람이라고 할 수가 없었고 인간의 모습은 찾아볼 수가 없었다.","전에는 그의 모양이 타인보다 상하였고 그의 모습이 사람들보다 상하였으므로 많은 사람이 그에 대하여 놀랐거니와","이왕에는 그 얼굴이 타인보다 상하였고 그 모양이 인생보다 상하였으므로 무리가 4)그를 보고 놀랐거니와 히, 너를","그는 보는 사람들마다 놀라서 고개를 돌릴 정도로 몰골이 상하였다. 그는 이미 사람과 비슷한 모습도 지니고 있지 않다.","Even as many were amazed at him— so marred were his features, beyond that of mortals his appearance, beyond that of human beings—","As many were astonied at thee; his visage was so marred more than any man, and his form more than the sons of men:","Just as there were many who were appalled at him--his appearance was so disfigured beyond that of any man and his form marred beyond human likeness--","Sicut obstupuerunt super eum multi, sic deformis erat, quasi non esset hominis species eius, filiorum hominis aspectus eius,","כאשר שממו עליך רבים כן משחת מאיש מראהו ותארו מבני אדם׃"],["29","52","15","그러나 이제 그는 수많은 민족들을 놀라게 하고 임금들도 그 앞에서 입을 다물리니 이제까지 알려지지 않은 것을 그들이 보고 들어 보지 못한 것을 깨닫기 때문이다.","이제 만방은 그를 보고 놀라지 않을 수 없고 제왕들조차 그 앞에서 입을 가리리라. 이런 일은 일찍이 눈으로 본 사람도 없고 귀로 들어본 사람도 없다.\"","그가 나라들을 놀라게 할 것이며 왕들은 그로 말미암아 그들의 입을 봉하리니 이는 그들이 아직 그들에게 전파되지 아니한 것을 볼 것이요 아직 듣지 못한 것을 깨달을 것임이라","후에는 그가 5)열방을 놀랠 것이며 열왕은 그를 인하여 입을 봉하리니 이는 그들이 아직 전파되지 않은 것을 볼 것이요 아직 듣지 못한 것을 깨달을 것임이라 하시니라열방에 뿌릴 것","그러나 이제는 오히려 세계 만민이 그를 보고 감탄할 것이며 세상의 모든 왕들도 놀라서 입을 열지 못할 것이다. 그들은 한번도 들어 보지 못한 일을 체험하며 전에는 생각도 못했던 일을 눈으로 직접 바라볼 것이다.\"","So shall he startle many nations, kings shall stand speechless; For those who have not been told shall see, those who have not heard shall ponder it.","So shall he sprinkle many nations; the kings shall shut their mouths at him: for that which had not been told them shall they see; and that which they had not heard shall they consider.","so will he sprinkle many nations, and kings will shut their mouths because of him. For what they were not told, they will see, and what they have not heard, they will understand.","sic disperget gentes multas. Super ipsum continebunt reges os suum, quia, quae non sunt narrata eis, viderunt et, quae non audierunt, contemplati sunt.","כן יזה גוים רבים עליו יקפצו מלכים פיהם כי אשר לא ספר להם ראו ואשר לא שמעו התבוננו׃"],["29","53","1","우리가 들은 것을 누가 믿었던가? 주님의 권능이 누구에게 드러났던가?","그러니 우리에게 들려주신 이 소식을 누가 곧이들으랴? 야훼께서 팔을 휘둘러 이루신 일을 누가 깨달으랴?","우리가 전한 것을 누가 믿었느냐 여호와의 팔이 누구에게 나타났느냐","우리의 1)전한 것을 누가 믿었느뇨 여호와의 팔이 뉘게 나타났느뇨 들은","우리가 들은 소식을 아무나 믿겠느냐? 여호와의 권능과 승리가 그토록 비천하고 멸시받는 사람에게서 나타난다는 것을 도대체 믿을 사람이 어디에 있겠는가?","Who would believe what we have heard? To whom has the arm of the LORD been revealed?","Who hath believed our report? and to whom is the arm of the LORD revealed?","Who has believed our message and to whom has the arm of the LORD been revealed?"," “Quis credidit auditui nostro, et brachium Domini cui revelatum est?","מי האמין לשמעתנו וזרוע יהוה על מי נגלתה׃"],["29","53","2","그는 주님 앞에서 가까스로 돋아난 새순처럼, 메마른 땅의 뿌리처럼 자라났다. 그에게는 우리가 우러러볼 만한 풍채도 위엄도 없었으며 우리가 바랄 만한 모습도 없었다.","그는 메마른 땅에 뿌리를 박고 가까스로 돋아난 햇순이라고나 할까? 늠름한 풍채도, 멋진 모습도 그에게는 없었다. 눈길을 끌 만한 볼품도 없었다.","그는 주 앞에서 자라나기를 연한 순 같고 마른 땅에서 나온 뿌리 같아서 고운 모양도 없고 풍채도 없은즉 우리가 보기에 흠모할 만한 아름다운 것이 없도다","그는 주 앞에서 자라나기를 연한 순 같고 마른 땅에서 나온 2)줄기 같아서 고운 모양도 없고 풍채도 없은즉 우리의 보기에 흠모할만한 아름다운 것이 없도다 싹","그러나 여호와의 종이 실제로 마른 땅에서 돋아난 연한 순같이 형편없는 모양으로 자라났다. 여호와께서 그토록 기막힌 꼴이 되게 하셨다. 그의 모양은 아름답지도 않고 장엄한 것도 없었다. 도대체 우리가 부러워하고 매력을 느낄 만한 것이 그에게 하나도 없었다.","He grew up like a sapling before him, like a shoot from the parched earth; He had no majestic bearing to catch our eye, no beauty to draw us to him.","For he shall grow up before him as a tender plant, and as a root out of a dry ground: he hath no form nor comeliness; and when we shall see him, there is no beauty that we should desire him.","He grew up before him like a tender shoot, and like a root out of dry ground. He had no beauty or majesty to attract us to him, nothing in his appearance that we should desire him.","Et ascendit sicut virgultum coram eo et sicut radix de terra sitienti. Non erat species ei neque decor, ut aspiceremus eum, et non erat aspectus, ut desideraremus eum.","ויעל כיונק לפניו וכשרש מארץ ציה לא תאר לו ולא הדר ונראהו ולא מראה ונחמדהו׃"],["29","53","3","사람들에게 멸시받고 배척당한 그는 고통의 사람, 병고에 익숙한 이였다. 남들이 그를 보고 얼굴을 가릴 만큼 그는 멸시만 받았으며 우리도 그를 대수롭지 않게 여겼다.","사람들에게 멸시를 당하고 퇴박을 맞았다. 그는 고통을 겪고 병고를 아는 사람, 사람들이 얼굴을 가리고 피해 갈 만큼 멸시만 당하였으므로 우리도 덩달아 그를 업신여겼다.","그는 멸시를 받아 사람들에게 버림 받았으며 간고를 많이 겪었으며 질고를 아는 자라 마치 사람들이 그에게서 얼굴을 가리는 것 같이 멸시를 당하였고 우리도 그를 귀히 여기지 아니하였도다","그는 멸시를 받아서 사람에게 싫어 버린바 되었으며 간고를 많이 겪었으며 질고를 아는 자라 마치 3)사람들에게 얼굴을 가리우고 보지 않음을 받는 자 같아서 멸시를 당하였고 우리도 그를 귀히 여기지 아니하였도다 그가 우리 앞에서 얼굴을 가리운 사람 같아서","모든 사람이 그를 깔보고 피하였다. 그는 중병에 걸려 온갖 고통에 시달리는 사람이었기 때문이다. 우리가 모두 그를 미워하며 기피하였다. 우리는 더 이상 그를 사람으로 여기지도 않았다.","He was spurned and avoided by men, a man of suffering, knowing pain, Like one from whom you turn your face, spurned, and we held him in no esteem.","He is despised and rejected of men; a man of sorrows, and acquainted with grief: and we hid as it were our faces from him; he was despised, and we esteemed him not.","He was despised and rejected by men, a man of sorrows, and familiar with suffering. Like one from whom men hide their faces he was despised, and we esteemed him not.","Despectus erat et novissimus virorum, vir dolorum et sciens infirmitatem, et quasi abscondebamus vultum coram eo; despectus, unde nec reputabamus eum.","נבזה וחדל אישים איש מכאבות וידוע חלי וכמסתר פנים ממנו נבזה ולא חשבנהו׃"],["29","53","4","그렇지만 그는 우리의 병고를 메고 갔으며 우리의 고통을 짊어졌다. 그런데 우리는 그를 벌받은 자, 하느님께 매맞은 자, 천대받은 자로 여겼다.","그런데 실상 그는 우리가 앓을 병을 앓아주었으며, 우리가 받을 고통을 겪어주었구나. 우리는 그가 천벌을 받은 줄로만 알았고 하느님께 매를 맞아 학대받는 줄로만 여겼다.","그는 실로 우리의 질고를 지고 우리의 슬픔을 당하였거늘 우리는 생각하기를 그는 징벌을 받아 하나님께 맞으며 고난을 당한다 하였노라","그는 실로 우리의 질고를 지고 우리의 슬픔을 당하였거늘 우리는 생각하기를 그는 징벌을 받아서 하나님에게 맞으며 고난을 당한다 하였노라","그러나 사실은 여호와의 종이 우리의 온갖 질병을 대신하여 앓고 우리가 당해야 될 고통을 대신 당하였다. 그런데도 우리는 그가 천벌을 받아서 고난을 당하는 것으로 생각하였다.","Yet it was our pain that he bore, our sufferings he endured. We thought of him as stricken, struck down by God and afflicted,","Surely he hath borne our griefs, and carried our sorrows: yet we did esteem him stricken, smitten of God, and afflicted.","Surely he took up our infirmities and carried our sorrows, yet we considered him stricken by God, smitten by him, and afflicted.","Vere languores nostros ipse tulit et dolores nostros ipse portavit; et nos putavimus eum quasi plagatum, percussum a Deo et humiliatum.","אכן חלינו הוא נשא ומכאבינו סבלם ואנחנו חשבנהו נגוע מכה אלהים ומענה׃"],["29","53","5","그러나 그가 찔린 것은 우리의 악행 때문이고 그가 으스러진 것은 우리의 죄악 때문이다. 우리의 평화를 위하여 그가 징벌을 받았고 그의 상처로 우리는 나았다.","그를 찌른 것은 우리의 반역죄요, 그를 으스러뜨린 것은 우리의 악행이었다. 그 몸에 채찍을 맞음으로 우리를 성하게 해주었고 그 몸에 상처를 입음으로 우리의 병을 고쳐주었구나.","그가 찔림은 우리의 허물 때문이요 그가 상함은 우리의 죄악 때문이라 그가 징계를 받으므로 우리는 평화를 누리고 그가 채찍에 맞으므로 우리는 나음을 받았도다","그가 찔림은 우리의 허물을 인함이요 그가 상함은 우리의 죄악을 인함이라 그가 징계를 받음으로 우리가 평화를 누리고 그가 채찍에 맞음으로 우리가 나음을 입었도다","그러나 그는 우리의 죄악 때문에 고통을 당하고 우리가 범죄하였기 때문에 그가 무서운 채찍에 맞아 살이 찢어진 것이다. 우리가 범죄하고서도 무사하게 넘긴 것은 그가 대신 형벌을 받았기 때문이다. 그가 우리 대신에 채찍을 맞아 우리 몸이 성하게 되었다.","But he was pierced for our sins, crushed for our iniquity. He bore the punishment that makes us whole, by his wounds we were healed.","But he was wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities: the chastisement of our peace was upon him; and with his stripes we are healed.","But he was pierced for our transgressions, he was crushed for our iniquities; the punishment that brought us peace was upon him, and by his wounds we are healed.","Ipse autem vulneratus est propter iniquitates nostras, attritus est propter scelera nostra; disciplina pacis nostrae super eum, et livore eius sanati sumus.","והוא מחלל מפשענו מדכא מעונתינו מוסר שלומנו עליו ובחברתו נרפא לנו׃"],["29","53","6","우리는 모두 양 떼처럼 길을 잃고 저마다 제 길을 따라갔지만 주님께서는 우리 모두의 죄악이 그에게 떨어지게 하셨다.","우리 모두 양처럼 길을 잃고 헤매며 제멋대로들 놀아났지만, 야훼께서 우리 모두의 죄악을 그에게 지우셨구나.","우리는 다 양 같아서 그릇 행하여 각기 제 길로 갔거늘 여호와께서는 우리 모두의 죄악을 그에게 담당시키셨도다","우리는 다 양 같아서 그릇 행하여 각기 제 길로 갔거늘 여호와께서는 우리 무리의 죄악을 그에게 담당시키셨도다","우리는 모두 목자를 떠난 양들처럼 길을 잃고 헤매며 제멋대로 돌아다녔으나 여호와께서는 우리의 죄악을 모두 그에게 지워 놓으셨다.","We had all gone astray like sheep, all following our own way; But the LORD laid upon him the guilt of us all.","All we like sheep have gone astray; we have turned every one to his own way; and the LORD hath laid on him the iniquity of us all.","We all, like sheep, have gone astray, each of us has turned to his own way; and the LORD has laid on him the iniquity of us all.","Omnes nos quasi oves erravimus, unusquisque in viam suam declinavit; et posuit Dominus in eo iniquitatem omnium nostrum “.","כלנו כצאן תעינו איש לדרכו פנינו ויהוה הפגיע בו את עון כלנו׃"],["29","53","7","학대받고 천대받았지만 그는 자기 입을 열지 않았다. 도살장에 끌려가는 어린 양처럼 털 깎는 사람 앞에 잠자코 서 있는 어미 양처럼 그는 자기 입을 열지 않았다.","그는 온갖 굴욕을 받으면서도 입 한번 열지 않고 참았다. 도살장으로 끌려가는 어린 양처럼 가만히 서서 털을 깎이는 어미 양처럼 결코 입을 열지 않았다.","그가 곤욕을 당하여 괴로울 때에도 그의 입을 열지 아니하였음이여 마치 도수장으로 끌려 가는 어린 양과 털 깎는 자 앞에서 잠잠한 양 같이 그의 입을 열지 아니하였도다","그가 곤욕을 당하여 괴로울 때에도 그 입을 열지 아니하였음이여 마치 도수장으로 끌려가는 어린 양과 털 깎는 자 앞에 잠잠한 양 같이 그 입을 열지 아니하였도다","그는 학대와 고문을 당하면서도 입 한번 열지 않고 그 고통을 다 참았다. 도살장으로 끌려가는 어린 양처럼 잠잠하고 털 깎는 자 앞에 선 어미 양처럼 입 한번 열지 않고 모든 고난을 다 참았다.","Though harshly treated, he submitted and did not open his mouth; Like a lamb led to slaughter or a sheep silent before shearers, he did not open his mouth.","He was oppressed, and he was afflicted, yet he opened not his mouth: he is brought as a lamb to the slaughter, and as a sheep before her shearers is dumb, so he openeth not his mouth.","He was oppressed and afflicted, yet he did not open his mouth; he was led like a lamb to the slaughter, and as a sheep before her shearers is silent, so he did not open his mouth.","Afflictus est et ipse subiecit se et non aperuit os suum; sicut agnus, qui ad occisionem ducitur, et quasi ovis, quae coram tondentibus se obmutuit et non aperuit os suum.","נגש והוא נענה ולא יפתח פיו כשה לטבח יובל וכרחל לפני גזזיה נאלמה ולא יפתח פיו׃"],["29","53","8","그가 구속되어 판결을 받고 제거되었지만 누가 그의 운명에 대하여 생각해 보았던가? 정녕 그는 산 이들의 땅에서 잘려 나가고 내 백성의 악행 때문에 고난을 당하였다.","그가 억울한 재판을 받고 처형당하는데 그 신세를 걱정해 주는 자가 어디 있었느냐? 그렇다, 그는 인간 사회에서 끊기었다. 우리의 반역죄를 쓰고 사형을 당하였다.","그는 곤욕과 심문을 당하고 끌려 갔으나 그 세대 중에 누가 생각하기를 그가 살아 있는 자들의 땅에서 끊어짐은 마땅히 형벌 받을 내 백성의 허물 때문이라 하였으리요","그가 곤욕과 심문을 당하고 끌려 갔으니 그 세대 중에 누가 생각하기를 그가 산 자의 땅에서 끊어짐은 마땅히 형벌 받을 내 백성의 허물을 인함이라 하였으리요","그가 체포되고 유죄 판결을 받아서 감옥으로 끌려갔으나 그를 위해서 걱정해 주는 사람이 그의 시대에 아무도 없었다. 그러나 사실은 그가 내 백성의 허물 때문에 죽게 된 것이다. 내 백성의 죄악이 결과적으로 그를 죽였다.","Seized and condemned, he was taken away. Who would have thought any more of his destiny? For he was cut off from the land of the living, struck for the sins of his people.","He was taken from prison and from judgment: and who shall declare his generation? for he was cut off out of the land of the living: for the transgression of my people was he stricken.","By oppression and judgment he was taken away. And who can speak of his descendants? For he was cut off from the land of the living; for the transgression of my people he was stricken.","Angustia et iudicio sublatus est. De generatione eius quis curabit? Quia abscissus est de terra viventium; propter scelus populi mei percussus est ad mortem.","מעצר וממשפט לקח ואת דורו מי ישוחח כי נגזר מארץ חיים מפשע עמי נגע למו׃"],["29","53","9","폭행을 저지르지도 않고 거짓을 입에 담지도 않았건만 그는 악인들과 함께 묻히고 그는 죽어서 부자들과 함께 묻혔다.","폭행을 저지른 일도 없었고 입에 거짓을 담은 적도 없었지만 그는 죄인들과 함께 처형당하고, 불의한 자들과 함께 묻혔다.","그는 강포를 행하지 아니하였고 그의 입에 거짓이 없었으나 그의 무덤이 악인들과 함께 있었으며 그가 죽은 후에 부자와 함께 있었도다","그는 강포를 행치 아니하였고 그 입에 궤사가 없었으나 그 무덤이 악인과 함께 되었으며 그 4)묘실이 부자와 함께 되었도다 죽은 후에","그는 폭력을 쓴 일도 없었고 거짓말을 한 적도 없었지만 세상이 그를 죄인들과 함께 처형하고 추방당한 이들이 묻힌 무덤에 함께 묻었다.","He was given a grave among the wicked, a burial place with evildoers, Though he had done no wrong, nor was deceit found in his mouth.","And he made his grave with the wicked, and with the rich in his death; because he had done no violence, neither was any deceit in his mouth.","He was assigned a grave with the wicked, and with the rich in his death, though he had done no violence, nor was any deceit in his mouth.","Et posuerunt sepulcrum eius cum impiis, cum divitibus tumulum eius, eo quod iniquitatem non fecerit, neque dolus fuerit in ore eius.","ויתן את רשעים קברו ואת עשיר במתיו על לא חמס עשה ולא מרמה בפיו׃"],["29","53","10","그러나 그를 으스러뜨리고자 하신 것은 주님의 뜻이었고 그분께서 그를 병고에 시달리게 하셨다. 그가 자신을 속죄 제물로 내놓으면 그는 후손을 보며 오래 살고 그를 통하여 주님의 뜻이 이루어지리라.","야훼께서 그를 때리고 찌르신 것은 뜻이 있어 하신 일이었다. 그 뜻을 따라 그는 자기의 생명을 속죄의 제물로 내놓았다. 그리하여 그는 후손을 보며 오래오래 살리라. 그의 손에서 야훼의 뜻이 이루어지리라.","여호와께서 그에게 상함을 받게 하시기를 원하사 질고를 당하게 하셨은즉 그의 영혼을 속건제물로 드리기에 이르면 그가 씨를 보게 되며 그의 날은 길 것이요 또 그의 손으로 여호와께서 기뻐하시는 뜻을 성취하리로다","여호와께서 그로 상함을 받게 하시기를 원하사 질고를 당케 하셨은즉 그 영혼을 속건제물로 드리기에 이르면 그가 그 씨를 보게 되며 그 날은 길 것이요 또 그의 손으로 여호와의 뜻을 성취하리로다","그러나 그가 고난을 당하고 상한 몸으로 죽게된 것은 여호와의 선하신 뜻이었다. 다른 사람들이 범죄하고 죽어야만 했을 때에 그가 대신 자기 목숨을 바쳤기 때문에 그의 후손들이 끝없이 행복하게 오래오래 살 것이다. 그가 고난을 당하고 죽음으로 여호와의 선하신 뜻이 성취될 것이다.","But it was the LORD’s will to crush him with pain. By making his life as a reparation offering, he shall see his offspring, shall lengthen his days, and the LORD’s will shall be accomplished through him.","Yet it pleased the LORD to bruise him; he hath put him to grief: when thou shalt make his soul an offering for sin, he shall see his seed, he shall prolong his days, and the pleasure of the LORD shall prosper in his hand.","Yet it was the LORD'S will to crush him and cause him to suffer, and though the LORD makes his life a guilt offering, he will see his offspring and prolong his days, and the will of the LORD will prosper in his hand.","Et Dominus voluit conterere eum infirmitate. Si posuerit in piaculum animam suam, videbit semen longaevum, et voluntas Domini in manu eius prosperabitur.","ויהוה חפץ דכאו החלי אם תשים אשם נפשו יראה זרע יאריך ימים וחפץ יהוה בידו יצלח׃"],["29","53","11","그는 제 고난의 끝에 빛을 보고 자기의 예지로 흡족해하리라. 의로운 나의 종은 많은 이들을 의롭게 하고 그들의 죄악을 짊어지리라.","그 극심하던 고통이 말끔히 가시고 떠오르는 빛을 보리라. 나의 종은 많은 사람의 죄악을 스스로 짊어짐으로써 그들이 떳떳한 시민으로 살게 될 줄을 알고 마음 흐뭇해 하리라.","그가 자기 영혼의 수고한 것을 보고 만족하게 여길 것이라 나의 의로운 종이 자기 지식으로 많은 사람을 의롭게 하며 또 그들의 죄악을 친히 담당하리로다","가라사대 그가 자기 영혼의 수고한 것을 보고 만족히 여길 것이라 나의 의로운 종이 자기 지식으로 많은 사람을 의롭게 하며 또 그들의 죄악을 친히 담당하리라","그가 무서운 고통에서 벗어나 다시 빛을 보고 영광을 누릴 것이다. 이제 여호와께서 이렇게 말씀하시기 때문이다. \"내 종이 내 뜻을 옳게 알았다. 내 종 자신은 아무 죄가 없으면서도 많은 사람들의 죄를 대신 지고 죽음으로써 그들을 죄악에서 해방시켜 주었다. 그는 다른 사람들이 받아야 될 죄의 벌을 대신 받았기 때문이다!","Because of his anguish he shall see the light; because of his knowledge he shall be content; My servant, the just one, shall justify the many, their iniquity he shall bear.","He shall see of the travail of his soul, and shall be satisfied: by his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many; for he shall bear their iniquities.","After the suffering of his soul, he will see the light of life and be satisfied; by his knowledge my righteous servant will justify many, and he will bear their iniquities.","Propter laborem animae eius videbit lucem, saturabitur in scientia sua. Iustificabit iustus servus meus multos et iniquitates eorum ipse portabit.","מעמל נפשו יראה ישבע בדעתו יצדיק צדיק עבדי לרבים ועונתם הוא יסבל׃"],["29","53","12","그러므로 나는 그가 귀인들과 함께 제 몫을 차지하고 강자들과 함께 전리품을 나누게 하리라. 이는 그가 죽음에 이르기까지 자신을 버리고 무법자들 가운데 하나로 헤아려졌기 때문이다. 또 그가 많은 이들의 죄를 메고 갔으며 무법자들을 위하여 빌었기 때문이다.","나는 그로 하여금 민중을 자기 백성으로 삼고 대중을 전리품처럼 차지하게 하리라. 이는 그가 자기 목숨을 내던져 죽었기 때문이다. 반역자의 하나처럼 그 속에 끼여 많은 사람의 죄를 짊어지고 그 반역자들을 용서해 달라고 기도했기 때문이다.","그러므로 내가 그에게 존귀한 자와 함께 몫을 받게 하며 강한 자와 함께 탈취한 것을 나누게 하리니 이는 그가 자기 영혼을 버려 사망에 이르게 하며 범죄자 중 하나로 헤아림을 받았음이니라 그러나 그가 많은 사람의 죄를 담당하며 범죄자를 위하여 기도하였느니라","이러므로 내가 그로 존귀한 자와 함께 분깃을 얻게 하며 강한 자와 함께 탈취한 것을 나누게 하리니 이는 그가 자기 영혼을 버려 사망에 이르게 하며 범죄자 중 하나로 헤아림을 입었음이라 그러나 실상은 그가 많은 사람의 죄를 지며 범죄자를 위하여 기도하였느니라 하시니라","그러므로 내가 그를 위대한 종들과 함께 상을 받게 하고 승리자들과 함께 전리품을 나누어 갖도록 하겠다. 그가 생명의 피를 제물로 쏟아 붓고 스스로 범죄자들의 편에 서서 죽음으로써 뭇사람의 형벌을 대신 지고 죄인 취급을 당하였기 때문이다.\"","Therefore I will give him his portion among the many, and he shall divide the spoils with the mighty, Because he surrendered himself to death, was counted among the transgressors, Bore the sins of many, and interceded for the transgressors.","Therefore will I divide him a portion with the great, and he shall divide the spoil with the strong; because he hath poured out his soul unto death: and he was numbered with the transgressors; and he bare the sin of many, and made intercession for the transgressors.","Therefore I will give him a portion among the great, and he will divide the spoils with the strong, because he poured out his life unto death, and was numbered with the transgressors. For he bore the sin of many, and made intercession for the transgressors.","Ideo dispertiam ei multos, et cum fortibus dividet spolia, pro eo quod tradidit in mortem animam suam et cum sceleratis reputatus est; et ipse peccatum multorum tulit et pro transgressoribus rogat.","לכן אחלק לו ברבים ואת עצומים יחלק שלל תחת אשר הערה למות נפשו ואת פשעים נמנה והוא חטא רבים נשא ולפשעים יפגיע׃"],["29","54","1","환성을 올려라, 아이를 낳지 못하는 여인아! 기뻐 소리쳐라, 즐거워하여라, 산고를 겪어 보지 못한 여인아! 버림받은 여인의 아들들이 혼인한 여인의 아들들보다 많을 것이다. 주님께서 말씀하신다.","환성을 올려라, 아기를 낳아보지 못한 여인들아! 기뻐 목청껏 소리쳐라, 산고를 겪어본 적이 없는 여자야! 너 소박맞은 여인의 아들이 유부녀의 아들보다 더 많구나. 야훼의 말씀이시다.","잉태하지 못하며 출산하지 못한 너는 노래할지어다 산고를 겪지 못한 너는 외쳐 노래할지어다 이는 홀로 된 여인의 자식이 남편 있는 자의 자식보다 많음이라 여호와께서 말씀하셨느니라","잉태치 못하며 생산치 못한 너는 노래할찌어다 구로치 못한 너는 외쳐 노래할찌어다 홀로 된 여인의 자식이 남편 있는 자의 자식보다 많음이니라 여호와의 말이니라","예루살렘아, 너는 임신을 하지 못하여 자식을 낳아 본 적이 없는 여인과 비슷하였다. 그러나 너는 이제 기뻐하며 환호성을 질러라! \"네가 버림받은 여인의 신세와 비슷하지만, 오히려 남편이 있는 여자보다 더 많은 자식을 둘 것이다.\" 라고 여호와께서 말씀하신다.","Raise a glad cry, you barren one who never bore a child, break forth in jubilant song, you who have never been in labor, For more numerous are the children of the deserted wife than the children of her who has a husband, says the LORD.","Sing, O barren, thou that didst not bear; break forth into singing, and cry aloud, thou that didst not travail with child: for more are the children of the desolate than the children of the married wife, saith the LORD.","\"Sing, O barren woman, you who never bore a child; burst into song, shout for joy, you who were never in labor; because more are the children of the desolate woman than of her who has a husband,\" says the LORD.","Exsulta, sterilis, quae non peperisti, laetare, gaude, quae non parturisti, quoniam multi sunt filii desertae magis quam filii nuptae, dicit Dominus.","רני עקרה לא ילדה פצחי רנה וצהלי לא חלה כי רבים בני שוממה מבני בעולה אמר יהוה׃"],["29","54","2","너의 천막 터를 넓혀라. 네 장막의 휘장을 아낌없이 펼쳐라. 네 천막 줄을 길게 늘이고 말뚝을 단단히 박아라.","천막 칠 자리를 넓혀라. 천막 휘장을 한껏 펴라. 줄을 길게 늘이고 말뚝을 단단히 박아라.","네 장막터를 넓히며 네 처소의 휘장을 아끼지 말고 널리 펴되 너의 줄을 길게 하며 너의 말뚝을 견고히 할지어다","네 장막터를 넓히며 네 처소의 휘장을 아끼지 말고 널리 펴되 너의 줄을 길게 하며 너의 말뚝을 견고히 할찌어다","그러므로 예루살렘아, 네 천막의 터를 더 넓혀라! 네 천막을 아끼지 말고 넓게 펼쳐라! 천막의 줄도 더 길게 늘이고 천막의 말뚝들도 단단히 박아라!","Enlarge the space for your tent, spread out your tent cloths unsparingly; lengthen your ropes and make firm your pegs.","Enlarge the place of thy tent, and let them stretch forth the curtains of thine habitations: spare not, lengthen thy cords, and strengthen thy stakes;","\"Enlarge the place of your tent, stretch your tent curtains wide, do not hold back; lengthen your cords, strengthen your stakes.","Dilata locum tentorii tui et pelles tabernaculorum tuorum extende, ne parcas; longos fac funiculos tuos et clavos tuos consolida.","הרחיבי מקום אהלך ויריעות משכנותיך יטו אל תחשכי האריכי מיתריך ויתדתיך חזקי׃"],["29","54","3","네가 좌우로 퍼져 나가고 네 후손들이 뭇 나라를 차지하여 황폐한 성읍들에 자리 잡을 것이다.","네가 좌우로 퍼져 나가리라. 네 후손은 뭇 민족을 거느리고 무너졌던 도시들을 재건하리라.","이는 네가 좌우로 퍼지며 네 자손은 열방을 얻으며 황폐한 성읍들을 사람 살 곳이 되게 할 것임이라","이는 네가 좌우로 퍼지며 네 자손은 열방을 얻으며 황폐한 성읍들로 사람 살 곳이 되게 할 것임이니라","앞으로 네가 사방으로 확장될 것이기 때문이다. 네 자녀들이 다른 족속의 땅까지 차지하고 살며 황폐한 성읍들을 다시 개발하여 살 것이다.","For you shall spread abroad to the right and left; your descendants shall dispossess the nations and shall people the deserted cities.","For thou shalt break forth on the right hand and on the left; and thy seed shall inherit the Gentiles, and make the desolate cities to be inhabited.","For you will spread out to the right and to the left; your descendants will dispossess nations and settle in their desolate cities.","Ad dexteram enim et ad laevam penetrabis, et semen tuum hereditabit gentes, quae civitates desertas inhabitabunt.","כי ימין ושמאול תפרצי וזרעך גוים יירש וערים נשמות יושיבו׃"],["29","54","4","두려워하지 마라. 네가 부끄러운 일을 당하지 않으리라. 수치스러워하지 마라. 네가 창피를 당하지 않으리라. 네 젊은 시절의 부끄러움을 잊고 네 과부 시절의 치욕을 네가 다시는 회상하지 않으리라.","두려워하지 마라. 네가 다시는 수치를 당하지 아니하리라. 수줍어하지 마라. 다시는 창피를 당하지 아니하리라. 너는 처녀 때의 수치를 잊을 것이요 과부 때의 창피를 결코 되씹지 아니하리라.","두려워하지 말라 네가 수치를 당하지 아니하리라 놀라지 말라 네가 부끄러움을 보지 아니하리라 네가 네 젊었을 때의 수치를 잊겠고 과부 때의 치욕을 다시 기억함이 없으리니","두려워 말라 네가 수치를 당치 아니하리라 놀라지 말라 네가 부끄러움을 보지 아니하리라 네가 네 청년 때의 수치를 잊겠고 과부 때의 치욕을 다시 기억함이 없으리니","시온아, 이제 너는 두려워하지 말아라! 네가 다시는 부끄러움을 당하지 않을 것이니 이제 너는 더 이상 실망하고 걱정하지 말아라! 네 젊은 시절의 수치를 네가 곧 잊을 것이며, 네가 과부로서 당한 수모도 다시는 더 이상 기억하지 않게 될 것이다.","Do not fear, you shall not be put to shame; do not be discouraged, you shall not be disgraced. For the shame of your youth you shall forget, the reproach of your widowhood no longer remember.","Fear not; for thou shalt not be ashamed: neither be thou confounded; for thou shalt not be put to shame: for thou shalt forget the shame of thy youth, and shalt not remember the reproach of thy widowhood any more.","\"Do not be afraid; you will not suffer shame. Do not fear disgrace; you will not be humiliated. You will forget the shame of your youth and remember no more the reproach of your widowhood.","Noli timere, quia non confunderis, neque erubescas, quia non te pudebit; nam confusionis adulescentiae tuae oblivisceris et opprobrii viduitatis tuae non recordaberis amplius.","אל תיראי כי לא תבושי ואל תכלמי כי לא תחפירי כי בשת עלומיך תשכחי וחרפת אלמנותיך לא תזכרי עוד׃"],["29","54","5","너를 만드신 분이 너의 남편 그 이름 만군의 주님이시다. 이스라엘의 거룩하신 분이 너의 구원자 그분께서는 온 땅의 하느님이라 불리신다.","너의 창조주께서 너의 남편이 아니시냐? 그 이름 만군의 야훼시다. 이스라엘의 거룩하신 이가 너의 구세주 아니시냐? 그분은 전세계의 하느님이라 불리신다.","이는 너를 지으신 이가 네 남편이시라 그의 이름은 만군의 여호와이시며 네 구속자는 이스라엘의 거룩한 이시라 그는 온 땅의 하나님이라 일컬음을 받으실 것이라","이는 너를 지으신 자는 네 남편이시라 그 이름은 만군의 여호와시며 네 구속자는 이스라엘의 거룩한 자시라 온 세상의 하나님이라 칭함을 받으실 것이며","너를 지으신 여호와께서 친히 너와 결혼하여 네 남편이 되실 것이기 때문이다! 그분의 이름은 만유의 주이시다! 이스라엘의 거룩하신 분이 네 남편이 되셔서 너를 지난날의 모든 수치에서 건져내 주실 것이다. 그분은 온 세계의 하나님이시다!","For your husband is your Maker; the LORD of hosts is his name, Your redeemer, the Holy One of Israel, called God of all the earth.","For thy Maker is thine husband; the LORD of hosts is his name; and thy Redeemer the Holy One of Israel; The God of the whole earth shall he be called.","For your Maker is your husband--the LORD Almighty is his name--the Holy One of Israel is your Redeemer; he is called the God of all the earth.","Qui enim fecit te, erit sponsus tuus, Dominus exercituum nomen eius; et redemptor tuus Sanctus Israel, Deus omnis terrae vocabitur.","כי בעליך עשיך יהוה צבאות שמו וגאלך קדוש ישראל אלהי כל הארץ יקרא׃"],["29","54","6","정녕 주님께서는 너를 소박맞아 마음 아파하는 아내인 양 퇴박맞은 젊은 시절의 아내인 양 다시 부르신다. 너의 하느님께서 말씀하신다.","그렇다, 버림받은 여자, 가슴에 상처를 입은 너를 야훼께서 부르신다. \"조강지처는 버림받지 않는다.\" 너의 하느님께서 말씀하신다.","여호와께서 너를 부르시되 마치 버림을 받아 마음에 근심하는 아내 곧 어릴 때에 아내가 되었다가 버림을 받은 자에게 함과 같이 하실 것임이라 네 하나님께서 말씀하셨느니라","여호와께서 너를 부르시되 마치 버림을 입어 마음에 근심하는 아내 곧 소시에 아내 되었다가 버림을 입은 자에게 함같이 하실 것임이니라 네 하나님의 말씀이니라","예루살렘아, 너는 버림받은 여자였다. 너는 남편에게 버림받고 슬퍼하며 살아온 여인이었다. 젊은 시절에는 사랑을 받았으나 남편에게 버림받고 근심하며 산 여인이었다. 그러나 이제는 여호와께서 너를 다시 부르시며 이렇게 말씀하신다.","The LORD calls you back, like a wife forsaken and grieved in spirit, A wife married in youth and then cast off, says your God.","For the LORD hath called thee as a woman forsaken and grieved in spirit, and a wife of youth, when thou wast refused, saith thy God.","The LORD will call you back as if you were a wife deserted and distressed in spirit--a wife who married young, only to be rejected,\" says your God.","Quia ut mulierem derelictam et maerentem spiritu vocavit te Dominus, et uxorem ab adulescentia abiectam dixit Deus tuus.","כי כאשה עזובה ועצובת רוח קראך יהוה ואשת נעורים כי תמאס אמר אלהיך׃"],["29","54","7","“내가 잠시 너를 버렸지만 크나큰 자비로 너를 다시 거두어들인다.","\"내가 잠깐 너를 내버려두었었지만, 큰 자비를 기울여 너를 다시 거두어들이리라.","내가 잠시 너를 버렸으나 큰 긍휼로 너를 모을 것이요","내가 잠시 너를 버렸으나 큰 긍휼로 너를 모을 것이요","\"내가 잠시 동안 너를 버리고 세상에 흩어 놓았으나 내가 너와 맺은 계약을 변함없이 지켜 그 큰 사랑으로 너를 다시 집으로 데려오고 내 백성을 다시 모아 놓겠다.","For a brief moment I abandoned you, but with great tenderness I will take you back.","For a small moment have I forsaken thee; but with great mercies will I gather thee.","\"For a brief moment I abandoned you, but with deep compassion I will bring you back.","Ad punctum in modico dereliqui te et in miserationibus magnis congregabo te.","ברגע קטן עזבתיך וברחמים גדלים אקבצך׃"],["29","54","8","분노가 북받쳐 내 얼굴을 잠시 너에게서 감추었지만 영원한 자애로 너를 가엾이 여긴다.” 네 구원자이신 주님께서 말씀하신다.","내가 분이 복받쳐 내 얼굴을 잠깐 너에게서 숨겼었지만, 이제 영원한 사랑으로 너에게 자비를 베풀리라.\" 너를 건지시는 야훼의 말씀이시다.","내가 넘치는 진노로 내 얼굴을 네게서 잠시 가렸으나 영원한 자비로 너를 긍휼히 여기리라 네 구속자 여호와께서 말씀하셨느니라","내가 넘치는 진노로 내 얼굴을 네게서 잠시 가리웠으나 영원한 자비로 너를 긍휼히 여기리라 네 구속자 여호와의 말이니라","네가 나를 버리고 우상을 섬길 때에 내가 몹시 분노를 터뜨리고 네게서 얼굴을 돌렸으나 그것은 잠시일 뿐이다. 나는 이제부터 언제까지나 너를 변함없이 사랑하고 너와 맺은 계약을 지키겠다. 너를 포로생활에서 해방시킨 나 여호와가 네게 약속하는 말이다.","In an outburst of wrath, for a moment I hid my face from you; But with enduring love I take pity on you, says the LORD, your redeemer.","In a little wrath I hid my face from thee for a moment; but with everlasting kindness will I have mercy on thee, saith the LORD thy Redeemer.","In a surge of anger I hid my face from you for a moment, but with everlasting kindness I will have compassion on you,\" says the LORD your Redeemer.","In momento indignationis abscondi faciem meam parumper a te et in misericordia sempiterna misertus sum tui, dixit redemptor tuus Dominus.","בשצף קצף הסתרתי פני רגע ממך ובחסד עולם רחמתיך אמר גאלך יהוה׃"],["29","54","9","“이는 나에게 노아의 때와 같다. 노아의 물이 다시는 땅에 범람하지 않으리라고 내가 맹세하였듯이 너에게 분노를 터뜨리지도 너를 꾸짖지도 않겠다고 내가 맹세한다.","\"내가 또다시 노아 시대에서처럼 맹세한다. 노아의 홍수가 다시는 세상을 휩쓸지 못하게 하리라고 맹세했듯이 나 이제 또다시 맹세한다. 내가 다시는 홧김에 너를 혼내 주지 아니하리라.","이는 내게 노아의 홍수와 같도다 내가 다시는 노아의 홍수로 땅 위에 범람하지 못하게 하리라 맹세한 것 같이 내가 네게 노하지 아니하며 너를 책망하지 아니하기로 맹세하였노니","이는 노아의 홍수에 비하리로다 내가 다시는 노아의 홍수로 땅 위에 범람치 않게 하리라 맹세한것 같이 내가 다시는 너를 노하지 아니하며 다시는 너를 책망하지 아니하기로 맹세하였노니","노아의 시대에 내가 \"다시는 물로 세상을 멸망시키지 않겠다.\"고 맹세하였던 것과 같이 이제 내가 또 그토록 중요한 맹세를 하겠다. \"내가 다시는 네게 화를 내지도 않고 너를 무섭게 꾸짖지도 않겠다.","This is for me like the days of Noah: As I swore then that the waters of Noah should never again flood the earth, So I have sworn now not to be angry with you, or to rebuke you.","For this is as the waters of Noah unto me: for as I have sworn that the waters of Noah should no more go over the earth; so have I sworn that I would not be wroth with thee, nor rebuke thee.","\"To me this is like the days of Noah, when I swore that the waters of Noah would never again cover the earth. So now I have sworn not to be angry with you, never to rebuke you again.","Sicut in diebus Noe istud mihi est, cui iuravi, ne inducerem aquas Noe ultra supra terram; sic iuravi, ut non irascar tibi et non increpem te.","כי מי נח זאת לי אשר נשבעתי מעבר מי נח עוד על הארץ כן נשבעתי מקצף עליך ומגער בך׃"],["29","54","10","산들이 밀려나고 언덕들이 흔들린다 하여도 나의 자애는 너에게서 밀려나지 않고 내 평화의 계약은 흔들리지 아니하리라.” 너를 가엾이 여기시는 주님께서 말씀하신다.","산들이 밀려 나고 언덕이 무너져도 나의 사랑은 결코 너를 떠나지 않는다. 내가 주는 평화의 계약은 결코 무너지지 않는다.\" 너를 불쌍히 여기시는 야훼의 말씀이시다.","산들이 떠나며 언덕들은 옮겨질지라도 나의 자비는 네게서 떠나지 아니하며 나의 화평의 언약은 흔들리지 아니하리라 너를 긍휼히 여기시는 여호와께서 말씀하셨느니라","산들은 떠나며 작은 산들은 옮길찌라도 나의 인자는 네게서 떠나지 아니하며 화평케 하는 나의 언약은 옮기지 아니하리라 너를 긍휼히 여기는 여호와의 말이니라","혹시 홍수가 나서 언덕과 산들이 물속에 잠긴다고 하여도 너에 대한 나의 사랑은 조금도 변하거나 흔들리지 않고 너와 평화롭게 살겠다는 나의 약속은 언제까지나 무효가 되지 않을 것이다.\" 이것이 너를 변함없이 사랑하는 나 여호와의 약속이다.\"","Though the mountains fall away and the hills be shaken, My love shall never fall away from you nor my covenant of peace be shaken, says the LORD, who has mercy on you.","For the mountains shall depart, and the hills be removed; but my kindness shall not depart from thee, neither shall the covenant of my peace be removed, saith the LORD that hath mercy on thee.","Though the mountains be shaken and the hills be removed, yet my unfailing love for you will not be shaken nor my covenant of peace be removed,\" says the LORD, who has compassion on you.","Montes enim recedent, et colles movebuntur, misericordia autem mea non recedet a te, et foedus pacis meae non movebitur, dixit miserator tuus Dominus.","כי ההרים ימושו והגבעות תמוטנה וחסדי מאתך לא ימוש וברית שלומי לא תמוט אמר מרחמך יהוה׃"],["29","54","11","너 가련한 여인아, 광풍에 시달려도 위로받지 못한 여인아. 보라, 내가 석류석을 너의 주춧돌로 놓고 청옥으로 너의 기초를 세우리라.","\"광풍에 시달려 고생하여도 위로해 주는 이 없는 도성아, 이제 나는 너의 돌들을 홍옥 위에 쌓아 올리고 청옥 위에 성의 주추를 놓으리라.","너 곤고하며 광풍에 요동하여 안위를 받지 못한 자여 보라 내가 화려한 채색으로 네 돌 사이에 더하며 청옥으로 네 기초를 쌓으며","너 곤고하며 광풍에 요동하여 안위를 받지 못한 자여 보라 내가 화려한 채색으로 네 돌 사이에 더하며 청옥으로 네 기초를 쌓으며","예루살렘아, 네가 지금은 폐허더미가 되어 있지만 주께서 이제는 지극히 찬란하고 존귀한 도성으로 만들어 주겠다고 말씀하신다. \"예루살렘아, 네가 내게 버림받고 심판을 받아서 황폐하게 되었으나 내가 이제 청옥으로 네 성벽의 기초를 놓고 값비싼 회반죽을 이겨 바르며 네 성벽의 돌들을 쌓아 놓겠다.","O afflicted one, storm-battered and unconsoled, I lay your pavements in carnelians, your foundations in sapphires;","O thou afflicted, tossed with tempest, and not comforted, behold, I will lay thy stones with fair colours, and lay thy foundations with sapphires.","\"O afflicted city, lashed by storms and not comforted, I will build you with stones of turquoise, your foundations with sapphires.","Paupercula, tempestate convulsa absque ulla consolatione, ecce ego sternam super carbunculos lapides tuos et fundabo te in sapphiris;","עניה סערה לא נחמה הנה אנכי מרביץ בפוך אבניך ויסדתיך בספירים׃"],["29","54","12","너의 성가퀴들을 홍옥으로, 너의 대문들을 수정으로, 너의 성벽을 모두 보석으로 만들리라.","루비로 요새의 뾰족 탑을 만들고 수정으로 성문들을 만들며 성 둘레를 보석으로 쌓으리라.","홍보석으로 네 성벽을 지으며 석류석으로 네 성문을 만들고 네 지경을 다 보석으로 꾸밀 것이며","홍보석으로 네 성첩을 지으며 석류석으로 네 성문을 만들고 네 지경을 다 보석으로 꾸밀 것이며","네 성벽 위의 탑들은 홍보석으로 만들며 네 성문들은 석류석과 같은 홍옥으로 만들며 네 성벽 전체를 내가 보석으로 쌓아 놓겠다.","I will make your battlements of rubies, your gates of jewels, and all your walls of precious stones.","And I will make thy windows of agates, and thy gates of carbuncles, and all thy borders of pleasant stones.","I will make your battlements of rubies, your gates of sparkling jewels, and all your walls of precious stones.","et ponam iaspidem propugnacula tua et portas tuas in lapides pretiosos et omnes terminos tuos in lapides desiderabiles.","ושמתי כדכד שמשתיך ושעריך לאבני אקדח וכל גבולך לאבני חפץ׃"],["29","54","13","너의 아들들은 모두 주님의 제자가 되리라. 또 네 아들들의 평화가 넘치리라.","너의 아들들은 모두 야훼의 제자가 되고 크나큰 평화를 누리리라.","네 모든 자녀는 여호와의 교훈을 받을 것이니 네 자녀에게는 큰 평안이 있을 것이며","네 모든 자녀는 여호와의 1)교훈을 받을 것이니 네 자녀는 크게 평강할 것이며 제자가 될 것이니","네 주민들은 모두 나의 계명을 배우는 제자들이 되고 번영과 행복을 누리며 외세의 방해를 받지 않고 평화스럽게 살 것이다.","All your children shall be taught by the LORD; great shall be the peace of your children.","And all thy children shall be taught of the LORD; and great shall be the peace of thy children.","All your sons will be taught by the LORD, and great will be your children's peace.","Universi filii tui erunt discipuli Domini, et magna erit pax filiis tuis;","וכל בניך למודי יהוה ורב שלום בניך׃"],["29","54","14","너는 의로움으로 굳건히 세워지고 압박에서 풀려나리니 네가 두려워할 일이 없으리라. 또 공포에서 풀려나리니 그것이 너에게 닥쳐오지 아니하리라.","네가 정의 위에 튼튼히 서서 온갖 압박에서 풀려나리니, 두려워할 일이 없으리라. 온갖 공포가 사라져 너에게 닥쳐오지 아니하리라.","너는 공의로 설 것이며 학대가 네게서 멀어질 것인즉 네가 두려워하지 아니할 것이며 공포도 네게 가까이하지 못할 것이라","너는 의로 설 것이며 학대가 네게서 멀어질 것인즉 네가 두려워 아니할 것이며 공포 그것도 너를 가까이 못할 것이라","너희는 모두 의롭게 살며 나는 항상 너희와 함께 있어서 너희를 보호해 주겠다. 그때에는 네가 온갖 압박과 고통에서 벗어날 것이니 과연 너는 아무 것도 두려워하지 않게 될 것이다. 어떤 공포나 고통도 네게 가까이 오지 못할 것이다.","In justice shall you be established, far from oppression, you shall not fear, from destruction, it cannot come near.","In righteousness shalt thou be established: thou shalt be far from oppression; for thou shalt not fear: and from terror; for it shall not come near thee.","In righteousness you will be established: Tyranny will be far from you; you will have nothing to fear. Terror will be far removed; it will not come near you.","in iustitia fundaberis. Procul eris ab oppressione, quia non timebis, et a pavore, quia non appropinquabit tibi.","בצדקה תכונני רחקי מעשק כי לא תיראי וממחתה כי לא תקרב אליך׃"],["29","54","15","누가 너를 공격한다면 그것은 나에게서 나온 것이 아니다. 누구든 너를 공격하는 자는 너로 말미암아 쓰러지리라.","억울하게 공격을 받는 일이야 있겠지만 너를 공격하는 자가 도리어 망하리라.","보라 그들이 분쟁을 일으킬지라도 나로 말미암지 아니한 것이니 누구든지 너와 분쟁을 일으키는 자는 너로 말미암아 패망하리라","그들이 2)모일찌라도 나로 말미암지 아니한 것이니 누구든지 3)모여 너를 치는 자는 너를 인하여 패망하리라 분쟁을 일으킬찌라도분쟁을 일으켜","누가 나의 허락도 없이 너를 공격하면 오히려 그가 멸망할 것이다.","If there be an attack, it is not my doing; whoever attacks shall fall before you.","Behold, they shall surely gather together, but not by me: whosoever shall gather together against thee shall fall for thy sake.","If anyone does attack you, it will not be my doing; whoever attacks you will surrender to you.","Ecce, si impetus fiet, non erit ex me; qui impetum fecerit in te, cadet contra te.","הן גור יגור אפס מאותי מי גר אתך עליך יפול׃"],["29","54","16","보라, 내가 대장장이를 창조하였으니 그가 숯불을 피워 제가 쓸 무기를 만들어 낸다. 나는 또 파멸시키기 위한 파괴자도 창조하였다.","숯불을 불어 피우고 자기가 쓸 연장을 만드는 대장장이를 나말고 누가 만들었겠느냐? 닥치는 대로 부수는 파괴자를 나말고 누가 만들었겠느냐?","보라 숯불을 불어서 자기가 쓸 만한 연장을 제조하는 장인도 내가 창조하였고 파괴하며 진멸하는 자도 내가 창조하였은즉","숯불을 불어서 자기가 쓸만한 기계를 제조하는 장인도 내가 창조하였고 파괴하며 진멸하는 자도 내가 창조하였은즉","숯불을 피워서 무기를 만드는 대장장이도 내가 창조하였고 그 무기로 사람을 죽이고 성읍을 파괴하는 군인들도 내가 창조하였다.","See, I have created the smith who blows on the burning coals and forges weapons as his work; It is I also who have created the destroyer to work havoc.","Behold, I have created the smith that bloweth the coals in the fire, and that bringeth forth an instrument for his work; and I have created the waster to destroy.","\"See, it is I who created the blacksmith who fans the coals into flame and forges a weapon fit for its work. And it is I who have created the destroyer to work havoc;","Ecce, ego creavi fabrum sufflantem in igne prunas et proferentem vas in opus suum; et ego creavi etiam vastatorem ad disperdendum.","הן אנכי בראתי חרש נפח באש פחם ומוציא כלי למעשהו ואנכי בראתי משחית לחבל׃"],["29","54","17","너를 치려고 만들어진 어떤 무기도 소용이 없고 재판에서 너를 거슬러 일어난 혀들은 네가 모두 패소시키리라. 이것이 주님의 종들을 위한 상속 재산이며 그들이 나에게서 받을 승리다. 주님의 말씀이다.","너를 치려고 벼린 무기는 아무리 잘 만들었어도 소용이 없으리라. 너를 법정에 고소하는 혀가 도리어 패소의 쓴 잔을 마시리라. 바로 이것이 야훼의 종들이 나에게서 받을 몫이다. 내가 이 권리를 그들에게 돌려준다.\" 야훼의 말씀이시다.","너를 치려고 제조된 모든 연장이 쓸모가 없을 것이라 일어나 너를 대적하여 송사하는 모든 혀는 네게 정죄를 당하리니 이는 여호와의 종들의 기업이요 이는 그들이 내게서 얻은 공의니라 여호와의 말씀이니라","무릇 너를 치려고 제조된 기계가 날카롭지 못할 것이라 무릇 일어나 너를 대적하여 송사하는 혀는 네게 정죄를 당하리니 이는 여호와의 종들의 기업이요 이는 그들이 내게서 얻은 의니라 여호와의 말이니라","그러므로 어떤 무기도 너를 해치지 못할 것이다. 너를 법정에 고소하는 사람이 있을 때 오히려 네가 그를 법정에서 이길 것이다. 나 여호와가 직접 내 백성 이스라엘을 보호하고 도와주겠다.\" 여호와께서 이렇게 약속해 주셨다.","Every weapon fashioned against you shall fail; every tongue that brings you to trial you shall prove false. This is the lot of the servants of the LORD, their vindication from me—oracle of the LORD.","No weapon that is formed against thee shall prosper; and every tongue that shall rise against thee in judgment thou shalt condemn. This is the heritage of the servants of the LORD, and their righteousness is of me, saith the LORD.","no weapon forged against you will prevail, and you will refute every tongue that accuses you. This is the heritage of the servants of the LORD, and this is their vindication from me,\" declares the LORD.","Omne vas, quod fictum est contra te, frustra erit. Et omnem linguam insurgentem tibi in iudicio confutabis: haec est hereditas servorum Domini et iustitia eorum ex me, dicit Dominus.","כל כלי יוצר עליך לא יצלח וכל לשון תקום אתך למשפט תרשיעי זאת נחלת עבדי יהוה וצדקתם מאתי נאם יהוה׃"],["29","55","1","자, 목마른 자들아, 모두 물가로 오너라. 돈이 없는 자들도 와서 사 먹어라. 와서 돈 없이 값 없이 술과 젖을 사라.","너희 목마른 자들아, 오너라. 여기에 물이 있다. 너희 먹을 것 없는 자들아, 오너라. 1)돈 없이 양식을 사서 먹어라. 값 없이 술과 젖을 사서 마셔라. ^\"네가 먹을 양식은 돈을 내고 살 것이 아니다. 네가 받아 마실 술과 양젖은 값을 내고 얻을 것이 아니다.\"=라고 옮길 수도 있다.","오호라 너희 모든 목마른 자들아 물로 나아오라 돈 없는 자도 오라 너희는 와서 사 먹되 돈 없이, 값 없이 와서 포도주와 젖을 사라","너희 목마른 자들아 물로 나아오라 돈 없는 자도 오라 너희는 와서 사 먹되 돈 없이, 값 없이 와서 포도주와 젖을 사라","여호와께서 이스라엘 백성에게 바벨론의 포로생활에만 얽매여 실망하지 말고 옛날 다윗 시대처럼 번영하는 나라가 다시 온다는 것을 믿도록 은혜의 계약을 선포해 주셨다. \"너희 목마른 자들아, 모두 이곳의 물로 나오너라! 돈이 없는 사람들도 모두 오너라! 너희는 사서 먹되, 돈 없이 와서 사라! 너희는 쉬고 전혀 값을 내지 말고 포도주와 젖을 사라!","All you who are thirsty, come to the water! You who have no money, come, buy grain and eat; Come, buy grain without money, wine and milk without cost!","Ho, every one that thirsteth, come ye to the waters, and he that hath no money; come ye, buy, and eat; yea, come, buy wine and milk without money and without price.","\"Come, all you who are thirsty, come to the waters; and you who have no money, come, buy and eat! Come, buy wine and milk without money and without cost.","Heu! Omnes sitientes, venite ad aquas; et, qui non habetis argentum, properate, emite et comedite, venite, emite absque argento et absque ulla commutatione vinum et lac.","הוי כל צמא לכו למים ואשר אין לו כסף לכו שברו ואכלו ולכו שברו בלוא כסף ובלוא מחיר יין וחלב׃"],["29","55","2","너희는 어찌하여 양식도 못 되는 것에 돈을 쓰고 배불리지도 못하는 것에 수고를 들이느냐? 들어라, 내 말을 들어라. 너희가 좋은 것을 먹고 기름진 음식을 즐기리라.","그런데 어찌하여 돈을 써가며 양식도 못되는 것을 얻으려 하느냐? 애써 번 돈을 배부르게도 못하는 데 써 버리느냐? 들어라, 나의 말을 들어보아라. 맛좋은 음식을 먹으며 기름진 것을 푸짐하게 먹으리라.","너희가 어찌하여 양식이 아닌 것을 위하여 은을 달아 주며 배부르게 하지 못할 것을 위하여 수고하느냐 내게 듣고 들을지어다 그리하면 너희가 좋은 것을 먹을 것이며 너희 자신들이 기름진 것으로 즐거움을 얻으리라","너희가 어찌하여 양식 아닌 것을 위하여 은을 달아 주며 배부르게 못할 것을 위하여 수고하느냐 나를 청종하라 그리하면 너희가 좋은 것을 먹을 것이며 너희 마음이 기름진 것으로 즐거움을 얻으리라","너희가 어찌하여 양식 아닌 것을 위하여 돈을 쓰느냐? 너희가 어찌하여 배를 채우지도 못할 양식을 위하여 수고하느냐? 이제 내가 하는 말을 너희가 똑똑히 듣기만 하면 너희가 항상 좋은 것으로 먹을 것이다. 지극히 좋은 양식으로 항상 만족하게 먹을 것이다.","Why spend your money for what is not bread; your wages for what does not satisfy? Only listen to me, and you shall eat well, you shall delight in rich fare.","Wherefore do ye spend money for that which is not bread? and your labour for that which satisfieth not? hearken diligently unto me, and eat ye that which is good, and let your soul delight itself in fatness.","Why spend money on what is not bread, and your labor on what does not satisfy? Listen, listen to me, and eat what is good, and your soul will delight in the richest of fare.","Quare appenditis argentum non in panibus et laborem vestrum non in saturitate? Audite, audientes me, et comedite bonum, ut delectetur in crassitudine anima vestra.","למה תשקלו כסף בלוא לחם ויגיעכם בלוא לשבעה שמעו שמוע אלי ואכלו טוב ותתענג בדשן נפשכם׃"],["29","55","3","너희는 귀를 기울이고 나에게 오너라. 들어라. 너희가 살리라. 내가 너희와 영원한 계약을 맺으리니 이는 다윗에게 베푼 나의 변치 않는 자애이다.","귀를 기울이고 나에게로 오너라. 나의 말을 들어라. 너희에게 생기가 솟으리라.","너희는 귀를 기울이고 내게로 나아와 들으라 그리하면 너희의 영혼이 살리라 내가 너희를 위하여 영원한 언약을 맺으리니 곧 다윗에게 허락한 확실한 은혜이니라","너희는 귀를 기울이고 내게 나아와 들으라 그리하면 너희 영혼이 살리라 내가 너희에게 영원한 언약을 세우리니 곧 다윗에게 허락한 확실한 은혜니라","너희는 내 말을 똑똑히 듣고 이제 내게로 오너라! 너희가 내 말을 옳게 듣기만 하면 너희가 죽지 않고 살 것이다. 나는 이제 너희와 언제까지나 유효한 언약을 맺겠다. 내가 옛날에 다윗과 맺은 언약을 그대로 지켜서 그 모든 약속을 너희에게 이루어 주겠다.","Pay attention and come to me; listen, that you may have life. I will make with you an everlasting covenant, the steadfast loyalty promised to David.","Incline your ear, and come unto me: hear, and your soul shall live; and I will make an everlasting covenant with you, even the sure mercies of David.","Give ear and come to me; hear me, that your soul may live. I will make an everlasting covenant with you, my faithful love promised to David.","Inclinate aurem vestram et venite ad me; audite, ut vivat anima vestra, et feriam vobiscum pactum sempiternum, misericordias David fideles.","הטו אזנכם ולכו אלי שמעו ותחי נפשכם ואכרתה לכם ברית עולם חסדי דוד הנאמנים׃"],["29","55","4","보라, 내가 그를 민족들을 위한 증인으로, 민족들의 지배자와 명령자로 만들었다.","나는 그를 뭇 백성들 앞에 증인으로 세웠고 부족들의 수령과 군주로 삼았다.","보라 내가 그를 만민에게 증인으로 세웠고 만민의 인도자와 명령자로 삼았나니","내가 그를 만민에게 증거로 세웠고 만민의 1)인도자와 명령자를 삼았었나니 왕과","내가 다윗을 나의 증인으로 세워서 세계 만민에게 나의 전능한 통치권을 증거하게 하고 또 내가 그를 세계 만민의 통치자와 명령자로 세워서 세계의 평화와 질서를 보존하도록 하였다.","As I made him a witness to peoples, a leader and commander of peoples,","Behold, I have given him for a witness to the people, a leader and commander to the people.","See, I have made him a witness to the peoples, a leader and commander of the peoples.","Ecce testem populis dedi eum, ducem ac praeceptorem gentibus.","הן עד לאומים נתתיו נגיד ומצוה לאמים׃"],["29","55","5","보라, 네가 알지 못하는 나라를 네가 부르고 너를 알지 못하는 나라가 너에게 달려오리니 주 너의 하느님 이스라엘의 거룩하신 분 그분께서 너를 영화롭게 하신 까닭이다.","이제 너는 네가 알지 못하던 민족을 부르리라. 너를 모르던 민족들이 너에게로 달려오리라. 너희 하느님 야훼, 이스라엘의 거룩하신 이께서 너를 영화롭게 하신 것을 보았기 때문이다.","보라 네가 알지 못하는 나라를 네가 부를 것이며 너를 알지 못하는 나라가 네게로 달려올 것은 여호와 네 하나님 곧 이스라엘의 거룩하신 이로 말미암음이니라 이는 그가 너를 영화롭게 하였느니라","네가 알지 못하는 나라를 부를 것이며 너를 알지 못하는 나라가 네게 달려올 것은 나 여호와 네 하나님 곧 이스라엘의 거룩한 자를 인함이니라 2)내가 너를 영화롭게 하였느니라 히, 그가","이제는 세계 만민이 너희를 보고서도 나 여호와를 섬기게 될 것이다. 내가 너희와 맺은 언약을 이루어 주면 너희가 모르던 민족들도 그것을 보고서 너희를 찾아올 것이다. 너희를 모르는 민족들도 열심히 너희를 찾아올 것이다. 너희의 하나님 나 여호와가 너희와 맺은 언약을 이루고 내가 이스라엘의 거룩한 하나님으로서 너희를 지극히 영광스럽게 높여 줄 것이기 때문이다.\"","So shall you summon a nation you knew not, and a nation that knew you not shall run to you, Because of the LORD, your God, the Holy One of Israel, who has glorified you.","Behold, thou shalt call a nation that thou knowest not, and nations that knew not thee shall run unto thee because of the LORD thy God, and for the Holy One of Israel; for he hath glorified thee.","Surely you will summon nations you know not, and nations that do not know you will hasten to you, because of the LORD your God, the Holy One of Israel, for he has endowed you with splendor.\"","Ecce gentem, quam nesciebas, vocabis, et gentes, quae te non cognoverunt, ad te current, propter Dominum Deum tuum et Sanctum Israel, quia glorificavit te.","הן גוי לא תדע תקרא וגוי לא ידעוך אליך ירוצו למען יהוה אלהיך ולקדוש ישראל כי פארך׃"],["29","55","6","만나 뵐 수 있을 때에 주님을 찾아라. 가까이 계실 때에 그분을 불러라.","야훼를 찾아라. 만나주실 때가 되었다. 그를 불러라, 옆에 와 계신다.","너희는 여호와를 만날 만한 때에 찾으라 가까이 계실 때에 그를 부르라","너희는 여호와를 만날만한 때에 찾으라 가까이 계실 때에 그를 부르라","여호와께서 너희를 만나러 오셨을 때에 너희도 주님을 만나러 나오너라! 주께서 가까이 와 계실 때에 너희도 주님을 부르며 찾아라!","Seek the LORD while he may be found, call upon him while he is near.","Seek ye the LORD while he may be found, call ye upon him while he is near:","Seek the LORD while he may be found; call on him while he is near.","Quaerite Dominum, dum inveniri potest; invocate eum, dum prope est.","דרשו יהוה בהמצאו קראהו בהיותו קרוב׃"],["29","55","7","죄인은 제 길을, 불의한 사람은 제 생각을 버리고 주님께 돌아오너라. 그분께서 그를 가엾이 여기시리라. 우리 하느님께 돌아오너라. 그분께서는 너그러이 용서하신다.","불의한 자는 그 가던 길을 돌이켜라. 허영에 들뜬 자는 생각을 고쳐라. 야훼께 돌아오너라, 자비롭게 맞아주시리라. 우리의 하느님께 돌아오너라, 너그럽게 용서해 주시리라.","악인은 그의 길을, 불의한 자는 그의 생각을 버리고 여호와께로 돌아오라 그리하면 그가 긍휼히 여기시리라 우리 하나님께로 돌아오라 그가 너그럽게 용서하시리라","악인은 그 길을, 불의한 자는 그 생각을 버리고 여호와께로 돌아오라 그리하면 그가 긍휼히 여기시리라 우리 하나님께로 나아오라 그가 널리 용서하시리라","여호와께 반대하고 자기 생각대로만 산 사람은 이제 그 길에서 떠나 여호와께로 돌아오너라. 여호와께서는 얼마든지 그런 사람도 다시 받아주실 것이다. 주께서 넓은 마음으로 용서하여 주실 것이다.","Let the wicked forsake their way, and sinners their thoughts; Let them turn to the LORD to find mercy; to our God, who is generous in forgiving.","Let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts: and let him return unto the LORD, and he will have mercy upon him; and to our God, for he will abundantly pardon.","Let the wicked forsake his way and the evil man his thoughts. Let him turn to the LORD, and he will have mercy on him, and to our God, for he will freely pardon.","Derelinquat impius viam suam, et vir iniquus cogitationes suas; et revertatur ad Dominum, et miserebitur eius, et ad Deum nostrum, quoniam multus est ad ignoscendum.","יעזב רשע דרכו ואיש און מחשבתיו וישב אל יהוה וירחמהו ואל אלהינו כי ירבה לסלוח׃"],["29","55","8","내 생각은 너희 생각과 같지 않고 너희 길은 내 길과 같지 않다. 주님의 말씀이다.","\"내 생각은 너희 생각과 같지 않다. 나의 길은 너희 길과 같지 않다.\" 야훼의 말씀이시다.","이는 내 생각이 너희의 생각과 다르며 내 길은 너희의 길과 다름이니라 여호와의 말씀이니라","여호와의 말씀에 내 생각은 너희 생각과 다르며 내 길은 너희 길과 달라서","여호와께서 이렇게 말씀하신다. \"내가 곧 너희를 해방시키겠다. 나의 계획은 너희가 생각해서 알아낼 수 있는 것들이 아니며 내가 할 수 있는 일들은 너희들이 보기에 가능한 것들만이 아니다.","For my thoughts are not your thoughts, nor are your ways my ways—oracle of the LORD.","For my thoughts are not your thoughts, neither are your ways my ways, saith the LORD.","\"For my thoughts are not your thoughts, neither are your ways my ways,\" declares the LORD.","Non enim cogitationes meae cogitationes vestrae, neque viae vestrae viae meae, dicit Dominus.","כי לא מחשבותי מחשבותיכם ולא דרכיכם דרכי נאם יהוה׃"],["29","55","9","하늘이 땅 위에 드높이 있듯이 내 길은 너희 길 위에, 내 생각은 너희 생각 위에 드높이 있다.","\"하늘이 땅에서 아득하듯 나의 길은 너희 길보다 높다. 나의 생각은 너희 생각보다 높다.","이는 하늘이 땅보다 높음 같이 내 길은 너희의 길보다 높으며 내 생각은 너희의 생각보다 높음이니라","하늘이 땅보다 높음 같이 내 길은 너희 길보다 높으며 내 생각은 너희 생각보다 높으니라","하늘이 땅보다 높은 것과 같이 나의 생각도 너희가 생각할 수 있는 모든 것들보다 높다. 내가 할 수 있는 일들도 너희가 가능하게 보는 모든 것들보다 훨씬 더 높다.","For as the heavens are higher than the earth, so are my ways higher than your ways, my thoughts higher than your thoughts.","For as the heavens are higher than the earth, so are my ways higher than your ways, and my thoughts than your thoughts.","\"As the heavens are higher than the earth, so are my ways higher than your ways and my thoughts than your thoughts.","Quia sicut exaltantur caeli a terra, sic exaltatae sunt viae meae a viis vestris, et cogitationes meae a cogitationibus vestris.","כי גבהו שמים מארץ כן גבהו דרכי מדרכיכם ומחשבתי ממחשבתיכם׃"],["29","55","10","비와 눈은 하늘에서 내려와 그리로 돌아가지 않고 오히려 땅을 적시어 기름지게 하고 싹이 돋아나게 하여 씨 뿌리는 사람에게 씨앗을 주고 먹는 이에게 양식을 준다.","하늘에서 쏟아지는 비, 내리는 눈이 하늘로 되돌아가지 아니하고 땅을 흠뻑 적시어 싹이 돋아 자라게 하며 씨뿌린 사람에게 씨앗과 먹을 양식을 내주듯이,","이는 비와 눈이 하늘로부터 내려서 그리로 되돌아가지 아니하고 땅을 적셔서 소출이 나게 하며 싹이 나게 하여 파종하는 자에게는 종자를 주며 먹는 자에게는 양식을 줌과 같이","비와 눈이 하늘에서 내려서는 다시 그리로 가지 않고 토지를 적시어서 싹이 나게 하며 열매가 맺게 하여 파종하는 자에게 종자를 주며 먹는 자에게 양식을 줌과 같이","비나 눈이 하늘에서 내렸으면 그냥 다시 그리로 돌아가지 않고 땅을 적셔서 곡식들은 싹 틔우고 열매를 맺게 한다. 그래서 농부들이 먹을 양식을 추수하고 또다시 농사 지을 종자를 얻는다.","Yet just as from the heavens the rain and snow come down And do not return there till they have watered the earth, making it fertile and fruitful, Giving seed to the one who sows and bread to the one who eats,","For as the rain cometh down, and the snow from heaven, and returneth not thither, but watereth the earth, and maketh it bring forth and bud, that it may give seed to the sower, and bread to the eater:","As the rain and the snow come down from heaven, and do not return to it without watering the earth and making it bud and flourish, so that it yields seed for the sower and bread for the eater,","Et quomodo descendit imber et nix de caelo et illuc ultra non revertitur, sed inebriat terram et infundit eam et germinare eam facit et dat semen serenti et panem comedenti,","כי כאשר ירד הגשם והשלג מן השמים ושמה לא ישוב כי אם הרוה את הארץ והולידה והצמיחה ונתן זרע לזרע ולחם לאכל׃"],["29","55","11","이처럼 내 입에서 나가는 나의 말도 나에게 헛되이 돌아오지 않고 반드시 내가 뜻하는 바를 이루며 내가 내린 사명을 완수하고야 만다.","내 입에서 나가는 말도 그 받은 사명을 이루어 나의 뜻을 성취하지 아니하고는 그냥 나에게로 돌아오지는 않는다.\"","내 입에서 나가는 말도 이와 같이 헛되이 내게로 되돌아오지 아니하고 나의 기뻐하는 뜻을 이루며 내가 보낸 일에 형통함이니라","내 입에서 나가는 말도 헛되이 내게로 돌아오지 아니하고 나의 뜻을 이루며 나의 명하여 보낸 일에 형통하리라","내 입에서 한번 나간 말씀도 그와 꼭 같다. 그 말씀도 성과없이 그냥 내게로 돌아오지 않는다. 내가 원하는 일을 실현하고 내가 맡겨 준 임무를 그대로 수행한다.\"","So shall my word be that goes forth from my mouth; It shall not return to me empty, but shall do what pleases me, achieving the end for which I sent it.","So shall my word be that goeth forth out of my mouth: it shall not return unto me void, but it shall accomplish that which I please, and it shall prosper in the thing whereto I sent it.","so is my word that goes out from my mouth: It will not return to me empty, but will accomplish what I desire and achieve the purpose for which I sent it.","sic erit verbum meum, quod egredietur de ore meo: non revertetur ad me vacuum, sed faciet, quaecumque volui, et prosperabitur in his, ad quae misi illud.","כן יהיה דברי אשר יצא מפי לא ישוב אלי ריקם כי אם עשה את אשר חפצתי והצליח אשר שלחתיו׃"],["29","55","12","정녕 너희는 기뻐하며 떠나고 평화로이 인도되리라. 산과 언덕들은 너희 앞에서 기뻐 소리치고 들의 나무들은 모두 손뼉을 치리라.","이제, 너희는 기뻐 뛰며 길을 떠나 안내를 받으며 탈없이 돌아가리라. 너희를 맞아 산과 언덕들은 환성을 터뜨리고 들의 나무가 모두 손뼉을 치리라.","너희는 기쁨으로 나아가며 평안히 인도함을 받을 것이요 산들과 언덕들이 너희 앞에서 노래를 발하고 들의 모든 나무가 손뼉을 칠 것이며","너희는 기쁨으로 나아가며 평안히 인도함을 받을 것이요 산들과 작은 산들이 너희 앞에서 노래를 발하고 들의 모든 나무가 손바닥을 칠 것이며","나의 동족 이스라엘아, 너희가 이제 포로생활에서 벗어나 기뻐 뛰며 조국 산천으로 돌아올 것이다. 주께서 인도해 주시는 길을 따라 안전하게 돌아올 것이다. 너희가 돌아올 때에는 언덕과 산들도 기뻐서 환호성을 외치고, 들녘의 나무들도 손뼉을 칠 것이다.","Yes, in joy you shall go forth, in peace you shall be brought home; Mountains and hills shall break out in song before you, all trees of the field shall clap their hands.","For ye shall go out with joy, and be led forth with peace: the mountains and the hills shall break forth before you into singing, and all the trees of the field shall clap their hands.","You will go out in joy and be led forth in peace; the mountains and hills will burst into song before you, and all the trees of the field will clap their hands.","Quia in laetitia egrediemini et in pace deducemini; montes et colles cantabunt coram vobis laudem, et omnia ligna regionis plaudent manu.","כי בשמחה תצאו ובשלום תובלון ההרים והגבעות יפצחו לפניכם רנה וכל עצי השדה ימחאו כף׃"],["29","55","13","가시덤불 대신 방백나무가 올라오고 쐐기풀 대신 도금양나무가 올라오리라. 이 일은 주님께 영예가 되고 결코 끊어지지 않는 영원한 표징이 되리라.","가시나무 섰던 자리에 전나무가 돋아나고 쐐기풀이 있던 자리에 소귀나무가 올라오리라. 이런 일이 야훼의 이름을 들날리고 영원히 사라지지 않는 표가 되리라.","잣나무는 가시나무를 대신하여 나며 화석류는 찔레를 대신하여 날 것이라 이것이 여호와의 기념이 되며 영영한 표징이 되어 끊어지지 아니하리라","잣나무는 가시나무를 대신하여 나며 화석류는 질려를 대신하여 날 것이라 이것이 여호와의 명예가 되며 영영한 표징이 되어 끊어지지 아니하리라 하시니라","너희가 지날 때에는 저주가 복으로 바꾸어 산천 초목도 낙원으로 바뀔 것이다. 너희가 조국으로 돌아오는 그 길가에서는 가시나무들 대신에 전나무들이 자라오르고 쐐기풀 대신에 소귀나무들이 자라오를 것이다. 여호와를 찬양하고 그의 이름을 높이기 위하여 이런 일들이 모두 일어날 것이다. 이렇게 낙원이 회복되면 주께서 이것을 영원히 존속하는 표징으로 삼으실 것이다.","In place of the thornbush, the cypress shall grow, instead of nettles, the myrtle. This shall be to the LORD’s renown, as an everlasting sign that shall not fail.","Instead of the thorn shall come up the fir tree, and instead of the brier shall come up the myrtle tree: and it shall be to the LORD for a name, for an everlasting sign that shall not be cut off.","Instead of the thornbush will grow the pine tree, and instead of briers the myrtle will grow. This will be for the LORD'S renown, for an everlasting sign, which will not be destroyed.\"","Pro vepribus ascendet cupressus, et pro urtica crescet myrtus; et erit Domino in gloriam, in signum aeternum, quod non auferetur.","תחת הנעצוץ יעלה ברוש תחת הסרפד יעלה הדס והיה ליהוה לשם לאות עולם לא יכרת׃"],["29","56","1","주님께서 이렇게 말씀하신다. “너희는 공정을 지키고 정의를 실천하여라. 나의 구원이 가까이 왔고 나의 의로움이 곧 드러나리라.”","야훼께서 말씀하신다. \"너희는 바른 길을 걷고 옳게 살아라. 나 너희를 구하러 왔다. 나의 승리가 나타날 때가 왔다.\"","여호와께서 이와 같이 말씀하시기를 너희는 정의를 지키며 의를 행하라 이는 나의 구원이 가까이 왔고 나의 공의가 나타날 것임이라 하셨도다","여호와께서 이같이 말씀하시되 너희는 공평을 지키며 의를 행하라 나의 구원이 가까이 왔고 나의 의가 쉬 나타날 것임이라 하셨은즉","여호와께서 이렇게 말씀하신다. \"내가 곧 예루살렘을 회복시키고 이스라엘 땅을 너희에게 다시 돌려주겠으니 너희는 이제 내가 정하여 준 법을 지키고 정의를 실천하여 토지를 공평하게 나누어 가져라. (ㄱ. 제 3 이사야서로 불리는 56-66장은 유다 땅으로 돌아와 성전 재건의 과제를 지니게 될 BC 537-521년 경에 대한 예언으로 이스라엘이 누리는 새로운 구원의 시대와 이방인들에 대한 심판 선언이 중심 내용을 이룬다)","Thus says the LORD: Observe what is right, do what is just, for my salvation is about to come, my justice, about to be revealed.","Thus saith the LORD, Keep ye judgment, and do justice: for my salvation is near to come, and my righteousness to be revealed.","This is what the LORD says: \"Maintain justice and do what is right, for my salvation is close at hand and my righteousness will soon be revealed.","Haec dicit Dominus:  “Custodite iudicium et facite iustitiam, quia iuxta est salus mea, ut veniat, et iustitia mea, ut reveletur “.","כה אמר יהוה שמרו משפט ועשו צדקה כי קרובה ישועתי לבוא וצדקתי להגלות׃"],["29","56","2","행복하여라, 이를 실천하는 사람! 이를 준수하는 인간 안식일을 지켜 더럽히지 않는 이 어떤 악행에도 손을 대지 않는 이.","복되어라, 옳게 사는 사람, 옳은 길을 끝내 지키는 사람, 안식일을 속되지 않게 잘 지키는 사람, 온갖 악에서 손을 떼는 사람.","안식일을 지켜 더럽히지 아니하며 그의 손을 금하여 모든 악을 행하지 아니하여야 하나니 이와 같이 하는 사람, 이와 같이 굳게 잡는 사람은 복이 있느니라","안식일을 지켜 더럽히지 아니하며 그 손을 금하여 모든 악을 행치 아니하여야 하나니 이같이 행하는 사람, 이같이 굳이 잡는 인생은 복이 있느니라","내 계명을 지키는 사람은 누구나 평화를 누리며 행복하게 살 것이다. 안식일을 더럽히지 않고 잘 지키는 사람은 행복한 인생을 살 것이다. 모든 악행에서 손을 떼고 끝까지 굳게 정의를 실천하는 사람은 행복할 것이다.\"","Happy is the one who does this, whoever holds fast to it: Keeping the sabbath without profaning it, keeping one’s hand from doing any evil.","Blessed is the man that doeth this, and the son of man that layeth hold on it; that keepeth the sabbath from polluting it, and keepeth his hand from doing any evil.","Blessed is the man who does this, the man who holds it fast, who keeps the Sabbath without desecrating it, and keeps his hand from doing any evil.\"","Beatus vir, qui facit hoc, et filius hominis, qui apprehendit istud, custodiens sabbatum, ne polluat illud, custodiens manum suam, ne faciat omne malum.","אשרי אנוש יעשה זאת ובן אדם יחזיק בה שמר שבת מחללו ושמר ידו מעשות כל רע׃"],["29","56","3","주님을 따르는 이방인은 이렇게 말하지 마라. “주님께서는 나를 반드시 당신 백성에게서 떼어 버리시리라.” 그리고 고자도 “나는 마른 장작에 지나지 않는다.”고 말하지 마라.","야훼께로 개종한 외국인은 \"야훼께서 나를 당신의 백성에게서 제명시키리라.\" 하고 걱정하지 마라. 고자들도 \"나는 마른 나무 같은 신세구나.\" 하고 염려하지 마라.","여호와께 연합한 이방인은 말하기를 여호와께서 나를 그의 백성 중에서 반드시 갈라내시리라 하지 말며 고자도 말하기를 나는 마른 나무라 하지 말라","여호와께 연합한 이방인은 여호와께서 나를 그 백성 중에서 반드시 갈라내시리라 말하지 말며 고자도 나는 마른 나무라 말하지 말라","그러므로 여호와를 섬기기로 작정한 이방인들은 \"여호와께서 틀림없이 나를 그분의 백성 가운데서 쫓아내실 것이다.\"라고 말하지 말아라. 자식을 낳을 수 없는 고자들도 \"내 신세는 말라 죽은 나무와 같다.\"고 말하지 말아라.","The foreigner joined to the LORD should not say, “The LORD will surely exclude me from his people”; Nor should the eunuch say, “See, I am a dry tree.”","Neither let the son of the stranger, that hath joined himself to the LORD, speak, saying, The LORD hath utterly separated me from his people: neither let the eunuch say, Behold, I am a dry tree.","Let no foreigner who has bound himself to the LORD say, \"The LORD will surely exclude me from his people.\" And let not any eunuch complain, \"I am only a dry tree.\"","Et non dicat filius advenae, qui adhaeret Domino, dicens:  “Separatione dividet me Dominus a populo suo “. Et non dicat eunuchus:  “Ecce, ego lignum aridum “.","ואל יאמר בן הנכר הנלוה אל יהוה לאמר הבדל יבדילני יהוה מעל עמו ואל יאמר הסריס הן אני עץ יבש׃"],["29","56","4","정녕 주님께서 이렇게 말씀하신다. “나의 안식일을 지키고 내가 좋아하는 것을 선택하며 나의 계약을 준수하는 고자들에게는","야훼께서 말씀하신다. \"고자라도 나의 안식일을 지키고 나의 뜻에 맞는 일만 하고 나의 계약을 굳게 지키면,","여호와께서 이와 같이 말씀하시기를 나의 안식일을 지키며 내가 기뻐하는 일을 선택하며 나의 언약을 굳게 잡는 고자들에게는","여호와께서 이같이 말씀하시기를 나의 안식일을 지키며 나를 기뻐하는 일을 선택하며 나의 언약을 굳게 잡는 고자들에게는","주 여호와께서 이렇게 말씀하신다. \"고자라고 하여도 나의 안식일을 거룩하게 지키고 내 마음에 드는 일들을 골라서 하고 나의 계명을 충실하게 지키면","For thus says the LORD: To the eunuchs who keep my sabbaths, who choose what pleases me, and who hold fast to my covenant,","For thus saith the LORD unto the eunuchs that keep my sabbaths, and choose the things that please me, and take hold of my covenant;","For this is what the LORD says: \"To the eunuchs who keep my Sabbaths, who choose what pleases me and hold fast to my covenant--","Quia haec dicit Dominus eunuchis:  “Qui custodierint sabbata mea et elegerint, quae ego volui, et tenuerint foedus meum,","כי כה אמר יהוה לסריסים אשר ישמרו את שבתותי ובחרו באשר חפצתי ומחזיקים בבריתי׃"],["29","56","5","나의 집과 나의 울안에 아들딸들보다 나은 기념비와 이름을 마련해 주리라. 나는 그들에게 결코 끊어지지 않을 영원한 이름을 주리라.","나의 집, 나의 울 안에 그들의 송덕비를 세워주리라. 어떤 아들 딸이 그보다 나은 이름을 남기랴! 나 그들에게 영원히 지워지지 않을 이름을 주리라.","내가 내 집에서, 내 성 안에서 아들이나 딸보다 나은 기념물과 이름을 그들에게 주며 영원한 이름을 주어 끊어지지 아니하게 할 것이며","내가 내 집에서, 내 성안에서 자녀보다 나은 기념물과 이름을 주며 영영한 이름을 주어 끊치지 않게 할 것이며","내가 그런 사람을 위하여 나의 성전뜰 안에 기념비를 세워 주겠다. 자녀들보다 더 오래 그의 이름을 기억하도록 기념비를 세워 주겠다. 내가 그의 이름을 영원히 잊혀지지 않도록 보존하겠다.","I will give them, in my house and within my walls, a monument and a name Better than sons and daughters; an eternal name, which shall not be cut off, will I give them.","Even unto them will I give in mine house and within my walls a place and a name better than of sons and of daughters: I will give them an everlasting name, that shall not be cut off.","to them I will give within my temple and its walls a memorial and a name better than sons and daughters; I will give them an everlasting name that will not be cut off.","dabo eis in domo mea et in muris meis locum et nomen melius a filiis et filiabus: nomen sempiternum dabo eis, quod non peribit.","ונתתי להם בביתי ובחומתי יד ושם טוב מבנים ומבנות שם עולם אתן לו אשר לא יכרת׃"],["29","56","6","주님을 섬기고 주님의 이름을 사랑하며 주님의 종이 되려고 주님을 따르는 이방인들, 안식일을 지켜 더럽히지 않고 나의 계약을 준수하는 모든 이들.","외국인들도 야훼에게로 개종하여 나를 섬기고, 야훼라는 이름을 사랑하여 나의 종이 되어 안식일을 속되지 않게 지키고 나의 계약을 지키기만 하면,","또 여호와와 연합하여 그를 섬기며 여호와의 이름을 사랑하며 그의 종이 되며 안식일을 지켜 더럽히지 아니하며 나의 언약을 굳게 지키는 이방인마다","또 나 여호와에게 연합하여 섬기며 나 여호와의 이름을 사랑하며 1)나의 종이 되며 안식일을 지켜 더럽히지 아니하며 나의 언약을 굳게 지키는 이방인마다 히, 그의","또 내 백성으로 들어온 이방인들도 나를 사랑하고 나의 명령에 순종하며 안식일을 더럽히지 않고 내가 이스라엘과 맺은 언약을 충실히 지키면","And foreigners who join themselves to the LORD, to minister to him, To love the name of the LORD, to become his servants— All who keep the sabbath without profaning it and hold fast to my covenant,","Also the sons of the stranger, that join themselves to the LORD, to serve him, and to love the name of the LORD, to be his servants, every one that keepeth the sabbath from polluting it, and taketh hold of my covenant;","And foreigners who bind themselves to the LORD to serve him, to love the name of the LORD, and to worship him, all who keep the Sabbath without desecrating it and who hold fast to my covenant--","Et filios advenae, qui adhaerent Domino, ut colant eum, ut diligant nomen Domini, ut sint ei in servos, omnes custodientes sabbatum, ne polluant illud, et tenentes foedus meum,","ובני הנכר הנלוים על יהוה לשרתו ולאהבה את שם יהוה להיות לו לעבדים כל שמר שבת מחללו ומחזיקים בבריתי׃"],["29","56","7","나는 그들을 나의 거룩한 산으로 인도하고 나에게 기도하는 집에서 그들을 기쁘게 하리라. 그들의 번제물과 희생 제물들은 나의 제단 위에서 기꺼이 받아들여지리니 나의 집은 모든 민족들을 위한 기도의 집이라 불리리라.”","나는 그들을 나의 거룩한 산에 불러다가 나의 기도처에서 기쁜 나날을 보내게 하리라. 그들이 나의 제단에 바치는 번제물과 희생 제물을 내가 즐겨 받으리라. 나의 집은 뭇 백성이 모여 기도하는 집이라 불리리라.\"","내가 곧 그들을 나의 성산으로 인도하여 기도하는 내 집에서 그들을 기쁘게 할 것이며 그들의 번제와 희생을 나의 제단에서 기꺼이 받게 되리니 이는 내 집은 만민이 기도하는 집이라 일컬음이 될 것임이라","내가 그를 나의 성산으로 인도하여 기도하는 내 집에서 그들을 기쁘게 할 것이며 그들의 번제와 희생은 나의 단에서 기꺼이 받게 되리니 이는 내 집은 만민의 기도하는 집이라 일컬음이 될 것임이라","그들도 시온산 위에 있는 내 성전으로 들어와서 내 백성과 함께 기도하며 잔치의 기쁨을 나눌 것이다. 그들도 나의 제단에 번제물과 화목제물을 바칠 수 있으며 나는 그들의 제물을 받고 기뻐하겠다. 나는 시온산 위에 있는 나의 성전을 세계 만민이 다 와서 나에게 기도할 수 있는 곳으로 만들겠다.\"","Them I will bring to my holy mountain and make them joyful in my house of prayer; Their burnt offerings and their sacrifices will be acceptable on my altar, For my house shall be called a house of prayer for all peoples.","Even them will I bring to my holy mountain, and make them joyful in my house of prayer: their burnt offerings and their sacrifices shall be accepted upon mine altar; for mine house shall be called an house of prayer for all people.","these I will bring to my holy mountain and give them joy in my house of prayer. Their burnt offerings and sacrifices will be accepted on my altar; for my house will be called a house of prayer for all nations.\"","adducam eos in montem sanctum meum et laetificabo eos in domo orationis meae: holocausta eorum et victimae eorum placebunt mihi super altari meo, quia domus mea domus orationis vocabitur cunctis populis “.","והביאותים אל הר קדשי ושמחתים בבית תפלתי עולתיהם וזבחיהם לרצון על מזבחי כי ביתי בית תפלה יקרא לכל העמים׃"],["29","56","8","쫓겨 간 이스라엘 사람들을 모으시는 주 하느님의 말씀이다. “나는 이미 모아들여진 이들 말고도 다시 더 모아들이리라.”","쫓겨났던 이스라엘 사람들을 모아들이신 나의 주 야훼께서 이미 모아들인 이 사람들 외에도 모아들일 사람이 또 있다고 말씀하신다.","이스라엘의 쫓겨난 자를 모으시는 주 여호와가 말하노니 내가 이미 모은 백성 외에 또 모아 그에게 속하게 하리라 하셨느니라","이스라엘의 쫓겨난 자를 모으는 주 여호와가 말하노니 내가 이미 모은 본 백성 외에 또 모아 그에게 속하게 하리라 하셨느니라","세계의 흩어진 이스라엘 백성을 고향 땅으로 데려다 놓으신 주 여호와께서 말씀하신다. \"내가 더 많은 사람들을 이스라엘로 데려다가 그들을 한 자리에 모아놓겠다.\"","Oracle of the Lord GOD, who gathers the dispersed of Israel— Others will I gather to them besides those already gathered.","The Lord GOD, which gathereth the outcasts of Israel saith, Yet will I gather others to him, beside those that are gathered unto him.","The Sovereign LORD declares--he who gathers the exiles of Israel: \"I will gather still others to them besides those already gathered.\"","Ait Dominus Deus, qui congregat dispersos Israel:  “Adhuc congregabo ad eum praeter congregatos eius “.","נאם אדני יהוה מקבץ נדחי ישראל עוד אקבץ עליו לנקבציו׃"],["29","56","9","들짐승들아, 숲의 짐승들아 모두 와서 잡아먹어라.","들짐승들아, 모두 와서 잡아먹어라. 산짐승들도 모두 와서 잡아먹어라.","들의 모든 짐승들아 숲 가운데의 모든 짐승들아 와서 먹으라","들의 짐승들아 삼림 중의 짐승들아 다 와서 삼키라","탐욕과 태만에 빠진 정치와 종교 지도자들에 대하여 여호와께서 말씀하신다. \"세계 만민들아, 다 와서 내 백성을 잡아먹어라! 산짐승들이 몰려와서 잡아먹듯이 내 백성 이스라엘을 잡아먹어라!","All you beasts of the field, come to devour, all you beasts in the forest!","All ye beasts of the field, come to devour, yea, all ye beasts in the forest.","Come, all you beasts of the field, come and devour, all you beasts of the forest!","Omnes bestiae agri, venite ad devorandum, universae bestiae saltus.","כל חיתו שדי אתיו לאכל כל חיתו ביער׃"],["29","56","10","그의 파수꾼들은 모두 눈이 먼 자들 아무것도 모르는 자들. 모두 벙어리 개들 짖지도 못하는 것들. 드러누워 꿈이나 꾸고 졸기나 좋아하는 자들이다.","보초라는 것들은 모두 앞 못 보는 소경이요, 집 지킨다는 개들은 짖지도 못하는 벙어리, 드러누워 공상이나 하다가 졸기가 일쑤구나.","이스라엘의 파수꾼들은 맹인이요 다 무지하며 벙어리 개들이라 짖지 못하며 다 꿈꾸는 자들이요 누워 있는 자들이요 잠자기를 좋아하는 자들이니","그 파숫군들은 소경이요 다 무지하며 벙어리개라 능히 짖지 못하며 다 꿈꾸는 자요 누운 자요 잠자기를 좋아하는 자니","내 백성의 지도자들은 모조리 소경이요 내 백성이 위기에 처한 줄을 내다보지 못하고 있다. 아무 것도 보지 못하는 소경들이 파수꾼으로 서 있는 것과 같고 짖지 못하는 벙어리 개들이 집을 지키는 꼴이 되었다. 내 백성의 지도자들은 항상 누워서 꿈이나 꾸고 항상 졸면서 편하게 사는 것만을 좋아한다.","All the sentinels of Israel are blind, they are without knowledge; They are all mute dogs, unable to bark; Dreaming, reclining, loving their sleep.","His watchmen are blind: they are all ignorant, they are all dumb dogs, they cannot bark; sleeping, lying down, loving to slumber.","Israel's watchmen are blind, they all lack knowledge; they are all mute dogs, they cannot bark; they lie around and dream, they love to sleep.","Speculatores eius caeci, omnes nescierunt; universi sunt canes muti non valentes latrare, insanientes, cubantes, amantes soporem;","צפו עורים כלם לא ידעו כלם כלבים אלמים לא יוכלו לנבח הזים שכבים אהבי לנום׃"],["29","56","11","게걸스러운 개들 그들은 만족할 줄 모른다. 목자라는 자들이 알아듣지도 못한다. 모두 제 길만 쫓아가고 저마다 예외 없이 제 이익만 쫓아간다.","먹어도 먹어도 게걸스런 저 개들, 저 무지막지한 목자들, 모두 제멋대로 놀아나, 저만 잘되겠다고 욕심부리는구나.","이 개들은 탐욕이 심하여 족한 줄을 알지 못하는 자들이요 그들은 몰지각한 목자들이라 다 제 길로 돌아가며 사람마다 자기 이익만 추구하며","이 개들은 탐욕이 심하여 족한줄을 알지 못하는 자요 그들은 몰각한 목자들이라 다 자기 길로 돌이키며 어디 있는 자이든지 자기 이만 도모하며","그러면서도 귀들은 만족할 줄을 모르고 먹기를 탐하는 개들과 같다. 그런 것들이 나의 양 떼를 돌보는 목자들이다! 양 떼를 지키고 돌볼 줄은 전혀 모르는 목자들이다. 그들은 정치인이든지 종교인이든지 모두 한결같이 자기들의 쾌락과 이익만을 탐하고 있다.","Yes, the dogs have a ravenous appetite; they never know satiety, Shepherds who have no understanding; all have turned their own way, each one covetous for gain:","Yea, they are greedy dogs which can never have enough, and they are shepherds that cannot understand: they all look to their own way, every one for his gain, from his quarter.","They are dogs with mighty appetites; they never have enough. They are shepherds who lack understanding; they all turn to their own way, each seeks his own gain.","et canes voraces nescierunt saturitatem, ipsi pastores ignoraverunt intellegentiam: omnes in viam suam declinaverunt, unusquisque ad avaritiam suam, a summo usque ad novissimum.","והכלבים עזי נפש לא ידעו שבעה והמה רעים לא ידעו הבין כלם לדרכם פנו איש לבצעו מקצהו׃"],["29","56","12","“오너라. 내가 술을 가져올 터이니 우리 독한 것으로 마시자. 내일도 오늘과 같으리니 더할 나위 없이 좋으리라.”","\"오너라, 내가 술을 내마. 모두들 취하도록 독한 놈으로 마시자! 오늘도 내일도 마시자! 술은 아직도 얼마든지 있다.\"","오라 내가 포도주를 가져오리라 우리가 독주를 잔뜩 마시자 내일도 오늘 같이 크게 넘치리라 하느니라","피차 이르기를 오라 내가 포도주를 가져오리라 우리가 독주를 잔뜩 먹자 내일도 오늘 같이 또 크게 넘치리라 하느니라","그들은 호탕하게 먹고 마시며 술타령이나 하고 있다. \"함께 마시고 취해서 행복해지세! 맥주와 양주를 실컷 마시고 취하세! 오늘도 마시고 내일 또 실컷 마시세! 내일은 오늘보다 훨씬 더 많이 마시고 취하세!\"","“Come, let me bring wine; let us fill ourselves with strong drink, And tomorrow will be like today, or even greater.”","Come ye, say they, I will fetch wine, and we will fill ourselves with strong drink; and to morrow shall be as this day, and much more abundant.","\"Come,\" each one cries, \"let me get wine! Let us drink our fill of beer! And tomorrow will be like today, or even far better.\""," “Venite, sumam vinum, et impleamur ebrietate; et cras erit sicut hodie et multo amplius “.","אתיו אקחה יין ונסבאה שכר והיה כזה יום מחר גדול יתר מאד׃"],["29","57","1","의인이 사라져 가도 마음에 두는 자 하나 없다. 알아보는 자 하나 없이 성실한 사람들이 죽어 간다. 그러나 의인은 재앙을 벗어나 죽어 가는 것이니","올바른 사람이 망해도 아랑곳하지 않고, 경건한 사람이 사라져도 눈 하나 깜박이지 않는다마는, 올바른 사람이 사라지는 것은 실상은 재앙을 벗어나","의인이 죽을지라도 마음에 두는 자가 없고 진실한 이들이 거두어 감을 당할지라도 깨닫는 자가 없도다 의인들은 악한 자들 앞에서 불리어가도다","의인이 1)죽을찌라도 마음에 두는 자가 없고 2)자비한 자들이 취하여 감을 입을찌라도 그 의인은 화액 전에 취하여 감을 입은 것인줄로 깨닫는 자가 없도다 히, 망할찌라도경건한 자들이","여호와께서 말씀하신다. \"아직도 의롭게 살며 변함없이 나에게 충성하는 소수의 남은 자들이 고난을 당하다가 죽어가지만 그들을 불쌍히 여기며 기억하는 이들이 하나도 없다. 그러나 사실은 이 세상의 악한 세력 밑에서 더 이상 고난을 당하지 않도록 내가 그들을 데려온 것이다.","The just have perished, but no one takes it to heart; The steadfast are swept away, while no one understands. Yet the just are taken away from the presence of evil,","The righteous perisheth, and no man layeth it to heart: and merciful men are taken away, none considering that the righteous is taken away from the evil to come.","The righteous perish, and no one ponders it in his heart; devout men are taken away, and no one understands that the righteous are taken away to be spared from evil.","Iustus perit, et non est qui recogitet in corde suo; et viri misericordiae colliguntur, tamen non est qui intellegat: a facie enim malitiae collectus est iustus.","הצדיק אבד ואין איש שם על לב ואנשי חסד נאספים באין מבין כי מפני הרעה נאסף הצדיק׃"],["29","57","2","그는 평화 속으로 들어가고 올바로 걷는 이는 자기 잠자리에서 편히 쉬리라.","평화를 누리러 가는 것이다. 올곧게 사는 사람은 모두 자기 잠자리에 누워 편히 쉬리라.","그들은 평안에 들어갔나니 바른 길로 가는 자들은 그들의 침상에서 편히 쉬리라","그는 평안에 들어갔나니 무릇 정로로 행하는 자는 자기들의 침상에서 편히 쉬느니라","그들은 이제 나의 평안을 누리며 영원히 편안하게 쉴 것이다. 나에게 충성하며 올곧게 산 대가로 영원히 편안하게 쉴 것이다.","and enter into peace; They rest upon their couches, the sincere, who walk in integrity.","He shall enter into peace: they shall rest in their beds, each one walking in his uprightness.","Those who walk uprightly enter into peace; they find rest as they lie in death.","In pacem ingreditur, requiescit in cubili suo, qui ambulat in directione sua.",null],["29","57","3","너희 점쟁이의 자식들아 간통하는 남자와 매춘부의 종자야 이리 오너라.","너희, 점쟁이의 자식들아, 썩 나가거라. 간통의 씨, 매춘부의 종자야.","무당의 자식, 간음자와 음녀의 자식들아 너희는 가까이 오라","무녀의 자식, 간음자와 음녀의 씨 너희는 가까이 오라","그러나 우상을 섬기며 음행을 하는 자들아, 이제 너희는 심판을 받아라. 너희는 사술과 음행으로 나를 모욕한 자식들이요, 음행하는 아비와 간음하는 어미의 자식들이다.","But you, draw near, you children of a sorceress, offspring of an adulterer and a prostitute!","But draw near hither, ye sons of the sorceress, the seed of the adulterer and the whore.","\"But you--come here, you sons of a sorceress, you offspring of adulterers and prostitutes!","Vos autem accedite huc, filii auguratricis, semen adulteri et fornicariae.",null],["29","57","4","너희가 누구를 조롱하느냐? 너희가 누구에게 입을 크게 벌리고 혀를 내미느냐? 너희 자신이 죄악의 자식들이며 거짓의 종자가 아니냐?","너희가 누구를 빈정거리느냐? 입을 비쭉거리며 혀를 내밀고 누구를 놀리느냐? 너희는 죄악의 씨, 사생아가 아니냐?","너희가 누구를 희롱하느냐 누구를 향하여 입을 크게 벌리며 혀를 내미느냐 너희는 패역의 자식, 거짓의 후손이 아니냐","너희가 누구를 희롱하느냐 누구를 향하여 입을 크게 벌리며 혀를 내미느냐 너희는 패역의 자식, 궤휼의 종류가 아니냐","그러면서도 너희는 내가 보낸 예언자들에게 혀를 길게 내밀며 조롱하고 입을 크게 벌리며 위협하고 협박하였다. 그것이 바로 나를 조롱하고 멸시한 행동이 아니냐? 이 죄악의 자식들아, 기만과 폭행만 일삼는 자식들아!","Against whom do you make sport, against whom do you open wide your mouth, and stick out your tongue? Are you not rebellious children, deceitful offspring—","Against whom do ye sport yourselves? against whom make ye a wide mouth, and draw out the tongue? are ye not children of transgression, a seed of falsehood.","Whom are you mocking? At whom do you sneer and stick out your tongue? Are you not a brood of rebels, the offspring of liars?","Super quem luditis? Super quem dilatatis os et eicitis linguam? Numquid non vos filii scelesti, semen mendax,",null],["29","57","5","너희는 참나무들 사이에서, 온갖 푸른 나무 아래에서 정욕을 불태우고 이 골짜기 저 골짜기에서, 갈라진 바위 밑에서 자식들을 죽여 제물로 바친다.","너희는 느티나무 그늘 아래에서, 모든 푸른 나무 밑에서 색을 탐하지 않았느냐? 이 골짜기 저 골짜기에서, 갈라진 바위 밑에서, 자식들을 잡아 희생제물로 바치지 않았느냐?","너희가 상수리나무 사이, 모든 푸른 나무 아래에서 음욕을 피우며 골짜기 가운데 바위 틈에서 자녀를 도살하는도다","너희가 3)상수리나무 사이, 모든 푸른 나무 아래서 음욕을 피우며 골짜기 가운데 바위 틈에서 자녀를 죽이는도다 우상으로 더불어 모든","너희는 푸른 나무마다 찾아다니며 음행을 하고 골짜기마다 찾아다니며 바위틈에서 너희의 자식들을 잡아서 제물로 바쳐야 너희가 섬기는 우상들이 기뻐하고 풍년과 태평성대를 주는 줄 믿고 있다.","You who burn with lust among the oaks, under every green tree; You who immolate children in the wadies, among the clefts of the rocks?","Enflaming yourselves with idols under every green tree, slaying the children in the valleys under the clifts of the rocks?","You burn with lust among the oaks and under every spreading tree; you sacrifice your children in the ravines and under the overhanging crags.","qui exardescitis in terebinthis subter omne lignum frondosum, immolantes parvulos in vallibus subter scissuras petrarum?",null],["29","57","6","골짜기의 매끈한 돌들이 너의 몫 바로 그것들이 너의 차지다. 그것들에게 너는 술을 부어 바치고 곡식 제물을 올렸다. 내가 이런 것들로 만족해야 하겠느냐?","너는 개울바닥의 매끈한 돌기둥들을 네 것으로 삼았다. 그 돌들이, 그 돌들이 너의 몫이었지. 너는 거기에다 술을 따르고 곡식을 바쳤다. 내가 그런 것을 기뻐할 줄 알았느냐?","골짜기 가운데 매끄러운 돌들 중에 네 몫이 있으니 그것들이 곧 네가 제비 뽑아 얻은 것이라 또한 네가 전제와 예물을 그것들에게 드리니 내가 어찌 위로를 받겠느냐","골짜기 가운데 매끄러운 돌 중에 너희 소득이 있으니 그것이 곧 너희가 제비 뽑아 얻은 것이라 너희가 전제와 4)예물을 그것들에게 드리니 내가 어찌 이를 용인하겠느냐 소제를","너희는 개울 바닥의 돌덩이들에게 음식과 술을 제물로 바쳤다. 그러므로 너희가 이제 그 돌덩이들 밑에 묻힐 것이나. 도대체 너희는 내가 그 모든 일을 좋아할 것으로 생각하였느냐?","Among the smooth stones of the wadi is your portion, they, they are your allotment; Indeed, you poured out a drink offering to them, and brought up grain offerings. With these things, should I be appeased?","Among the smooth stones of the stream is thy portion; they, they are thy lot: even to them hast thou poured a drink offering, thou hast offered a meat offering. Should I receive comfort in these?","The idols among the smooth stones of the ravines are your portion; they, they are your lot. Yes, to them you have poured out drink offerings and offered grain offerings. In the light of these things, should I relent?","In partibus vallis pars tua, hae sunt sors tua; et ipsis effundisti libamen, obtulisti sacrificium. Numquid super his consolabor?",null],["29","57","7","너는 높이 솟은 산 위에 네 잠자리를 펴고 희생 제물을 바치려고 그리로 올라갔다.","높이 솟은 산 위에 올라 잠자리를 펴다니, 거기까지 올라가 제사를 드리다니,","네가 높고 높은 산 위에 네 침상을 베풀었고 네가 또 거기에 올라가서 제사를 드렸으며","네가 높고 높은 산 위에 네 침상을 베풀었고 네가 또 그리로 올라가서 제사를 드렸으며","너희는 드높이 치솟은 산봉우리마다 찾아 다니며 창녀의 소굴을 만들어 놓았다. 너희는 거기까지 올라가서 우상들에게 짐승을 잡아 바치고 잔치하며 음행하였다.","Upon a towering and lofty mountain you set up your bed, and there you went up to offer sacrifice.","Upon a lofty and high mountain hast thou set thy bed: even thither wentest thou up to offer sacrifice.","You have made your bed on a high and lofty hill; there you went up to offer your sacrifices.","Super montem excelsum et sublimem posuisti cubile tuum, et illuc ascendisti, ut immolares hostias.",null]]