[["40","7","4","그들 가운데 가장 좋다는 자도 가시덤불 같고 올곧다는 자도 가시나무 울타리 같다. 그들의 파수꾼들의 날, 재앙의 날이 다가왔다. 이제 그들에게 혼란이 일어나리라.","조금 낫다는 것들이 가시덤불 꼴이요, 조금 바르다는 것들이 가시나무 울타리보다 더하구나. 아, 북녘에서 형벌이 떨어져 이제 당장 혼란이 일어나리라.","그들의 가장 선한 자라도 가시 같고 가장 정직한 자라도 찔레 울타리보다 더하도다 그들의 파수꾼들의 날 곧 그들 가운데에 형벌의 날이 임하였으니 이제는 그들이 요란하리로다","그들의 가장 선한 자라도 가시 같고 가장 정직한 자라도 찔레 울타리보다 더하도다 1)그들의 파숫군들의 날 곧 1)그들의 형벌의 날이 임하였으니 이제는 그들이 요란하리로다 히, 너히, 너","그들 중에서 가장 선하다는 사람도 가시덤불과 같아 접촉하는 사람마다 찔러 피를 흘리게 하고, 그들 중에서 가장 정직하다는 사람도 가시 울타리와 같아 지나는 사람마다 사로잡는다. 네 파수꾼들이 예고한 그 형벌의 날이 이제 시작되었다. 너희에게 이미 혼란과 파멸과 죽음이 시작되었다.","The best of them is like a brier, the most honest like a thorn hedge. The day announced by your sentinels! Your punishment has come; now is the time of your confusion.","The best of them is as a brier: the most upright is sharper than a thorn hedge: the day of thy watchmen and thy visitation cometh; now shall be their perplexity.","The best of them is like a brier, the most upright worse than a thorn hedge. The day of your watchmen has come, the day God visits you. Now is the time of their confusion.","Qui optimus in eis, est quasi paliurus, et, qui rectus, quasi spina de saepe; dies speculatorum tuorum, visitatio tua venit: nunc erit confusio eorum.","טובם כחדק ישר ממסוכה יום מצפיך פקדתך באה עתה תהיה מבוכתם׃"],["40","7","5","친구를 믿지 말고 벗을 신뢰하지 마라. 네 품에 안겨 잠드는 여자에게도 네 입을 조심하여라.","이웃을 믿지 마라. 벗이라고 기대지 마라. 네 품에 안겨 자는 아내라고 말을 함부로 하지 마라.","너희는 이웃을 믿지 말며 친구를 의지하지 말며 네 품에 누운 여인에게라도 네 입의 문을 지킬지어다","너희는 이웃을 믿지 말며 친구를 의지하지 말며 네 품에 누운 여인에게라도 네 입의 문을 지킬찌어다","시대가 험악해졌으니 네 이웃을 믿지 말고 네 친구도 의지하지 말며 네 품에 누워 있는 여인 앞에서도 네 입의 문을 꼭 지켜라!","Put no faith in a friend, do not trust a companion; With her who lies in your embrace watch what you say.","Trust ye not in a friend, put ye not confidence in a guide: keep the doors of thy mouth from her that lieth in thy bosom.","Do not trust a neighbor; put no confidence in a friend. Even with her who lies in your embrace be careful of your words.","Nolite credere amico, nolite confidere in proximo; ab ea, quae dormit in sinu tuo, custodi claustra oris tui;","אל תאמינו ברע אל תבטחו באלוף משכבת חיקך שמר פתחי פיך׃"],["40","7","6","아들이 아버지를 경멸하고 딸이 어머니에게, 며느리가 시어머니에게 대든다. 집안 식구가 바로 원수가 된다.","아들이 아비를 우습게 보고 딸이 어미에게 거역하며 며느리가 시어미와 맞서는 세상, 식구끼리 모두 원수가 되었다.","아들이 아버지를 멸시하며 딸이 어머니를 대적하며 며느리가 시어머니를 대적하리니 사람의 원수가 곧 자기의 집안 사람이리로다","아들이 아비를 멸시하며 딸이 어미를 대적하며 며느리가 시어미를 대적하리니 사람의 원수가 곧 자기의 집안 사람이리로다","아들이 아버지를 깔보며 딸이 어머니에게 대들고 며느리가 시어머니에게 대항하기 때문이다. 그렇다! 사람의 원수가 바로 자기 가족들이다!","For the son belittles his father, the daughter rises up against her mother, The daughter-in-law against her mother-in-law, and your enemies are members of your household.","For the son dishonoureth the father, the daughter riseth up against her mother, the daughter in law against her mother in law; a man's enemies are the men of his own house.","For a son dishojors his father, a daughter rises up against her mother, a daughter-in-law against her mother-in-law--a man's enemies are the members of his own household.","quia filius contumeliam facit patri, filia consurgit adversus matrem suam, nurus adversus socrum suam: inimici hominis domestici eius.","כי בן מנבל אב בת קמה באמה כלה בחמתה איבי איש אנשי ביתו׃"],["40","7","7","그러나 나는 주님을 바라보고 내 구원의 하느님을 기다리리라. 내 하느님께서 내 청을 들어 주시리라.","그러나 나만은 야훼를 우러르고 하느님께서 구해 주시기를 기다리리라. 나의 하느님께서 내 소원을 들어주시기 바라면서.","오직 나는 여호와를 우러러보며 나를 구원하시는 하나님을 바라보나니 나의 하나님이 나에게 귀를 기울이시리로다","오직 나는 여호와를 우러러보며 나를 구원하시는 하나님을 바라보나니 나의 하나님이 나를 들으시리로다","그렇더라도 나는 주님을 바라보며 그분의 도움을 기다리고 있다. 하나님께서 살려주시기를 나는 고대하고 있다. 나의 주께서 내 소원을 들어주실 것이다.","But as for me, I will look to the LORD, I will wait for God my savior; my God will hear me!","Therefore I will look unto the LORD; I will wait for the God of my salvation: my God will hear me.","But as for me, I watch in hope for the LORD, I wait for God my Savior; my God will hear me.","Ego autem ad Dominum aspiciam, exspectabo Deum salvatorem meum; audiet me Deus meus.","ואני ביהוה אצפה אוחילה לאלהי ישעי ישמעני אלהי׃"],["40","7","8","내 원수야, 나를 두고 기뻐하지 마라. 나는 넘어져도 다시 일어나고 어둠 속에 앉아 있어도 주님께서 나의 빛이 되어 주신다.","원수들아, 우리가 이 꼴이 되었다고 좋아하지 마라. 지금은 쓰러졌지만, 일어설 날이 온다. 지금은 어둠 속에서 새우지만, 야훼께서 우리의 빛이 되어주실 날이 온다.","나의 대적이여 나로 말미암아 기뻐하지 말지어다 나는 엎드러질지라도 일어날 것이요 어두운 데에 앉을지라도 여호와께서 나의 빛이 되실 것임이로다","나의 대적이여 나로 인하여 기뻐하지 말찌어다 나는 엎드러질찌라도 일어날 것이요 어두운데 앉을찌라도 여호와께서 나의 빛이 되실 것임이로다","오 나의 원수들아, 바벨론과 그 동맹국들아, 내가 망한 것을 즐거워하지 말아라! 비록 내가 넘어졌으나 다시 일어날 것이기 때문이다. 비록 내가 어둠 속에 앉아 있어도, 여호와께서 친히 나의 광명이 되실 것이다.","Do not rejoice over me, my enemy! though I have fallen, I will arise; though I sit in darkness, the LORD is my light.","Rejoice not against me, O mine enemy: when I fall, I shall arise; when I sit in darkness, the LORD shall be a light unto me.","Do not gloat over me, my enemy! Though I have fallen, I will rise. Though I sit in darkness, the LORD will be my light.","Ne laeteris, inimica mea, super me quia cecidi: consurgam; cum sedeo in tenebris, Dominus lux mea est.","אל תשמחי איבתי לי כי נפלתי קמתי כי אשב בחשך יהוה אור לי׃"],["40","7","9","내가 그분께 죄를 지었으니 그분께서 나에게 판결을 내리시고 권리를 찾아 주실 때까지 나는 주님의 분노를 짊어지리라. 그분께서 나를 빛 속으로 이끌어 주시리니 나는 그분의 의로움을 보리라.","우리는 야훼께 죄를 얻었으니, 야훼께서 우리를 법으로 다스리시고 재판을 내리시기까지 그분의 진노를 참고 받아야 한다. 그러다가 마침내 우리에게 밝은 세상을 보이시면, 그제야 우리는 눈이 열려, 여태 해오신 일이 옳았음을 알게 되리라.","내가 여호와께 범죄하였으니 그의 진노를 당하려니와 마침내 주께서 나를 위하여 논쟁하시고 심판하시며 주께서 나를 인도하사 광명에 이르게 하시리니 내가 그의 공의를 보리로다","내가 여호와께 범죄하였으니 주께서 나를 위하여 심판하사 신원하시기까지는 그의 노를 당하려니와 주께서 나를 인도하사 광명에 이르게 하시리니 내가 그의 의를 보리로다","내가 여호와께 범죄하였기 때문에 주께서 나를 벌하시는 동안에는 내가 그 분노를 감당하며 참고 기다릴 것이다. 그러나 마침내는 주께서 나를 모든 원수들의 손에서 건져주시고 그들이 내게 행한 모든 악에 대하여 형벌을 내리실 것이다. 하나님께서 나를 이 어두운 곳에서 밝은 곳으로 이끌어 내시고 나는 주님의 인자하심을 체험할 것이다.","I will endure the wrath of the LORD because I have sinned against him, Until he pleads my case, and establishes my right. He will bring me forth to the light; I will see his righteousness.","I will bear the indignation of the LORD, because I have sinned against him, until he plead my cause, and execute judgment for me: he will bring me forth to the light, and I shall behold his righteousness.","Because I have sinned against him, I will bear the LORD'S wrath, until he pleads my case and establishes my right. He will bring me out into the light; I will see his righteousness.","Iram Domini porto, quoniam peccavi ei, donec iudicet causam meam et faciat iudicium meum; educet me in lucem, videbo iustitiam eius.","זעף יהוה אשא כי חטאתי לו עד אשר יריב ריבי ועשה משפטי יוציאני לאור אראה בצדקתו׃"],["40","7","10","“주 너의 하느님이 어디 계시느냐?” 하고 나에게 말하던 원수는 그것을 보고 수치를 느끼리라. 그리하여 내 눈은 원수의 몰락을 보고 그 원수는 이제 거리의 오물처럼 짓밟히리라.","그제야 원수들도 눈이 열려, \"너희 신이라는 야훼가 어디 있느냐?\"며 빈정거리던 일을 오히려 부끄럽게 여기리라. 원수들이 길바닥의 진흙같이 되는 꼴을 이 눈으로 보게 되리라.","나의 대적이 이것을 보고 부끄러워하리니 그는 전에 내게 말하기를 네 하나님 여호와가 어디 있느냐 하던 자라 그가 거리의 진흙 같이 밟히리니 그것을 내가 보리로다","나의 대적이 이것을 보고 부끄러워 하리니 그는 전에 내게 말하기를 네 하나님 여호와가 어디 있느냐 하던 2)자라 그가 거리의 진흙 같이 밟히리니 그것을 내가 목도하리로다 히, 여자","그때에는 나의 원수들이 하나님이 내 편에 계신 것을 볼 것이다. 그들이 지금은 나를 향하여 \"도대체 네 하나님이 어디에 있느냐?\" 하고 욕을 하지만 그때에는 그들이 수치를 당할 것이다. 나는 지금 이미 그들이 길바닥의 진흙같이 밝히고 있는 것을 내 눈으로 직접 내려다보고 있다.","When my enemy sees this, shame shall cover her: She who said to me, “Where is the LORD, your God?” My eyes shall see her downfall; now she will be trampled underfoot, like mud in the streets.","Then she that is mine enemy shall see it, and shame shall cover her which said unto me, Where is the LORD thy God? mine eyes shall behold her: now shall she be trodden down as the mire of the streets.","Then my enemy will see it and will be covered with shame, she who said to me, \"Where is the LORD your God?\" My eyes will see her downfall; even now she will be trampled underfoot like mire in the streets.","Et aspiciet inimica mea et operietur confusione, quae dicit ad me:  “Ubi est Dominus Deus tuus? “. Oculi mei videbunt in eam; nunc erit in conculcationem ut lutum platearum.","ותרא איבתי ותכסה בושה האמרה אלי איו יהוה אלהיך עיני תראינה בה עתה תהיה למרמס כטיט חוצות׃"],["40","7","11","너의 벽을 쌓는 날 그날에 너의 국경이 넓혀지리라.","너희가 성을 다시 쌓을 날, 너희의 국토가 넓혀질 그 날이 온다.","네 성벽을 건축하는 날 곧 그 날에는 지경이 넓혀질 것이라","네 성벽을 건축하는 날 곧 그 날에는 지경이 넓혀질 것이라","하나님의 백성아, 네 성읍들을 옛날보다 더 넓고 더 아름답게 재건할 날이 온다.","It is the day for building your walls; on that day your boundaries shall be enlarged.","In the day that thy walls are to be built, in that day shall the decree be far removed.","The day for building your walls will come, the day for extending your boundaries.","Dies veniet ut aedificentur maceriae tuae; in die illa dilatabuntur fines tui.","יום לבנות גדריך יום ההוא ירחק חק׃"],["40","7","12","그날에 아시리아에서 이집트까지 이집트에서 유프라테스 강까지 이 바다에서 저 바다까지 이 산에서 저 산까지 온갖 곳에서 사람들이 너에게 오리라.","그 날이 오면, 아시리아에서 이집트까지, 띠로에서 유프라테스 강까지, 이 바다에서 저 바다까지, 이 산에서 저 산에 이르는 곳곳에서 사람들이 너희에게 오리라.","그 날에는 앗수르에서 애굽 성읍들에까지, 애굽에서 강까지, 이 바다에서 저 바다까지, 이 산에서 저 산까지의 사람들이 네게로 돌아올 것이나","그 날에는 앗수르에서 애굽 성읍들에까지, 애굽에서 하수까지, 이 바다에서 저 바다까지, 이 산에서 저 산까지의 사람들이 네게로 돌아올 것이나","그날에는 온 세상으로 끌려갔던 포로민들이 네게로 돌아올 것이다. 앗수르에서 애굽까지, 애굽에서 유브라데강까지, 이 바다에서 저 바다까지, 이 산에서 저 산까지!","It is the day when those from Assyria to Egypt shall come to you, And from Tyre even to the River, from sea to sea, and from mountain to mountain;","In that day also he shall come even to thee from Assyria, and from the fortified cities, and from the fortress even to the river, and from sea to sea, and from mountain to mountain.","In that day people will come to you from Assyria and the cities of Egypt, even from Egypt to the Euphrates and from sea to sea and from mountain to mountain.","In die illa usque ad te venient habitantes ab Assyria usque ad Aegyptum et ab Aegypto usque ad flumen et a mari usque ad mare et a monte usque ad montem.","יום הוא ועדיך יבוא למני אשור וערי מצור ולמני מצור ועד נהר וים מים והר ההר׃"],["40","7","13","세상은 그 주민들 때문에, 그들의 행동 때문에 황폐하게 되리라.","국토가 이렇게 황폐해진 것은 도시놈들의 비행 탓이다.","그 땅은 그 주민의 행위의 열매로 말미암아 황폐하리로다","그 땅은 그 거민의 행위의 열매로 인하여 황무하리로다","저 원수의 나라 바벨론의 그 주민들 때문에 그 주민들의 행실 때문에 그 땅이 황폐할 것이다.","And the earth shall be a waste because of its inhabitants, as a result of their deeds.","Notwithstanding the land shall be desolate because of them that dwell therein, for the fruit of their doings.","The earth will become desolate because of its inhabitants, as the result of their deeds.","Terra autem erit in desolationem propter habitatores suos et propter fructum operum eorum.","והיתה הארץ לשממה על ישביה מפרי מעלליהם׃"],["40","7","14","과수원 한가운데 숲 속에 홀로 살아가는 당신 백성을, 당신 소유의 양 떼를 당신의 지팡이로 보살펴 주십시오. 옛날처럼 바산과 길앗에서 그들을 보살펴 주십시오.","이 백성은 남에게 내줄 수 없는 하느님의 양떼입니다. 그 지팡이로 이 백성을 보살펴 주십시오. 주변에 기름진 동산이 많은데도 우거진 숲속을 헤매는 외로운 양떼를 그 옛날처럼 바산과 길르앗에서 풀을 뜯게 해주십시오.","원하건대 주는 주의 지팡이로 주의 백성 곧 갈멜 속 삼림에 홀로 거주하는 주의 기업의 양 떼를 먹이시되 그들을 옛날 같이 바산과 길르앗에서 먹이시옵소서","원컨대 주는 주의 지팡이로 주의 백성 곧 갈멜속 삼림에 홀로 거하는 주의 기업의 떼를 먹이시되 그들을 옛날 같이 바산과 길르앗에서 먹이옵소서","오 주님, 오셔서 주님의 지팡이로 주님의 백성을 다스리고 갈멜숲 속에 사는 주님의 양 떼를 먹여 주소서. 그들이 번창하며 평화롭게 하소서. 옛날처럼 바산과 길르앗의 비옥할 초장에서 살게 하소서.","Shepherd your people with your staff, the flock of your heritage, That lives apart in a woodland, in the midst of an orchard. Let them feed in Bashan and Gilead, as in the days of old;","Feed thy people with thy rod, the flock of thine heritage, which dwell solitarily in the wood, in the midst of Carmel: let them feed in Bashan and Gilead, as in the days of old.","Shepherd your people with your staff, the flock of your inheritance, which lives by itself in a forest, in fertile pasturelands. Let them feed in Bashan and Gilead as in days long ago.","Pasce populum tuum in virga tua, gregem hereditatis tuae, habitantes solos in saltu, in medio hortorum; pascantur Basan et Galaad iuxta dies antiquos.","רעה עמך בשבטך צאן נחלתך שכני לבדד יער בתוך כרמל ירעו בשן וגלעד כימי עולם׃"],["40","7","15","당신께서 이집트 땅에서 나오실 때처럼 저희에게 놀라운 일들을 보여 주십시오.","이집트에서 나오실 때, 보여주신 놀라운 일을 다시 보여주십시오.","이르시되 네가 애굽 땅에서 나오던 날과 같이 내가 그들에게 이적을 보이리라 하셨느니라","가라사대 네가 애굽 땅에서 나오던 날과 같이 내가 그들에게 기사를 보이리라","주께서 애굽땅에서 나오실 때처럼 저희가 온갖 기적들을 보게 하소서.","As in the days when you came from the land of Egypt, show us wonderful signs.","According to the days of thy coming out of the land of Egypt will I shew unto him marvellous things.","\"As in the days when you came out of Egypt, I will show them my wonders.\"","Secundum dies egressionis tuae de terra Aegypti ostende nobis mirabilia.","כימי צאתך מארץ מצרים אראנו נפלאות׃"],["40","7","16","민족들이 아무리 힘이 세더라도 그들은 그것을 보고 부끄러워하며 손을 입에 댈 것입니다. 그들의 귀가 막힐 것입니다.","제 힘을 자랑하는 뭇 민족들이 보고 어안이 벙벙하고 기가 막혀서 쥐구멍을 찾게 해주십시오.","이르되 여러 나라가 보고 자기의 세력을 부끄러워하여 손으로 그 입을 막을 것이요 귀는 막힐 것이며","가로되 열방이 보고 자기의 세력을 부끄려서 손으로 그 입을 막을 것이요 귀는 막힐 것이오며","세계 만민들은 그들이 아무리 우월하여도 그때에는 그것을 보고 부끄러워하게 하소서. 그들이 입을 가리고 귀를 막게 하소서.","The nations will see and will be put to shame, in spite of all their strength; They will put their hands over their mouths; their ears will become deaf.","The nations shall see and be confounded at all their might: they shall lay their hand upon their mouth, their ears shall be deaf.","Nations will see and be ashamed, deprived of all their power. They will lay their hands on their mouths and their ears will become deaf.","Videbunt gentes et confundentur super omni fortitudine sua, ponent manum super os, aures eorum surdae erunt;","יראו גוים ויבשו מכל גבורתם ישימו יד על פה אזניהם תחרשנה׃"],["40","7","17","그들은 뱀처럼, 땅 위를 기어 다니는 것처럼 먼지를 핥고 저희 요새에서 떨며 주 우리 하느님께로 나오고 무서워하면서 당신을 경외할 것입니다.","흙이나 핥는 뱀의 꼴을 만드시고 땅바닥을 기어가는 벌레 신세가 되게 해주십시오. 겁에 질려 저희의 요새에서 나와 부들부들 떨며 우리 하느님 야훼께로 오게 하십시오. 야훼 두려운 줄 알게 해주십시오.","그들이 뱀처럼 티끌을 핥으며 땅에 기는 벌레처럼 떨며 그 좁은 구멍에서 나와서 두려워하며 우리 하나님 여호와께로 돌아와서 주로 말미암아 두려워하리이다","그들이 뱀처럼 티끌을 핥으며 땅에 기는 벌레처럼 떨며 그 좁은 구멍에서 나와서 두려워하며 우리 하나님 여호와께로 돌아와서 주로 인하여 두려워하리이다","그들은 뱀처럼, 땅바닥에 기어 다니는 벌레들처럼 티끌을 핥게 하소서. 그들은 자기들의 숨은 구멍들 속에서 우리의 하나님 여호와 앞으로 떨면서 기어 나오고 주님 앞에서 떨며 경배하게 하소서.","They will lick the dust like a snake, like crawling things on the ground; They will come quaking from their strongholds; they will tremble in fear of you, the LORD, our God.","They shall lick the dust like a serpent, they shall move out of their holes like worms of the earth: they shall be afraid of the LORD our God, and shall fear because of thee.","They will lick dust like a snake, like creatures that crawl on the ground. They will come trembling out of their dens; they will turn in fear to the LORD our God and will be afraid of you.","lingent pulverem sicut serpens, velut reptilia terrae. Trementes exibunt de aedibus suis  “ ad Dominum Deum nostrum  “ formidabunt et timebunt te.","ילחכו עפר כנחש כזחלי ארץ ירגזו ממסגרתיהם אל יהוה אלהינו יפחדו ויראו ממך׃"],["40","7","18","당신의 소유인 남은 자들, 그들의 허물을 용서해 주시고 죄를 못 본 체해 주시는 당신 같으신 하느님이 어디 있겠습니까? 그분은 분노를 영원히 품지 않으시고 오히려 기꺼이 자애를 베푸시는 분이시다.","하느님 같은 신이 어디 있겠습니까? 남에게 넘겨줄 수 없어 남기신 이 적은 무리, 아무리 못할 짓을 했어도 용서해 주시고, 아무리 거스르는 짓을 했어도 눈감아주시는 하느님, 하느님의 기쁨이야 한결같은 사랑을 베푸시는 일 아니십니까? 그러니 어찌 노여움을 끝내 품고 계시겠습니까?","주와 같은 신이 어디 있으리이까 주께서는 죄악과 그 기업에 남은 자의 허물을 사유하시며 인애를 기뻐하시므로 진노를 오래 품지 아니하시나이다","주와 같은 신이 어디 있으리이까 주께서는 죄악을 사유하시며 그 기업의 남은 자의 허물을 넘기시며 인애를 기뻐하심으로 노를 항상 품지 아니하시나이다","죄를 지고 가 버리시고 자기의 남은 백성이 적의를 품고 반항한 죄를 지나쳐 가시는 하나님, 주님과 같으신 하나님이 또 누가 있습니까! 주님은 분노를 영원히 품고 계시는 분이 아닙니다. 주께서는 다시 연합하여 하나가 되는 것을 기뻐하는 분이시기 때문입니다.","Who is a God like you, who removes guilt and pardons sin for the remnant of his inheritance; Who does not persist in anger forever, but instead delights in mercy,","Who is a God like unto thee, that pardoneth iniquity, and passeth by the transgression of the remnant of his heritage? he retaineth not his anger for ever, because he delighteth in mercy.","Who is a God like you, who pardons sin and forgives the transgression of the remnant of his inheritance? You do not stay angry forever but delight to show mercy.","Quis Deus similis tui, qui aufers iniquitatem et transis peccatum reliquiarum hereditatis tuae? Non servat in aeternum furorem suum, quoniam volens misericordiam est.","מי אל כמוך נשא עון ועבר על פשע לשארית נחלתו לא החזיק לעד אפו כי חפץ חסד הוא׃"],["40","7","19","그분께서는 다시 우리를 가엾이 여기시고 우리의 허물들을 모르는 체해 주시리라. 당신께서 저희의 모든 죄악을 바다 깊은 곳으로 던져 주십시오.","마음을 돌이키시어 우리를 불쌍히 여기시고 우리의 온갖 죄악을 부수어주십시오. 깊은 바다에 쓸어넣어 주십시오.","다시 우리를 불쌍히 여기셔서 우리의 죄악을 발로 밟으시고 우리의 모든 죄를 깊은 바다에 던지시리이다","다시 우리를 긍휼히 여기셔서 우리의 죄악을 발로 밟으시고 우리의 모든 죄를 깊은 바다에 던지시리이다","주님은 다시 한 번 우리를 불쌍히 여기시고 우리의 모든 죄를 발로 밟아 바다 깊은 곳으로 던져 애굽 군대를 홍해에 빠뜨리신 것과 같이 없애 주십니다.","And will again have compassion on us, treading underfoot our iniquities? You will cast into the depths of the sea all our sins;","He will turn again, he will have compassion upon us; he will subdue our iniquities; and thou wilt cast all their sins into the depths of the sea.","You will again have compassion on us; you will tread our sins underfoot and hurl all our iniquities into the depths of the sea.","Revertetur et miserebitur nostri, calcabit iniquitates nostras et proiciet in profundum maris omnia peccata nostra.","ישוב ירחמנו יכבש עונתינו ותשליך במצלות ים כל חטאותם׃"],["40","7","20","먼 옛날 당신께서 저희 조상들에게 맹세하신 대로 야곱을 성실히 대하시고 아브라함에게 자애를 베풀어 주십시오.","한 옛날 우리 선조들에게 맹세하신 대로 우리 야곱의 후손에게, 우리 아브라함의 후손에게, 거짓 없는 사랑, 한결같은 사랑을 베풀어주십시오.","주께서 옛적에 우리 조상들에게 맹세하신 대로 야곱에게 성실을 베푸시며 아브라함에게 인애를 더하시리이다","주께서 옛적에 우리 열조에게 맹세하신대로 야곱에게 성실을 베푸시며 아브라함에게 인애를 더하시리이다","주께서는 태고적부터 우리의 조상들에게 맹세하신 것과 같이, 야곱의 후손에게 진실함을 주시고 아브라함의 후손에게 변함없는 사랑을 주실 것입니다.","You will show faithfulness to Jacob, and loyalty to Abraham, As you have sworn to our ancestors from days of old.","Thou wilt perform the truth to Jacob, and the mercy to Abraham, which thou hast sworn unto our fathers from the days of old.","You will be true to Jacob, and show mercy to Abraham, as you pledged on oath to our fathers in days long ago.","Dabis veritatem Iacob, misericordiam Abraham, quae iurasti patribus nostris a diebus antiquis.","תתן אמת ליעקב חסד לאברהם אשר נשבעת לאבתינו מימי קדם׃"],["41","1","1","니네베에 관한 신탁. 엘코스 사람 나훔이 본 환시의 책.","엘코스 사람 나훔이 니느웨가 받을 벌을 내다보고 적은 책.","니느웨에 대한 경고 곧 엘고스 사람 나훔의 묵시의 글이라","니느웨에 대한 중한 경고 곧 엘고스 사람 나훔의 묵시의 글이라","하나님께서 나훔에게 보여주신 환상이다. 그는 엘고스에 살던 사람인데, 니느웨에 임박한 멸망에 관하여 ㄱ) 책을 썼다. (ㄱ. 소예언서에서 본문에 \"책\"이라고 밝힌 곳은 이곳 뿐이다)","Oracle concerning Nineveh. The book of the vision of Nahum of Elkosh.","The burden of Nineveh. The book of the vision of Nahum the Elkoshite.","An oracle concerning Nineveh. The book of the vision of Nahum the Elkoshite.","Oraculum Nineve. Liber visio nis Nahum Elcesaei.","משא נינוה ספר חזון נחום האלקשי׃"],["41","1","2","주님은 열정을 지니신 분, 보복하시는 하느님 주님은 보복하시는 분, 진노하시는 분이시다. 주님은 당신의 적들에게 보복하시는 분 당신의 원수들에게 화를 터뜨리시는 분이시다.","야훼께서는 원수를 갚고야 마신다. 적에게 분풀이를 하고야 마신다.","여호와는 질투하시며 보복하시는 하나님이시니라 여호와는 보복하시며 진노하시되 자기를 거스르는 자에게 여호와는 보복하시며 자기를 대적하는 자에게 진노를 품으시며","여호와는 투기하시며 보복하시는 하나님이시니라 여호와는 보복하시며 진노하시되 자기를 거스리는 자에게 보복하시며 자기를 대적하는 자에게 진노를 품으시며","ㄴ) 급하게 질투를 내며 원수를 갚는 신이 여호와시다. 주님은 당신이 사랑하는 백성을 해치는 자들에게 분노를 발하시며 원수를 갚으신다. 여호와는 적대자들에게 복수하시고 원수들에게 분풀이를 하신다. (ㄴ. 원문에는 2-8절의 서두가 불완전한 알파벳순으로 시작된다. 이것을 한글 자음 순으로 번역하였다)","A jealous and avenging God is the LORD, an avenger is the LORD, full of wrath; The LORD takes vengeance on his adversaries, and rages against his enemies;","God is jealous, and the LORD revengeth; the LORD revengeth, and is furious; the LORD will take vengeance on his adversaries, and he reserveth wrath for his enemies.","The LORD is a jealous and avenging God; the LORD takes vengeance and is filled with wrath. The LORD takes vengeance on his foes and maintains his wrath against his enemies.","Deus aemulator et ulciscens Dominus, ulciscens Dominus et habens furorem, ulciscens Dominus in hostes suos et servans iram inimicis suis.","אל קנוא ונקם יהוה נקם יהוה ובעל חמה נקם יהוה לצריו ונוטר הוא לאיביו׃"],["41","1","3","주님은 분노에 더디시고 힘이 뛰어나신 분. 그러나 벌하지 않으신 채 내버려 두지는 않으신다. 폭풍과 회오리바람은 그분께서 다니시는 길이며 구름은 그분 발밑에 이는 먼지다.","야훼께서 힘이 없어 오래 참으시는 줄 아느냐. 결코 죄지은 자를 벌하지 않은 채 버려두지는 않으신다. 발길로 구름을 먼지처럼 일으키시며 태풍 속, 폭풍 속을 뚫고 오신다.","여호와는 노하기를 더디하시며 권능이 크시며 벌 받을 자를 결코 내버려두지 아니하시느니라 여호와의 길은 회오리바람과 광풍에 있고 구름은 그의 발의 티끌이로다","여호와는 노하기를 더디하시며 권능이 크시며 죄인을 결코 사하지 아니하시느니라 여호와의 길은 회리바람과 광풍에 있고 구름은 그 발의 티끌이로다","주님은 본래 더디 화를 내시지만, 한번 분노가 폭발하면 엄청난 힘을 나타내시며 죄인을 결단코 용서해 주지 않으신다. 능력을 한번 나타내시면 온 세상을 뒤집는 태풍과 폭풍이 된다. 하늘의 모든 구름은 그의 발밑에서 먼지처럼 소용돌이친다","The LORD is slow to anger, yet great in power; the LORD will not leave the guilty unpunished. In stormwind and tempest he comes, and clouds are the dust at his feet;","The LORD is slow to anger, and great in power, and will not at all acquit the wicked: the LORD hath his way in the whirlwind and in the storm, and the clouds are the dust of his feet.","The LORD is slow to anger and great in power; the LORD will not leave the guilty unpunished. His way is in the whirlwind and the storm, and clouds are the dust of his feet.","Dominus patiens et magnus fortitudine, nullumque impunitum derelinquet Dominus. In tempestate et turbine via eius, et nubes pulvis pedum eius.","יהוה ארך אפים וגדול כח ונקה לא ינקה יהוה בסופה ובשערה דרכו וענן אבק רגליו׃"],["41","1","4","그분께서는 바다를 꾸짖어 말려 버리시고 강들을 모조리 바닥까지 드러내신다. 바산과 카르멜이 시들고 레바논의 초목이 시든다.","그가 한번 호령하시면, 강은 마르고 바다는 그 바닥이 드러난다. 바산에서도 가르멜에서도 풀이 시들고 레바논 산에서는 꽃이 이운다.","그는 바다를 꾸짖어 그것을 말리시며 모든 강을 말리시나니 바산과 갈멜이 쇠하며 레바논의 꽃이 시드는도다","그는 바다를 꾸짖어 그것을 말리우시며 모든 강을 말리우시나니 바산과 갈멜이 쇠하며 레바논의 꽃이 이우는도다","단 한 번 꾸짖음에 바다가 바닥을 드러내고 모든 강들도 말라버린다. 레바논산의 온갖 꽃들이 이울고 바산과 갈멜산의 싱싱한 초원이 시든다.","He roars at the sea and leaves it dry, and all the rivers he dries up. Laid low are Bashan and Carmel, and the bloom of Lebanon withers;","He rebuketh the sea, and maketh it dry, and drieth up all the rivers: Bashan languisheth, and Carmel, and the flower of Lebanon languisheth.","He rebukes the sea and dries it up; he makes all the rivers run dry. Bashan and Carmel wither and the blossoms of Lebanon fade.","Increpans mare et exsiccans illud et omnia flumina ad desertum deducens. Elanguit Basan et Carmelus, et flos Libani elanguit.","גוער בים ויבשהו וכל הנהרות החריב אמלל בשן וכרמל ופרח לבנון אמלל׃"],["41","1","5","그분 앞에서 산들이 떨고 언덕들이 비틀거린다. 그분 앞에서 땅이, 세상과 그 모든 주민이 황폐해진다.","그를 보고서 멧부리들은 떨고 언덕들은 비틀거린다. 그의 앞에서 땅은 황무지가 되고 세상과 그 안에서 숨쉬는 모든 것이 꺼진다.","그로 말미암아 산들이 진동하며 작은 산들이 녹고 그 앞에서는 땅 곧 세계와 그 가운데에 있는 모든 것들이 솟아오르는도다","그로 인하여 산들이 진동하며 작은 산들이 녹고 그의 앞에서는 땅 곧 세계와 그 가운데 거하는 자들이 솟아 오르는도다","메들이 그분 앞에서 벌벌 떨며 뒤로 물러나고 언덕들은 부들부들 요동을 친다. 보아라. 그분 앞에서 땅이 황무지로 변하고 세상에 사는 모든 사람들이 슬프게 탄식한다.","The mountains quake before him, and the hills dissolve; The earth is laid waste before him, the world and all who dwell in it.","The mountains quake at him, and the hills melt, and the earth is burned at his presence, yea, the world, and all that dwell therein.","The mountains quake before him and the hills melt away. The earth trembles at his presence, the world and all who live in it.","Montes commoti sunt ab eo, et colles conturbati; et contremuit terra a facie eius et orbis et omnes habitantes in eo.","הרים רעשו ממנו והגבעות התמגגו ותשא הארץ מפניו ותבל וכל ישבי בה׃"],["41","1","6","그분의 노기 앞에서 누가 버틸 수 있으랴? 그분의 타오르는 분노에 누가 맞설 수 있으랴? 그분의 진노가 불같이 쏟아지니 그분 앞에서 바위들이 부서진다.","주께서 진노하시면 누가 당하랴. 주께서 분노를 터뜨리시면 누가 맞서랴. 주의 진노가 불같이 일면, 바위도 깨진다.","누가 능히 그의 분노 앞에 서며 누가 능히 그의 진노를 감당하랴 그의 진노가 불처럼 쏟아지니 그로 말미암아 바위들이 깨지는도다","누가 능히 그 분노하신 앞에 서며 누가 능히 그 진노를 감당하랴 그 진노를 불처럼 쏟으시니 그를 인하여 바위들이 깨어지는도다","솟구치는 그분의 분노, 누가 그 앞에서 견디어 내겠으며 그분의 진노가 타오를 때에 누가 맞설 수 있겠는가? 여호와의 분노가 불덩이처럼 쏟아져서, 그 분노로 말미암아 바위들이 녹아내린다.","Before his wrath, who can stand firm, and who can face his blazing anger? His fury is poured out like fire, and boulders break apart before him.","Who can stand before his indignation? and who can abide in the fierceness of his anger? his fury is poured out like fire, and the rocks are thrown down by him.","Who can withstand his indignation? Who can endure his fierce anger? His wrath is poured out like fire; the rocks are shattered before him.","Ante faciem indignationis eius quis stabit, et quis resistet in aestu furoris eius? Indignatio eius effusa est ut ignis, et petrae dissolutae sunt ab eo.","לפני זעמו מי יעמוד ומי יקום בחרון אפו חמתו נתכה כאש והצרים נתצו ממנו׃"],["41","1","7","주님은 선하신 분 환난의 날에 피난처가 되어 주시는 분 당신께 피신하는 이들을 알아주시는 분이시다.","야훼께서는 당신을 바라는 사람이 곤경에 빠졌을 때, 잘 보살펴 주시고 당신께 몸을 숨기는 사람이 물결에 휩쓸렸을 때, 돌보아주시지만, 당신께 맞서는 자는 없애버리신다. 당신을 대적하는 자는 빛 없는 곳으로 몰아내신다.","여호와는 선하시며 환난 날에 산성이시라 그는 자기에게 피하는 자들을 아시느니라","여호와는 선하시며 환난 날에 산성이시라 그는 자기에게 의뢰하는 자들을 아시느니라","주님은 자기를 의지하는 자들을 아시고, 환난날에 그들을 숨겨 주는 피난처되신다. 찾고 의지하는 사람을 항상 살펴 주시지만,","The LORD is good to those who wait for him, a refuge on the day of distress, Taking care of those who look to him for protection,","The LORD is good, a strong hold in the day of trouble; and he knoweth them that trust in him.","The LORD is good, a refuge in times of trouble. He cares for those who trust in him,","Bonus Dominus, refugium in die tribulationis et sciens sperantes in se","טוב יהוה למעוז ביום צרה וידע חסי בו׃"],["41","1","8","그러나 그분께서는 당신께 맞서는 자들을 넘쳐흐르는 홍수로 끝장내시고 당신의 원수들을 어둠 속까지 쫓으신다.",null,"그가 범람하는 물로 그 곳을 진멸하시고 자기 대적들을 흑암으로 쫓아내시리라","그가 범람한 물로 그곳을 진멸하시고 자기 대적들을 흑암으로 쫓아내시리라","캄캄한 어둠 속으로 원수들을 쫓으시고, 반항하고 대드는 자들에게는 범람하는 홍수로 쓸어 버리신다.","when the flood rages; He makes an end of his opponents, and pursues his enemies into darkness.","But with an overrunning flood he will make an utter end of the place thereof, and darkness shall pursue his enemies.","but with an overwhelming flood he will make an end of Nineveh; he will pursue his foes into darkness.","et in diluvio transeunte; consummationem faciet adversariorum suorum, et inimicos eius persequentur tenebrae.","ובשטף עבר כלה יעשה מקומה ואיביו ירדף חשך׃"],["41","1","9","너희는 주님께 무슨 음모를 꾸미느냐? 그분은 모조리 끝장내시는 분 어떤 적대자도 두 번 다시 일어나지 못한다.","원수들아, 너희는 야훼께 무슨 음모를 꾸미느냐? 야훼께서는 당신의 적들이 두 번 다시 일어나지 못하게 끝장을 보는 분이시다.","너희는 여호와께 대하여 무엇을 꾀하느냐 그가 온전히 멸하시리니 재난이 다시 일어나지 아니하리라","너희가 여호와를 대하여 무엇을 꾀하느냐 그가 온전히 멸하시리니 재난이 다시 일어나지 아니하리라","너희는 주께서 앗수르에게 어떻게 하실 것으로 생각하느냐? 주님은 적들을 단번에 멸절시켜 두 번 다시 칠 필요가 없게 하신다.","What do you plot against the LORD, the one about to bring total destruction? No opponent rises a second time!","What do ye imagine against the LORD? he will make an utter end: affliction shall not rise up the second time.","Whatever they plot against the LORD he will bring to an end; trouble will not come a second time.","Quid cogitatis contra Dominum? Consummationem ipse faciet; non consurget duplex tribulatio.","מה תחשבון אל יהוה כלה הוא עשה לא תקום פעמים צרה׃"],["41","1","10","그들은 가시나무처럼 뒤엉키고 술고래처럼 곯아떨어졌다. 그들은 바싹 마른 검불처럼 타 버리리라.","가시덤불처럼 태워버리시고 검불처럼 살라버리신다.","가시덤불 같이 엉크러졌고 술을 마신 것 같이 취한 그들은 마른 지푸라기 같이 모두 탈 것이거늘","가시덤불 같이 엉크러졌고 술을 마신 것 같이 취한 그들이 마른 지푸라기 같이 다 탈 것이어늘","주님은 자기의 원수들을 뒤엉킨 가시덤불처럼 불속에 처넣으신다. 그들은 바싹 마른 지푸라기처럼 불속에서 타 없어질 것이다.","Like a thorny thicket, they are tangled, and like drunkards, they are drunk; like dry stubble, they are utterly consumed.","For while they be folden together as thorns, and while they are drunken as drunkards, they shall be devoured as stubble fully dry.","They will be entangled among thorns and drunk from their wine; they will be consumed like dry stubble.","Sicut spinae condensae se invicem complectentes et sicut potatores inebriati consumentur quasi stipula omnino arida.","כי עד סירים סבכים וכסבאם סבואים אכלו כקש יבש מלא׃"],["41","1","11","주님을 거슬러 악을 꾀하는 자 사악한 일을 꾸미는 자가 너에게서 나왔다.","야훼께 음모를 꾸미는 자, 발칙한 일을 꾸미는 자가 너에게서 나왔구나.","여호와께 악을 꾀하는 한 사람이 너희 중에서 나와서 사악한 것을 권하는도다","여호와께 악을 꾀하는 한 사람이 너희 중에서 나와서 사특한 것을 권하는도다","앗수르야, 여호와를 대항하여 악한 것을 계획하고 전혀 쓸데없는 음모를 꾸미는 왕이 바로 네게서 나타났다.","From you has come one plotting evil against the LORD, one giving sinister counsel.","There is one come out of thee, that imagineth evil against the LORD, a wicked counsellor.","From you, O Nineveh, has one come forth who plots evil against the LORD and counsels wickedness.","Ex te exivit cogitans contra Dominum malitiam, mente pertractans praevaricationem.","ממך יצא חשב על יהוה רעה יעץ בליעל׃"],["41","1","12","주님께서 이렇게 말씀하신다. “그들이 빈틈없고 그토록 많아도 잘려 나가 사라지고 말리라. 내가 너를 괴롭혔지만 다시는 너를 괴롭히지 않으리라.","이것은 야훼의 말씀이시다. \"유다야, 적의 병력이 아무리 많고 강하여도 내가 낫질하듯 없애버리리라. 이제까지 나는 너를 너무 괴롭혔다. 이제 다시는 너희를 괴롭히지 아니하리라.","여호와께서 이같이 말씀하시기를 그들이 비록 강하고 많을지라도 반드시 멸절을 당하리니 그가 없어지리라 내가 전에는 너를 괴롭혔으나 다시는 너를 괴롭히지 아니할 것이라","여호와께서 말씀하시기를 그들이 비록 강장하고 중다할찌라도 반드시 멸절을 당하리니 그가 없어지리라 내가 전에는 너를 괴롭게 하였으나 다시는 너를 괴롭게 하지 아니할 것이라","여호와께서 이렇게 말씀하셨다. \"비록 앗수르의 군대가 그토록 많고 강하더라도 그들 모두가 그대로 멸절당하여 하나같이 소멸할것이다. 오, 나의 백성 이스라엘아, 내가 너를 비천하게 낮추어 놓았으나 다시는 내가 너를 괴롭히지 않겠다.","Thus says the LORD: though fully intact and so numerous, they shall be mown down and disappear. Though I have humbled you, I will humble you no more.","Thus saith the LORD; Though they be quiet, and likewise many, yet thus shall they be cut down, when he shall pass through. Though I have afflicted thee, I will afflict thee no more.","This is what the LORD says: \"Although they have allies and are numerous, they will be cut off and pass away. Although I have afflicted you, O Judah, I will afflict you no more.","Haec dicit Dominus:  “Et si incolumes fuerint et numerosi, sic quoque attondentur et pertransibunt; afflixi te et non affligam te ultra.","כה אמר יהוה אם שלמים וכן רבים וכן נגזו ועבר וענתך לא אענך עוד׃"],["41","1","13","이제 나는 그가 너에게 메운 멍에를 부러뜨리고 너를 묶은 사슬을 끊어 주리라.”","나 이제 너를 억누르던 적의 멍에를 부러뜨리고 너를 묶은 사슬을 끊어주리라.","이제 네게 지운 그의 멍에를 내가 깨뜨리고 네 결박을 끊으리라","이제 네게 지운 그의 멍에를 내가 깨뜨리고 너의 결박을 끊으리라","오히려 이제 내가 네 발목의 쇠사슬을 끊어 버리고, 앗수르 왕이 네 목에 메워준 노예의 멍에를 부러뜨리고 너를 해방시키겠다.\"","Now I will break his yoke off of you, and tear off your bonds.","For now will I break his yoke from off thee, and will burst thy bonds in sunder.","Now I will break their yoke from your neck and tear your shackles away.\"","Et nunc conteram virgam eius de dorso tuo et vincula tua disrumpam “.","ועתה אשבר מטהו מעליך ומוסרתיך אנתק׃"],["41","1","14","주님께서 너를 거슬러 명령을 내리셨다. “다시는 너의 이름을 이을 자손이 나지 않으리라. 나는 조각 신상과 주조 신상을 너의 신전에서 없애 버리고 네 무덤을 파 놓으리니 네가 쓸모없기 때문이다.”","나 야훼가 너 니느웨에 판결을 내린다. 너의 이름을 이을 자손을 내가 남기지 아니하리라. 새겨 만든 신상, 부어 만든 우상을 너희 신당에서 찍어버리고, 너의 욕된 무덤을 파헤치리라.\"","나 여호와가 네게 대하여 명령하였나니 네 이름이 다시는 전파되지 않을 것이라 내가 네 신들의 집에서 새긴 우상과 부은 우상을 멸절하며 네 무덤을 준비하리니 이는 네가 쓸모 없게 되었음이라","나 여호와가 네게 대하여 명하였나니 네 이름이 다시는 전파되지 않을 것이라 내가 네 신들의 집에서 새긴 우상과 부은 우상을 멸절하며 네 무덤을 예비하리니 이는 네가 비루함이니라","니느웨의 왕아, 여호와께서 네게 대하여 이렇게 결정을 내리셨다. \"내가 네 왕조를 멸망시키기로 작정하였다. 네 아들들이 다시는 네 왕위에 오르지 못할 것이다. 네가 나무와 돌을 깎고 금속을 녹여 만든 신상들과 그 신전들도 내가 모조리 파괴하고 네가 죽어서 묻히면 그 무덤마저 내가 거름더미로 만들어 놓겠다.\"","The LORD has commanded regarding you: no descendant will again bear your name; From the house of your gods I will abolish the carved and the molten image; I will make your grave a dung heap.","And the LORD hath given a commandment concerning thee, that no more of thy name be sown: out of the house of thy gods will I cut off the graven image and the molten image: I will make thy grave; for thou art vile.","The LORD has given a command concerning you, Nineveh: \"You will have no descendants to bear your name. I will destroy the carved images and cast idols that are in the temple of your gods. I will prepare your grave, for you are vile.\"","Et praecipiet super te Dominus:  “Non seminabitur ex nomine tuo amplius. De domo dei tui disperdam sculptile et conflatile; ponam sepulcrum tuum, quia inhonoratus es “.","וצוה עליך יהוה לא יזרע משמך עוד מבית אלהיך אכרית פסל ומסכה אשים קברך כי קלות׃"],["41","1","15",null,null,"볼지어다 아름다운 소식을 알리고 화평을 전하는 자의 발이 산 위에 있도다 유다야 네 절기를 지키고 네 서원을 갚을지어다 악인이 진멸되었으니 그가 다시는 네 가운데로 통행하지 아니하리로다 하시니라","볼찌어다 아름다운 소식을 보하고 화평을 전하는 자의 발이 산 위에 있도다 유다야 네 절기를 지키고 네 서원을 갚을찌어다 악인이 진멸되었으니 그가 다시는 네 가운데로 통행하지 아니하리로다","보아라! 기쁜 소식을 전하는 사람의 발이 산을 넘고 넘어 달려온다. 해방의 소식을 들려준다. \"저 침략자들이 전멸을 당했으니, 우리에게 해방이 왔다!\" 오 유다여, 광복을 선포하고 네가 이미 맹세한 것과 같이 주님만을 경배하여라! 원수 니느웨는 다시 오지 않을 것이기 때문이다. 니느웨의 그 죄악의 왕조가 영영 사라져 다시는 나타나지 않을 것이기 때문이다.",null,"Behold upon the mountains the feet of him that bringeth good tidings, that publisheth peace! O Judah, keep thy solemn feasts, perform thy vows: for the wicked shall no more pass through thee; he is utterly cut off.","Look, there on the mountains, the feet of one who brings good news, who proclaims peace! Celebrate your festivals, O Judah, and fulfill your vows. No more will the wicked invade you; they will be completely destroyed.",null,"הנה על ההרים רגלי מבשר משמיע שלום חגי יהודה חגיך שלמי נדריך כי לא יוסיף עוד לעבור בך בליעל כלה נכרת׃"],["41","2","1","보라, 기쁜 소식을 전하는 이, 평화를 알리는 이의 발이 산을 넘어온다. 유다야, 축일을 지내고 서원을 지켜라. 불한당이 다시는 너를 넘나들지 못할 것이다. 그는 완전히 망하였다.","1)희소식을 전하는 발길이 산을 넘고 넘어 달려온다. 광복의 소식을 안고 온다. 유다야, 축제를 마련하여라. 서원제물을 바쳐라. 그 못된 자들은 모두 없어졌다. 다시는 너희 가운데 얼씬도 못하리라. 라틴어 성서에는 1:15절.","파괴하는 자가 너를 치러 올라왔나니 너는 산성을 지키며 길을 파수하며 네 허리를 견고히 묶고 네 힘을 크게 굳게 할지어다","파괴하는 자가 너를 치러 올라왔나니 너는 산성을 지키며 길을 파수하며 네 허리를 견고히 묶고 네 힘을 크게 굳게 할찌어다","니느웨야, 너를 무너뜨리는 자가 네 앞에 이르렀다. 너도 이제는 망하였다. 너는 이미 적군들에게 포위되어 있다. 그러니 너는 비상 나팔을 불어라! 방어 진지마다 병력을 배치하고 지키며 적의 예상 진입로들을 철저히 경계하여라! 네 방위병들을 전원 소집하고 적의 공격을 대비하여 비상 경계를 하여라!","At this moment on the mountains the footsteps of one bearing good news, of one announcing peace! Celebrate your feasts, Judah, fulfill your vows! For never again will destroyers invade you; they are completely cut off.","He that dasheth in pieces is come up before thy face: keep the munition, watch the way, make thy loins strong, fortify thy power mightily.","An attacker advances against you, Nineveh. Guard the fortress, watch the road, brace yourselves, marshal all your strength!","Ecce super montes pedes evan gelizantis et annuntiantis pacem. Celebra, Iuda, festivitates tuas et redde vota tua, quia non adiciet ultra ut pertranseat in te Belial: totus interiit.","עלה מפיץ על פניך נצור מצרה צפה דרך חזק מתנים אמץ כח מאד׃"],["41","2","2","파괴자가 너를 치러 올라갔다. 성채를 지키고 길을 살피며 허리를 동여매고 힘을 모두 모아라.","침략자가 2)너를 치러 올라온다. 파수꾼아, 성루에 올라가 눈에 불을 켜고 길을 지켜보려무나. 허리를 질끈 동이고 젖먹던 힘까지 다 내어 싸워보려무나. 니느웨를 말한다.","여호와께서 야곱의 영광을 회복하시되 이스라엘의 영광 같게 하시나니 이는 약탈자들이 약탈하였고 또 그들의 포도나무 가지를 없이 하였음이라","여호와께서 야곱의 영광을 회복하시되 이스라엘의 영광 같게 하시나니 이는 약탈자들이 약탈하였고 또 그 포도나무 가지를 없이 하였음이라","앗수르의 강도 떼들이 유다를 약탈하고 그들의 포도덩굴을 망쳐 놓았을지라도, 주께서 야곱의 포도나무를 다시 일으켜서 이스라엘의 포도나무와 같게 하실 것이다.","One who scatters has come up against you; guard the rampart, Watch the road, brace yourselves, marshal all your strength!","For the LORD hath turned away the excellency of Jacob, as the excellency of Israel: for the emptiers have emptied them out, and marred their vine branches.","The LORD will restore the splendor of Jacob like the splendor of Israel, though destroyers have laid them waste and have ruined their vines.","Ascendit, qui dispergat, contra te.  “Custodi munitionem, contemplare viam, conforta lumbos, robora virtutem valde “.","כי שב יהוה את גאון יעקב כגאון ישראל כי בקקום בקקים וזמריהם שחתו׃"],["41","2","3","약탈자들이 그들을 약탈하고 그들의 포도나무 가지들을 망쳐 버렸지만 정녕 주님께서는 이스라엘의 영예처럼 야곱의 영예를 되돌려 주시리라.","야곱의 포도덩굴, 그 이스라엘의 자랑을 적들은 짓밟고 털어갔었다. 그러나 야훼께서 그 포도원을 다시 일으키시리라.","그의 용사들의 방패는 붉고 그의 무사들의 옷도 붉으며 그 항오를 벌이는 날에 병거의 쇠가 번쩍이고 노송나무 창이 요동하는도다","그의 용사들의 방패는 붉고 그의 무사들의 옷도 붉으며 그 항오를 벌이는 날에 병거의 철이 번쩍이고 노송나무 창이 요동하는도다","성을 공격하는 용사들의 방패는 아침 햇빛을 받아 붉게 번쩍인다. 공격이 시작되었다. 일제히 주홍빛 옷을 입은 용사들을 보아라! 번쩍번쩍 빛나는 그들의 전차들은 뽐내며 달리는 군마들이 끌고 줄줄이 전진해 나간다.","The LORD will restore the vine of Jacob, the honor of Israel, Because ravagers have ravaged them and ruined their branches.","The shield of his mighty men is made red, the valiant men are in scarlet: the chariots shall be with flaming torches in the day of his preparation, and the fir trees shall be terribly shaken.","The shields of his soldiers are red; the warriors are clad in scarlet. The metal on the chariots flashes on the day they are made ready; the spears of pine are brandished.","Quia restituet Dominus magnificentiam Iacob sicut magnificentiam Israel, quia praedones praedati sunt eos et propagines eorum corruperunt.",null],["41","2","4","그의 용사들의 방패는 붉고 군사들은 자주색 옷을 입었다. 그가 전열을 갖추는 날 병거의 쇠붙이들은 불타는 듯하고 창들은 물결친다.","적의 억센 용사들이 자주 갑옷을 입고, 붉은 방패를 들고 마구 쳐들어오는데 기마들은 미친 듯이 날뛰고","그 병거는 미친 듯이 거리를 달리며 대로에서 이리저리 빨리 달리니 그 모양이 횃불 같고 빠르기가 번개 같도다","그 병거는 거리에 미치게 달리며 대로에서 이리 저리 빨리 가니 그 모양이 횃불 같고 빠르기 번개 같도다","그들의 전차들은 거리마다 질주하고 모든 광장에서 이리저리 달린다. 그들이 달리는 모양은 수많은 횃불들의 움직임과 같고, 이쪽 저쪽으로 내리꽂히는 번갯불과도 같다.","The shields of his warriors are crimsoned, the soldiers clad in scarlet; Like fire are the trappings of the chariots on the day he prepares for war; the cavalry is agitated!","The chariots shall rage in the streets, they shall justle one against another in the broad ways: they shall seem like torches, they shall run like the lightnings.","The chariots storm through the streets, rushing back and forth through the squares. They look like flaming torches; they dart about like lightning.","Clipeus fortium eius ruber, viri exercitus in coccineis; ignitae laminae ferreae curruum, quando praeparat bellum, et equites agitantur.",null],["41","2","5","병거들이 거리에서 치닫고 광장에서 앞 다투어 달려가니 그 모습이 횃불 같고 번개처럼 여기저기 번쩍인다.","병거의 바퀴는 불이 나게 돌며, 거리를 누비는구나. 횃불처럼 번개처럼 이리 번쩍 저리 번쩍 광장을 치달린다.","그가 그의 존귀한 자들을 생각해 내니 그들이 엎드러질 듯이 달려서 급히 성에 이르러 막을 것을 준비하도다","그가 그 존귀한 자를 생각해 내니 그들이 엎드러질듯이 달려서 급히 성에 이르러 막을 것을 예비하도다","공격하는 자는 특공대를 생각해 냈다. 이들은 넘어질 듯이 달려서 일순간에 성벽에 이르렀다. 그들은 곧장 화살막이들을 펼쳐 놓았다.","The chariots dash madly through the streets and wheel in the squares, Looking like torches, bolting like lightning.","He shall recount his worthies: they shall stumble in their walk; they shall make haste to the wall thereof, and the defence shall be prepared.","He summons his picked troops, yet they stumble on their way. They dash to the city wall; the protective shield is put in place.","In viis furibundae currunt quadrigae, invicem colliduntur in plateis; aspectus eorum quasi lampades, quasi fulgura discurrentia.",null],["41","2","6","그가 군관들을 부르자 그들은 비틀거리면서도 나아간다. 그들은 성벽으로 서둘러 가서 화살 막이를 세운다.","정예부대를 앞세워 거꾸러지면서 돌격한다. 벼락같이 성벽에 들이닥쳐 화살막이를 벌여놓는다.","강들의 수문이 열리고 왕궁이 소멸되며","강들의 수문이 열리고 왕궁이 소멸되며","강들을 막아 놓은 수문들이 열리고 왕궁은 삽시간에 지진이 일어난 듯하다.","His picked troops are called, ranks break at their charge; To the wall they rush, their screen is set up.","The gates of the rivers shall be opened, and the palace shall be dissolved.","The river gates are thrown open and the palace collapses.","Recordatur fortium suorum, ruunt in itineribus suis; currunt ad murum, et praeparatur umbraculum.",null],["41","2","7","강의 수문들이 열리니 왕궁은 불안에 떤다.","마침내 강을 낀 성문들이 열리니 대궐은 수라장이요,","정한 대로 왕후가 벌거벗은 몸으로 끌려가니 그 모든 시녀들이 가슴을 치며 비둘기 같이 슬피 우는도다","정명대로 왕후가 벌거벗은 몸으로 끌려가며 그 모든 시녀가 가슴을 치며 비둘기 같이 슬피 우는도다","니느웨의 왕비는 발가벗긴 채 끌려나와 노예의 행렬을 이끌고 간다. 모든 시녀들도 가슴을 치며 비둘기 떼처럼 구슬피 흐느끼면서 뒤따라간다.","The river gates are opened, the palace is washed away.","And Huzzab shall be led away captive, she shall be brought up, and her maids shall lead her as with the voice of doves, tabering upon their breasts.","It is decreed that the city be exiled and carried away. Its slave girls moan like doves and beat upon their breasts.","Portae fluviorum apertae sunt, palatium tremit.",null],["41","2","8","왕후는 끌려 나와 사로잡혀 가고 시녀들은 비둘기 소리처럼 한숨지으며 가슴을 친다.","여신상을 들어내어 포로처럼 끌어가는데 시녀들은 가슴을 치며 비둘기처럼 구슬피 흐느끼는구나.","니느웨는 예로부터 물이 모인 못 같더니 이제 모두 도망하니 서라 서라 하나 돌아보는 자가 없도다","니느웨는 예로부터 물이 모인 못 같더니 이제 모두 도망하니 서라 서라 하나 돌아 보는 자가 없도다","니느웨는 물 빠지는 호수처럼 주민들이 모두 도망을 친다. 이런 판국에 군인들이 \"정지! 정지!\" 하는 명령이 무슨 소용이 있으랴! 어느 한 사람 돌아서지 않고 모두 도망하였다.","The mistress is led forth captive, and her maidservants led away, Moaning like doves, beating their breasts.","But Nineveh is of old like a pool of water: yet they shall flee away. Stand, stand, shall they cry; but none shall look back.","Nineveh is like a pool, and its water is draining away. \"Stop! Stop!\" they cry, but no one turns back.","Et speciosa denudatur, tollitur, et ancillae eius gemunt ut columbae et percutiunt corda sua.",null],["41","2","9","오래전부터 물웅덩이 같던 니네베, 물이 빠지기 시작하자 “멈추어라, 멈추어라!” 하고 소리치지만 돌아보는 자 아무도 없다.","니느웨는 물이 빠지고 있는 웅덩이 같아, \"멈추어라, 멈추어라.\" 하고 소리치나 아무도 뒤를 돌아보지 않는다.","은을 노략하라 금을 노략하라 그 저축한 것이 무한하고 아름다운 기구가 풍부함이니라","은을 노략하라 금을 늑탈하라 그 저축한 것이 무한하고 아름다운 기구가 풍부함이니라","\"공격자들아, 은을 약탈하고 금을 약탈하여라!\" 한없이 많은 보물들에, 탐나는 그릇과 귀중품들이 많기도 하다.","Nineveh is like a pool whose waters escape; “Stop! Stop!” but none turns back.","Take ye the spoil of silver, take the spoil of gold: for there is none end of the store and glory out of all the pleasant furniture.","Plunder the silver! Plunder the gold! The supply is endless, the wealth from all its treasures!","Et Nineve quasi piscina aquarum, cuius aquae fugiunt.  “State, state! “; sed non est qui revertatur.",null],["41","2","10","너희는 은을 털어라! 금을 털어라! 보물이 얼마든지 쌓여 있다. 온갖 값진 기물들이 수북이 쌓여 있다.","\"은을 털어가자, 금을 털어가자, 없는 것 없이 잘도 해놓고 살았구나. 값진 세간들 잘도 차려놓고 살았구나.\" 하며","니느웨가 공허하였고 황폐하였도다 주민이 낙담하여 그 무릎이 서로 부딪히며 모든 허리가 아프게 되며 모든 낯이 빛을 잃도다","니느웨가 공허하였고 황무하였도다 거민이 낙담하여 그 무릎이 서로 부딪히며 모든 허리가 아프게 되며 모든 낯이 빛을 잃도다","털털 털리고 탈탈 약탈을 당하여, 남은 것은 황폐한 쓰레기더미뿐이다. 가슴은 공포에 질려 녹아 나고, 무릎은 벌벌 떨리고, 허리가 경련을 일으키며 뻣뻣해지고, 놀라서 얼굴이 창백해졌다.","“Plunder the silver, plunder the gold!” There is no end to the treasure, to wealth in every precious thing!","She is empty, and void, and waste: and the heart melteth, and the knees smite together, and much pain is in all loins, and the faces of them all gather blackness.","She is pillaged, plundered, stripped! Hearts melt, knees give way, bodies tremble, every face grows pale."," “Diripite argentum, diripite aurum! “. Et non est finis divitiarum; thesaurus ex omnibus vasis desiderabilibus.",null],["41","2","11","황량, 황폐, 폐허! 심장은 녹아 내리고 무릎은 후들거리며 허리는 모두 떨리고 얼굴은 죄다 하얗게 질린다.","참으로 잘들 털어간다. 모조리 잘들 쓸어간다. 이런 꼴을 당하고 어찌 가슴이 떨리지 아니하며, 다리가 후들거리지 않으랴? 허리는 온통 끊어지는 것 같고 얼굴도 모두 파랗게 질렸구나.","이제 사자의 굴이 어디냐 젊은 사자가 먹을 곳이 어디냐 전에는 수사자 암사자가 그 새끼 사자와 함께 거기서 다니되 그것들을 두렵게 할 자가 없었으며","이제 사자의 굴이 어디뇨 젊은 사자의 먹는 곳이 어디뇨 전에는 수사자 암사자가 그 새끼 사자와 함께 거기서 다니되 그것들을 두렵게 할 자가 없었으며","오, 니느웨의 도성이여, 너는 사자들을 존중하고 왕족을 사자들에 비교하였다. 그런데 그 사자들의 거처는 어디로 사라졌느냐? 젊은 사자들이 먹이를 먹고, 수사자, 암사자, 새끼 사자들 모두 두려울 것 하나없이 누비고 다니던 곳이 어디로 갔느냐?","Emptiness, desolation, waste; melting hearts and trembling knees, Churning in every stomach, every face turning pale!","Where is the dwelling of the lions, and the feedingplace of the young lions, where the lion, even the old lion, walked, and the lion's whelp, and none made them afraid?","Where now is the lions' den, the place where they fed their young, where the lion and lioness went, and the cubs, with nothing to fear?","Dissipata et vastata et dilacerata, et cor tabescens, et dissolutio geniculorum; et tremor in cunctis renibus, et facies omnium eorum candentes.",null],["41","2","12","사자들의 굴이 어디 있느냐? 새끼 사자들의 소굴이 어디 있느냐? 수사자와 암사자와 새끼 사자가 아무런 위협도 받지 않고 드나들던 그곳.","사자굴은 어찌 되었느냐? 사자 새끼가 우글거리던 그 바위굴은 어찌 되었느냐? 수사자가 나가도 암컷과 새끼들이 겁도 없이 기다리더니,","수사자가 그 새끼를 위하여 먹이를 충분히 찢고 그의 암사자들을 위하여 움켜 사냥한 것으로 그 굴을 채웠고 찢은 것으로 그 구멍을 채웠었도다","수사자가 그 새끼를 위하여 식물을 충분히 찢고 그 암사자를 위하여 무엇을 움켜서는 취한 것으로 그 굴에 채웠고 찢은 것으로 그 구멍에 채웠었도다","수사자는 새끼들을 위하여 많이도 잡아들이고, 암사자들을 위하여 짐승들을 잘도 물어 죽였다. 그는 자기가 사는 굴마다 짐승들을 가득히 채워 놓고, 자기 집마다 찢어 놓은 고기가 많기도 하였다.","Where is the lionesses’ den, the young lions’ cave, Where the lion went in and out, and the cub, with no one to disturb them?","The lion did tear in pieces enough for his whelps, and strangled for his lionesses, and filled his holes with prey, and his dens with ravin.","The lion killed enough for his cubs and strangled the prey for his mate, filling his lairs with the kill and his dens with the prey.","Ubi est habitaculum leonum, et spelunca catulorum leonum, ad quam ivit leo, ut duceret illuc catulum leonis, et non erat qui exterreret?",null],["41","2","13","그 수사자가 새끼들에게 먹을 것을 넉넉히 찢어 주고 암컷들에게 먹이를 잡아 주더니. 제 바위 굴을 먹이로, 찢어 놓은 고기로 제 굴을 가득 채우더니.","수사자가 사냥해 온 것을 새끼들에게 주고 암사자에게 찢어주더니, 바위굴은 사냥해 온 고기로 그득하고 그 굴에는 늘 먹이가 차 있더니.","만군의 여호와의 말씀에 내가 네 대적이 되어 네 병거들을 불살라 연기가 되게 하고 네 젊은 사자들을 칼로 멸할 것이며 내가 또 네 노략한 것을 땅에서 끊으리니 네 파견자의 목소리가 다시는 들리지 아니하리라 하셨느니라","만군의 여호와의 말씀에 내가 네 대적이 되어 너의 병거들을 살라 연기가 되게 하고 너의 젊은 사자들을 칼로 멸할 것이며 내가 또 너의 노략한 것을 땅에서 끊으리니 너의 파견자의 목소리가 다시는 들리지 아니하리라 하셨느니라","그런데 이제는 온 세계의 주인이신 하나님 여호와께서 이렇게 말씀하셨다. \"보아라, 내가 너를 공격하기 시작하였다. 내가 네 무기들을 모조리 파괴하겠다. 네 전차들은 연기를 뿜으며 불타 버리도록 하겠다. 그러면 사자 같던 젊은이들이 칼에 찔려 죽을 것이다. 또 나는 땅에서 네 먹이를 끊어 놓겠다. 그러면 네가 다시는 다른 나라들을 정복하여 약탈해 오지 못할 것이고 다시는 각국으로 외교관들을 파견하지 못할 것이다!\"","The lion tore apart enough for his cubs, and strangled for his lionesses; He filled his lairs with prey, and his dens with torn flesh.","Behold, I am against thee, saith the LORD of hosts, and I will burn her chariots in the smoke, and the sword shall devour thy young lions: and I will cut off thy prey from the earth, and the voice of thy messengers shall no more be heard.","\"I am against you,\" declares the LORD Almighty. \"I will burn up your chariots in smoke, and the sword will devour your young lions. I will leave you no prey on the earth. The voices of your messengers will no longer be heard.\"","Leo cepit sufficienter catulis suis et necavit leaenis suis; et implevit praeda speluncas suas et cubile suum rapina.",null],["41","2","14","보라, 내가 너에게 맞서리라. 만군의 주님의 말씀이다. 나는 너의 병거를 연기 속에 불태워 버리고 칼이 네 새끼 사자들을 삼키게 하리라. 또 너의 먹이를 이 땅에서 없애 버리고 다시는 전령들의 전갈이 들려오지 않게 하리라.","\"나 이제 너를 치리라.\" 만군의 야훼께서 하시는 말씀이시다. \"네 병거를 연기가 되어 사라지게 하고 너의 백성을 칼로 쳐죽여 다시는 세상에서 약탈하지 못하게 하리니, 네 사절들이 떠드는 소리를 다시는 들을 수 없으리라.",null,null,null,"I now come against you— oracle of the LORD of hosts— I will consume your chariots in smoke, and the sword will devour your young lions; Your preying on the land I will bring to an end, the cry of your lionesses will be heard no more.",null,null," “Ecce ego ad te, dicit Dominus exercituum, et succendam usque ad fumum quadrigas tuas; et leunculos tuos comedet gladius, et exterminabo de terra praedam tuam, et non audietur ultra vox nuntiorum tuorum “.",null],["41","3","1","불행하여라, 피의 성읍! 온통 거짓뿐이고 노획물로 가득한데 노략질을 그치지 않는다.","피로 절은 이 저주받을 도시야, 협잡이나 해먹고 약탈을 일삼고 노략질을 그치지 않더니,","화 있을진저 피의 성이여 그 안에는 거짓이 가득하고 포악이 가득하며 탈취가 떠나지 아니하는도다","화 있을찐저 피 성이여 그 속에서는 궤휼과 강포가 가득하며 늑탈이 떠나지 아니하는도다","사람을 죽인 피로 얼룩진 니느웨 도성은 멸망하고야 만다! 도성 전체가 온갖 거짓으로 가득 찼고, 폭력과 불법이 온통 들어차 있다. 사람을 끌어다 죽이는 일이 하루도 끊이지 않고 있다.","Ah! The bloody city, all lies, Full of plunder, whose looting never stops!","Woe to the bloody city! it is all full of lies and robbery; the prey departeth not;","Woe to the city of blood, full of lies, full of plunder, never without victims!","Vae, civitas sanguinum, universa mendacii praeda plena! Non recedet a te rapina.","הוי עיר דמים כלה כחש פרק מלאה לא ימיש טרף׃"],["41","3","2","채찍 소리 요란하게 굴러가는 바퀴 소리 달려오는 말 튀어 오르는 병거","들리느냐? 저 채찍질 소리. 병거 바퀴 돌아가는 저 요란한 소리. 말은 소리치고 병거는 치닫는다.","휙휙 하는 채찍 소리, 윙윙 하는 병거 바퀴 소리, 뛰는 말, 달리는 병거,","휙휙하는 채찍 소리, 굉굉하는 병거 바퀴 소리, 뛰는 말, 달리는 병거,","그러므로 너 니느웨가 망하는 꼴을 보아라! 말을 모는 저 채찍 소리가 들리지 않느냐? 전차 바퀴들이 덜거덩거리는 소리가 들리지 않느냐? 몰려드는 군마들이 보이지 않느냐? 사납게 날뛰며 밀려드는 전차들이 보이지 않느냐?","The crack of the whip, the rumbling of wheels; Horses galloping, chariots bounding,","The noise of a whip, and the noise of the rattling of the wheels, and of the pransing horses, and of the jumping chariots.","The crack of whips, the clatter of wheels, galloping horses and jolting chariots!","Vox flagellorum et vox strepitus rotarum, equi frementes et quadrigae ferventes, equites irruentes","קול שוט וקול רעש אופן וסוס דהר ומרכבה מרקדה׃"],["41","3","3","돌격하는 기병 번뜩이는 칼 번쩍이는 창 수없이 살해된 자들 시체 더미 끝이 없는 주검. 사람들이 주검에 걸려 비틀거린다.","칼과 창을 번개처럼 번쩍이며 기마병이 말 타고 달려든다. 다치는 사람은 수도 없고 주검은 너저분하게 널려 있다. 산더미처럼 쌓인 시체는 가는 곳마다 발에 차인다.","충돌하는 기병, 번쩍이는 칼, 번개 같은 창, 죽임 당한 자의 떼, 주검의 큰 무더기, 무수한 시체여 사람이 그 시체에 걸려 넘어지니","충돌하는 기병, 번쩍이는 칼, 번개 같은 창, 살륙 당한 떼, 큰 무더기 주검, 무수한 시체여 사람이 그 시체에 걸려 넘어지니","기마병은 말을 일으켜 싸움을 시작하였다. 칼들은 불꽃처럼 번뜩이고 창들은 번갯불처럼 날아다닌다. 뭇사람들이 쓰러져 죽고, 온 땅에 시체가 가득하다. 끝도 없이 쓰러진 시체들의 거리, 가는 곳마다 시체에 걸려서 넘어지는구나!","Cavalry charging, the flash of the sword, the gleam of the spear; A multitude of slain, a mass of corpses, Endless bodies to stumble upon!","The horseman lifteth up both the bright sword and the glittering spear: and there is a multitude of slain, and a great number of carcases; and there is none end of their corpses; they stumble upon their corpses:","Charging cavalry, flashing swords and glittering spears! Many casualties, piles of dead, bodies without number, people stumbling over the corpses--","et gladii micantes et hastae fulgurantes et multitudo interfectorum et acervi mortuorum; nec est finis cadaverum, et corruunt super corpora.","פרש מעלה ולהב חרב וברק חנית ורב חלל וכבד פגר ואין קצה לגויה יכשלו בגויתם׃"],["41","3","4","수없이 불륜을 저지르고 마술사가 되어 사람들을 홀린 탓이다. 불륜으로 민족들을, 마술로 부족들을 팔아먹은 탓이다.","창녀처럼 예쁘게 꾸미고 마술사처럼 남을 홀리던 것아, 창녀처럼 꾀어 뭇 민족을 팔아먹던 것아, 마술을 부려 뭇 족속을 팔아먹던 것아,","이는 마술에 능숙한 미모의 음녀가 많은 음행을 함이라 그가 그의 음행으로 여러 나라를 미혹하고 그의 마술로 여러 족속을 미혹하느니라","이는 마술의 주인된 아리따운 기생이 음행을 많이 함을 인함이라 그가 그 음행으로 열국을 미혹하고 그 마술로 여러 족속을 미혹하느니라","니느웨가 이렇게 멸망하게 된 것은 창녀처럼 죄를 많이 지은 까닭이다. 그는 아름답고 사람을 홀리는 힘이 강하여, 음탕한 몸으로 뭇 백성들을 미혹하고 사람을 홀리는 매력으로 온갖 족속들을 멸망의 길로 옭아 넣었다.","For the many debaucheries of the prostitute, a charming mistress of witchcraft, Who enslaved nations with her prostitution, and peoples by her witchcraft:","Because of the multitude of the whoredoms of the wellfavoured harlot, the mistress of witchcrafts, that selleth nations through her whoredoms, and families through her witchcrafts.","all because of the wanton lust of a harlot, alluring, the mistress of sorceries, who enslaved nations by her prostitution and peoples by her witchcraft.","Hoc propter multitudinem fornicationum meretricis speciosae et gratae et habentis maleficia, quae vendidit gentes fornicationibus suis et nationes maleficiis suis.","מרב זנוני זונה טובת חן בעלת כשפים המכרת גוים בזנוניה ומשפחות בכשפיה׃"],["41","3","5","보라, 내가 너에게 맞서리라. 만군의 주님의 말씀이다. 나는 네 옷자락을 얼굴 위로 걷어 올려 네 알몸을 민족들이 보고 네 치부를 왕국들이 보게 하리라.","나 이제 너를 치리라.\" 만군의 야훼께서 하시는 말씀이시다. \"네 치마를 벗겨 그 알몸을 뭇 민족들 앞에 드러내 주리라. 뭇 나라에 네 부끄러움을 드러내 주리라.","보라 내가 네게 말하노니 만군의 여호와의 말씀에 네 치마를 걷어 올려 네 얼굴에 이르게 하고 네 벌거벗은 것을 나라들에게 보이며 네 부끄러운 곳을 뭇 민족에게 보일 것이요","만군의 여호와의 말씀에 내가 네 대적이 되어서 네 치마를 걷어쳐 네 얼굴에 이르게 하고 네 벌거벗은 것을 열국에 보이며 네 부끄러운 곳을 열방에 보일 것이요","그러므로 온 세계의 주인이신 하나님 여호와께서 이렇게 말씀하셨다. \"보라, 내가 너를 공격하기 시작하였다. 나는 네 몸을 가린 긴 옷자락을 네 얼굴 위로 벗겨 올려 네 알몸을 뭇백성들이 보게 하고, 네 부끄러움을 세계 만민이 구경하게 하겠다.","I now come against you— oracle of the LORD of hosts— and I will lift your skirt above your face; I will show your nakedness to the nations, to the kingdoms your shame!","Behold, I am against thee, saith the LORD of hosts; and I will discover thy skirts upon thy face, and I will shew the nations thy nakedness, and the kingdoms thy shame.","\"I am against you,\" declares the LORD Almighty. \"I will lift your skirts over your face. I will show the nations your nakedness and the kingdoms your shame."," “Ecce ego ad te, dicit Dominus exercituum; et levabo vestimentum tuum in faciem tuam et ostendam gentibus nuditatem tuam et regnis ignominiam tuam.","הנני אליך נאם יהוה צבאות וגליתי שוליך על פניך והראיתי גוים מערך וממלכות קלונך׃"],["41","3","6","나는 너에게 오물을 던지고 너를 욕보이며 구경거리가 되게 하리라.","네 몸에 똥물을 끼얹어 웃음거리를 만들리니, 너는 구경거리가 되어","내가 또 가증하고 더러운 것들을 네 위에 던져 능욕하여 너를 구경거리가 되게 하리니","내가 또 가증하고 더러운 것을 네 위에 던져 능욕하여 너로 구경거리가 되게 하리니","나는 또 네 몸에 오물을 끼얹어 너를 천하게 만들고, 네가 얼마나 더러운 여자인가를 온 세상이 구경하도록 하겠다.","I will cast filth upon you, disgrace you and make you a spectacle;","And I will cast abominable filth upon thee, and make thee vile, and will set thee as a gazingstock.","I will pelt you with filth, I will treat you with contempt and make you a spectacle.","Et proiciam super te abominationes et contumeliis te afficiam; et ponam te in exemplum.","והשלכתי עליך שקצים ונבלתיך ושמתיך כראי׃"],["41","3","7","너를 보는 자마다 너에게서 달아나며 “니네베가 망하였다! 누가 그를 가엾이 여기겠느냐?” 하고 말하리니 내가 어디서 너를 위로해 줄 자들을 찾으랴?","보는 사람마다 너를 피해 가며 비웃으리라. '니느웨가 기어이 망했구나. 누가 가엾게 보아주랴. 위로해 줄 사람이 어디 있을까. 아무리 찾아도 보이지 않는구나!'","그 때에 너를 보는 자가 다 네게서 도망하며 이르기를 니느웨가 황폐하였도다 누가 그것을 위하여 애곡하며 내가 어디서 너를 위로할 자를 구하리요 하리라","그 때에 너를 보는 자가 다 네게서 도망하며 이르기를 니느웨가 황무하였도다 누가 위하여 애곡하며 내가 어디서 너를 위로할 자를 구하리요 하리라 하시도다","그러면 너를 보는 사람마다 겁이 나서 너를 피해 가고 비웃기나 할 것이다. \"니느웨가 폭삭 망했더군! 그래도 이제 누가 동정이나 하겠는가? 이제는 불쌍하다고 위로해 줄 사람이나 구할 수 있겠는가?\"","Until everyone who sees you runs from you saying, “Nineveh is destroyed; who can pity her? Where can I find any to console you?”","And it shall come to pass, that all they that look upon thee shall flee from thee, and say, Nineveh is laid waste: who will bemoan her? whence shall I seek comforters for thee?","All who see you will flee from you and say, 'Nineveh is in ruins--who will mourn for her?' Where can I find anyone to comfort you?\"","Et erit: omnis, qui viderit te, resiliet a te et dicet: “Vastata est Nineve! Quis dolebit super eam? Unde quaeram consolatorem tibi?”.","והיה כל ראיך ידוד ממך ואמר שדדה נינוה מי ינוד לה מאין אבקש מנחמים לך׃"],["41","3","8","네가 테베보다 낫단 말이냐? 나일 강 곁에 자리 잡아 강물이 둘러싸고 바다가 방어벽이며 물이 성벽인 그곳.","네가 1)데베스보다 낫단 말이냐? 나일 강 가에 자리잡은 데베스, 물이 두루 흘러 나일 강으로 앞을 막고 물로 성벽을 삼았던 도시, 이집트의 서울이다. 히브리어 본문: \"노 아몬.\"","네가 어찌 노아몬보다 낫겠느냐 그는 강들 사이에 있으므로 물이 둘렸으니 바다가 성루가 되었고 바다가 방어벽이 되었으며","네가 어찌 노아몬보다 낫겠느냐 그는 강들 사이에 있으므로 물이 둘렸으니 바다가 성루가 되었고 바다가 성벽이 되었으며","니느웨야, 네가 저 강들을 타고 앉은 ㄱ) 데베보다 더 잘될 수가 있겠느냐? 그 도성은 사면으로 강의 보호를 받아, 바다처럼 많은 나일강 물이 성벽이 되고 그 강의 물줄기들이 층층으로 성벽을 이루어 주었다. (ㄱ. 히브리어 원문에는 \"노아몬\")","Are you better than No-amon that was set among the Nile’s canals, Surrounded by waters, with the river for her rampart and water for her wall?","Art thou better than populous No, that was situate among the rivers, that had the waters round about it, whose rampart was the sea, and her wall was from the sea?","Are you better than Thebes, situated on the Nile, with water around her? The river was her defense, the waters her wall.","Numquid melior es quam Noamon, quae habitabat in fluminibus? Aquae in circuitu eius: cuius vallum mare, aquae muri eius.","התיטבי מנא אמון הישבה ביארים מים סביב לה אשר חיל ים מים חומתה׃"],["41","3","9","에티오피아가 그 힘이 되고 이집트도 끝없이 그 힘이 되어 주었다. 풋과 리비아인들은 그 협조자들이었다.","게다가 에티오피아가 그의 힘이 되었고 이집트는 끝없이 뻗었었다. 그리고 푸트와 리비아 또한 그를 도왔다.","구스와 애굽은 그의 힘이 강하여 끝이 없었고 붓과 루빔이 그를 돕는 자가 되었으나","구스와 애굽이 그 힘이 되어 한이 없었고 붓과 루빔이 그의 돕는 자가 되었으나","구스와 애굽 전역이 데베의 강력한 동맹국들이었으며, 유사시에는 그들만이 아니라 붓과 ㄴ) 리비아 족속들에게서도 끝없는 지원을 요청할 수가 있었다. (ㄴ. 히브리어 원문에는 \"루빔\")","Ethiopia was her strength, and Egypt without end; Put and the Libyans were her allies.","Ethiopia and Egypt were her strength, and it was infinite; Put and Lubim were thy helpers.","Cush and Egypt were her boundless strength; Put and Libya were among her allies.","Chus fuit fortitudo eius et Aegyptus, cuius non est finis; Phut et Libyes fuerunt in auxilio eius.","כוש עצמה ומצרים ואין קצה פוט ולובים היו בעזרתך׃"],["41","3","10","그러한 테베도 유배를 가고 포로로 끌려갔다. 젖먹이들도 거리 모퉁이마다 내동댕이쳐지고 귀족들을 놓고서는 제비를 뽑으며 고관들은 모조리 사슬로 묶였다.","그러던 데베스의 시민들을 너는 사로잡아 갔었지. 끌어다가 종으로 부려먹었지. 어린것들은 거리 모퉁이에서 찢어죽이고, 유지들은 제비를 뽑아 끌어가고 귀인들은 모두 사슬로 묶어 끌고 갔었지.","그가 포로가 되어 사로잡혀 갔고 그의 어린 아이들은 길 모퉁이 모퉁이에 메어침을 당하여 부서졌으며 그의 존귀한 자들은 제비 뽑혀 나뉘었고 그의 모든 권세자들은 사슬에 결박되었나니","그가 포로가 되어 사로잡혀 갔고 그 어린 아이들은 길 모퉁이 모퉁이에 메어침을 당하여 부서졌으며 그 존귀한 자들은 제비 뽑혀 나뉘었고 그 모든 대인은 사슬에 결박되었나니","그런데도 데베는 함락되어 그 주민들이 원수의 나라로 끌려가 노예가 되었고 어린아이들은 길가의 돌에 메어쳐져 모조리 학살을 당하였다. 쓸 만한 사람들은 제비 뽑아 종으로 나누어졌고 지도자들은 모두 쇠사슬에 묶여 끌려갔다.","Yet even she became an exile, and went into captivity; Even her little ones were dashed to pieces at the corner of every street; For her nobles they cast lots, and all her great ones were put into chains.","Yet was she carried away, she went into captivity: her young children also were dashed in pieces at the top of all the streets: and they cast lots for her honourable men, and all her great men were bound in chains.","Yet she was taken captive and went into exile. Her infants were dashed to pieces at the head of every street. Lots were cast for her nobles, and all her great men were put in chains.","Sed et ipsa in transmigrationem ducta est, ivit in captivitatem. Parvuli eius elisi sunt in capite omnium viarum; et super inclitos eius miserunt sortem, et omnes optimates eius constricti sunt in compedibus.","גם היא לגלה הלכה בשבי גם עלליה ירטשו בראש כל חוצות ועל נכבדיה ידו גורל וכל גדוליה רתקו בזקים׃"],["41","3","11","너도 얼이 빠져 숨어야 하리라. 너도 원수를 피해 숨을 곳을 찾아야 하리라.","그러던 네가 곤드레만드레 몸도 못 가누며 원수를 피해 살 구멍을 찾게 될 줄 누가 알았으랴.","너도 술에 취하여 숨으리라 너도 원수들 때문에 피난처를 찾으리라","너도 취한바 되어 숨으리라 너도 대적을 인하여 피난처를 찾아보리라","니느웨야, 너도 공포와 고난으로 인하여 정신을 잃고 실신하여 쓰러질 것이다. 너도 원수들 앞에서 살구멍을 찾을 것이다.","You, too, will drink of this; you will be overcome; You, too, will seek a refuge from the foe.","Thou also shalt be drunken: thou shalt be hid, thou also shalt seek strength because of the enemy.","You too will become drunk; you will go into hiding and seek refuge from the enemy.","Et tu ergo inebriaberis, eris despecta; et tu quaeres refugium ab inimico.","גם את תשכרי תהי נעלמה גם את תבקשי מעוז מאויב׃"],["41","3","12","너의 모든 요새는 첫 열매들이 달린 무화과나무 같다. 그것들은 흔들기만 하면 먹을 사람의 입에 떨어진다.","너의 성채들은 하나하나 모두 떨어질 것이다. 흔들기만 하면 벌린 입에 떨어지는 잘 익은 무화과처럼.","네 모든 산성은 무화과나무의 처음 익은 열매가 흔들기만 하면 먹는 자의 입에 떨어짐과 같으리라","너의 모든 산성은 무화과나무의 처음 익은 열매가 흔들기만 하면 먹는 자의 입에 떨어짐과 같으리라","니느웨야, 네 모든 요새들은 잘 익은 무화과요, 네 주민들은 맏물 무화과와 같다. 그런 무화과들은 조금만 흔들어도 먹고 싶은 사람의 마음대로 쉽게 떨어진다.","But all your fortresses are fig trees, bearing early figs; When shaken, they fall into the devourer’s mouth.","All thy strong holds shall be like fig trees with the firstripe figs: if they be shaken, they shall even fall into the mouth of the eater.","All your fortresses are like fig trees with their first ripe fruit; when they are shaken, the figs fall into the mouth of the eater.","Omnes munitiones tuae sicut ficus cum ficis praecocibus: si concussae fuerint, cadent in os comedentis.","כל מבצריך תאנים עם בכורים אם ינועו ונפלו על פי אוכל׃"],["41","3","13","보라, 네 군대를! 네 한가운데에 있는 그 군대는 여자들뿐이다. 네 땅의 성문들은 원수들에게 활짝 열리고 그 빗장들은 불이 삼켜 버린다.","원수들이 밀려드는데, 군인들은 아녀자 같고 전국의 성문은 모두 열리고 너의 성문 빗장은 불타버리리라.","네 가운데 장정들은 여인 같고 네 땅의 성문들은 네 원수 앞에 넓게 열리고 빗장들은 불에 타도다","너의 중 1)장정들은 여인 같고 너의 땅의 성문들은 너의 대적 앞에 넓게 열리고 빗장들은 불에 타도다 히, 백성","보아라. 네 백성은 네 원수들에게 완전히 포위되어 있다. 네 땅의 성문들은 꼼짝없이 열리고 성문의 빗장들은 불에 타 없어질 것이다.","Indeed your troops are women in your midst; To your foes are open wide the gates of your land, fire has consumed their bars.","Behold, thy people in the midst of thee are women: the gates of thy land shall be set wide open unto thine enemies: the fire shall devour thy bars.","Look at your troops--they are all women! The gates of your land are wide open to your enemies; fire has consumed their bars.","Ecce populus tuus, mulieres in medio tui; inimicis tuis late patebunt portae terrae tuae; devorabit ignis vectes tuos.","הנה עמך נשים בקרבך לאיביך פתוח נפתחו שערי ארצך אכלה אש בריחיך׃"],["41","3","14","포위에 대비하여 물을 길어 두고 요새들을 튼튼하게 하여라. 흙 밭에 들어가 진흙을 밟고 벽돌 찍는 틀을 잡아라.","이제 포위당할 터이니, 물이라도 길어두려무나. 진흙을 밟아 벽돌이라도 찍어 성채를 든든히 해두려무나.","너는 물을 길어 에워싸일 것을 대비하며 너의 산성들을 견고하게 하며 진흙에 들어가서 흙을 밟아 벽돌 가마를 수리하라","너는 물을 길어 에워싸일 것을 예비하며 너의 산성들을 견고케 하며 진흙에 들어가서 흙을 밟아 벽돌 가마를 수리하라","너는 포위당할 것을 예상하여 물을 길어다 비축하고 네 방어 진지들을 강화하며 네 성벽이 파손될 것에 대비하여 미리 진흙을 밟아 벽돌을 만들어 비축해 두어라.","Draw water for the siege, strengthen your fortresses; Go down into the mud and tread the clay, take hold of the brick mold!","Draw thee waters for the siege, fortify thy strong holds: go into clay, and tread the morter, make strong the brickkiln.","Draw water for the siege, strengthen your defenses! Work the clay, tread the mortar, repair the brickwork!","Aquam propter obsidionem hauri tibi, firma munitiones tuas; intra in lutum et calca argillam, tene typum laterum.","מי מצור שאבי לך חזקי מבצריך באי בטיט ורמסי בחמר החזיקי מלבן׃"],["41","3","15","거기에서 불이 너를 삼키고 칼이 너를 베어 버리리라. 불이 누리 떼를 삼키듯 너를 삼켜 버리리라. 누리 떼처럼 불어나고 메뚜기 떼처럼 불어나 보아라.","모두 쓸데없는 일, 너는 불타버리고 사람들은 모두 칼에 맞아 죽으리라. 뛰는 메뚜기처럼 불어나려무나. 날아가는 메뚜기처럼 불어나려무나.","거기서 불이 너를 삼키며 칼이 너를 베기를 느치가 먹는 것 같이 하리라 네가 느치 같이 스스로 많게 할지어다 네가 메뚜기 같이 스스로 많게 할지어다","거기서 불이 너를 삼키며 칼이 너를 베기를 늣의 먹는 것 같이 하리라 네가 늣 같이 스스로 많게 할찌어다 네가 메뚜기 같이 스스로 많게 할찌어다","그러나 네가 준비해 놓은 그 모든 것들 속에서 불이 너를 태워 죽일 것이다. 메뚜기 떼가 닥치는 대로 모든 식물을 말끔히 잘라먹듯이, 칼이 네 백성을 모두 잘라먹을 것이다.  앗수르야, 너는 메뚜기 떼처럼 네 무리를 늘리고, 누리 떼처럼 네 무리들을 많게 하여라.","There the fire will consume you, the sword will cut you down; it will consume you like the grasshoppers. Multiply like the grasshoppers, multiply like the locusts!","There shall the fire devour thee; the sword shall cut thee off, it shall eat thee up like the cankerworm: make thyself many as the cankerworm, make thyself many as the locusts.","There the fire will devour you; the sword will cut you down and, like grasshoppers, consume you. Multiply like grasshoppers, multiply like locusts!","Ibi comedet te ignis, peribis gladio, devorabit te ut bruchus. Augere ut bruchus, multiplicare ut locusta.","שם תאכלך אש תכריתך חרב תאכלך כילק התכבד כילק התכבדי כארבה׃"],["41","3","16","너는 상인들을 하늘의 별들보다 더 많게 하였다. 그러나 누리 떼는 허물을 벗고 날아가 버리리라.","하늘의 별처럼 많은 밀정을 풀어놓아 보려무나. 날아가는 메뚜기만큼 수비대를 세워보려무나. 누리떼만큼 관리들을 두어보려무나. 겨울날 담장에 총총히 붙었다가도 해만 뜨면 탈바꿈하고 멀리 날아가 버리는 메뚜기처럼 어디론가 사라지고 말리라.","네가 네 상인을 하늘의 별보다 많게 하였으나 느치가 날개를 펴서 날아감과 같고","네가 네 상고를 하늘의 별보다 많게 하였으나 황충이 날개를 펴서 날아감과 같고","너는 네 상인들을 하늘의 별보다 더 많이 내보내었으나, 그들은 모두 메뚜기가 어느날 허물을 벗고 날아가 버리는 것처럼 사라질 것이다.","You have made your traders more numerous than the stars of the heavens; like grasshoppers that shed their skins and fly away.","Thou hast multiplied thy merchants above the stars of heaven: the cankerworm spoileth, and fleeth away.","You have increased the number of your merchants till they are more than the stars of the sky, but like locusts they strip the land and then fly away.","Plures fecisti negotiatores tuos quam stellae sint caeli; bruchus exuit pellem et avolavit.","הרבית רכליך מכוכבי השמים ילק פשט ויעף׃"],["41","3","17","네 수비병들은 메뚜기 떼처럼 많고 네 관리들은 풀무치 무리 같다. 추운 날에는 울타리에 붙어 있다가 해만 뜨면 날아가 버리니 그것들이 어디에 있는지 아무도 모른다.",null,"네 방백은 메뚜기 같고 너의 장수들은 큰 메뚜기 떼가 추운 날에는 울타리에 깃들였다가 해가 뜨면 날아감과 같으니 그 있는 곳을 알 수 없도다","너의 방백은 메뚜기 같고 너의 대장은 큰 메뚜기 떼가 추운 날에는 울타리에 깃들였다가 해가 뜨면 날아감과 같으니 그 있는 곳을 알 수 없도다","네가 파견한 관리들과 밀정들과 군인들은 메뚜기 떼에 불과하다. 추운 날이 오면 그것들은 벽에 붙어 앉았다가 따뜻한 해가 떠오르면 모조리 도망하리니, 어디로 사라졌는지 아무도 모르게 될 것이다.","Your sentries are like locusts, and your scribes like locust swarms Gathered on the rubble fences on a cold day! Yet when the sun rises, they vanish, and no one knows where they have gone.","Thy crowned are as the locusts, and thy captains as the great grasshoppers, which camp in the hedges in the cold day, but when the sun ariseth they flee away, and their place is not known where they are.","Your guards are like locusts, your officials like swarms of locusts that settle in the walls on a cold day--but when the sun appears they fly away, and no one knows where.","Custodes tui quasi locustae, et scribae tui quasi agmen locustarum, quae considunt in saepibus in die frigoris; sol ortus est, et avolaverunt, non est cognitus locus earum, ubi fuerint.","מנזריך כארבה וטפסריך כגוב גבי החונים בגדרות ביום קרה שמש זרחה ונודד ולא נודע מקומו אים׃"],["41","3","18","아시리아 임금아 네 목자들은 졸고 군관들은 드러누워 있다. 네 백성이 산에 흩어졌으나 모을 자가 하나도 없다.","오호라, 아시리아의 임금아, 네 2)목자들은 영영 잠들었구나. 네 용사들은 깰 수 없는 잠에 빠졌구나. 네 군대는 다시 모을 길 없이 이 산 저 산에서 흩어졌다. 어쩌다가 이 모양이 되었느냐? 관리들을 말한다.","앗수르 왕이여 네 목자가 자고 네 귀족은 누워 쉬며 네 백성은 산들에 흩어지나 그들을 모을 사람이 없도다","앗수르 왕이여 네 목자가 자고 네 귀족은 누워 쉬며 네 백성은 산들에 흩어지나 그들을 모을 사람이 없도다","슬프다, 앗수르의 임금이여! 네 관리들은 영영 잠이 들고 네 영웅들은 고요히 누워있구나. 네 백성은 저 산들 위에 흩어져 있으나 이제는 그들을 모아 놓을 사람이 없구나.","Your shepherds slumber, O king of Assyria, your nobles have gone to rest; Your people are scattered upon the mountains, with none to gather them.","Thy shepherds slumber, O king of Assyria: thy nobles shall dwell in the dust: thy people is scattered upon the mountains, and no man gathereth them.","O king of Assyria, your shepherds slumber; your nobles lie down to rest. Your people are scattered on the mountains with no one to gather them.","Dormiunt pastores tui, rex Assyriae, requiescunt principes tui; dispersus est populus tuus in montibus, et non est qui congreget.","נמו רעיך מלך אשור ישכנו אדיריך נפשו עמך על ההרים ואין מקבץ׃"],["41","3","19","네 상처는 아물 길 없고 부상은 나을 길이 없다. 네 소식을 듣는 이들은 모두 너를 두고 손뼉을 쳐 댄다. 너의 끊임없는 악행을 겪어 보지 않은 이가 있느냐?","네 상처는 나을 길이 없고 얻어터진 자리는 아물 길이 없다. 내내 너의 행패를 당하던 사람들이 네가 망했다는 소문을 듣고, 모두 손뼉을 치며 고소해하리라.\"","네 상처는 고칠 수 없고 네 부상은 중하도다 네 소식을 듣는 자가 다 너를 보고 손뼉을 치나니 이는 그들이 항상 네게 행패를 당하였음이 아니더냐 하시니라","너의 다친 것은 고칠 수 없고 네 상처는 중하도다 네 소식을 듣는 자가 다 너를 인하여 손뼉을 치나니 이는 네 악행을 늘 받지 않은 자가 없음이 아니냐","너는 고칠 수 없는 상처를 입었구나. 너는 죽을 만큼 매를 맞았구나. 네가 망했다는 소식을 듣는 사람들마다 손뼉을 치면서 기뻐하리라. 네 포학한 손아귀에 걸려 끊임없이 고난을 당하지 않은 사람이 도대체 누구이겠는가!","There is no healing for your hurt, your wound is fatal. All who hear this news of you clap their hands over you; For who has not suffered under your endless malice?","There is no healing of thy bruise; thy wound is grievous: all that hear the bruit of thee shall clap the hands over thee: for upon whom hath not thy wickedness passed continually?","Nothing can heal your wound; your injury is fatal. Everyone who hears the news about you claps his hands at your fall, for who has not felt your endless cruelty?","Non est remedium fracturae tuae, insanabilis est plaga tua; omnes, qui audierint auditionem tuam, plaudent manibus super te, quia super quem non transiit malitia tua semper? “.","אין כהה לשברך נחלה מכתך כל שמעי שמעך תקעו כף עליך כי על מי לא עברה רעתך תמיד׃"],["42","1","1","하바쿡 예언자가 환시로 본 신탁.","예언자 하바꾹이 환상으로 받은 말씀.","선지자 하박국이 묵시로 받은 경고라","선지자 하박국의 묵시로 받은 경고라","하나님께서 예언자 하박국에게 환상을 통하여 알려 주신 말씀이다.","The oracle which Habakkuk the prophet received in a vision.","The burden which Habakkuk the prophet did see.","The oracle that Habakkuk the prophet received.","Oraculum, quod vidit Habacuc propheta.","המשא אשר חזה חבקוק הנביא׃"],["42","1","2","주님, 당신께서 듣지 않으시는데 제가 언제까지 살려 달라고 부르짖어야 합니까? 당신께서 구해 주지 않으시는데 제가 언제까지 “폭력이다!” 하고 소리쳐야 합니까?","\"야훼여, 살려달라고 울부짖는 이 소리, 언제 들어주시렵니까? 호소하는 이 억울한 일, 언제 풀어주시렵니까?","여호와여 내가 부르짖어도 주께서 듣지 아니하시니 어느 때까지리이까 내가 강포로 말미암아 외쳐도 주께서 구원하지 아니하시나이다","여호와여 내가 부르짖어도 주께서 듣지 아니하시니 어느 때까지리이까 내가 강포를 인하여 외쳐도 주께서 구원치 아니하시나이다","\"오 여호와여, \"사람 살려!\" 하고 아무리 외쳐도 주님은 들어 주지를 않으시고, \"사람 패 죽인다!\" 하고 소리를 질러도 주님은 구출해 주지를 않으시니, 이런 일이 언제까지 계속되어야 합니까?","How long, O LORD, must I cry for help and you do not listen? Or cry out to you, “Violence!” and you do not intervene?","O LORD, how long shall I cry, and thou wilt not hear! even cry out unto thee of violence, and thou wilt not save!","How long, O LORD, must I call for help, but you do not listen? Or cry out to you, \"Violence!\" but you do not save?","Usquequo, Domine, clamabo, et non exaudis? Vociferabor ad te:  “Violentia! “, et non salvas?","עד אנה יהוה שועתי ולא תשמע אזעק אליך חמס ולא תושיע׃"],["42","1","3","어찌하여 제가 불의를 보게 하십니까? 어찌하여 제가 재난을 바라보아야 합니까? 제 앞에는 억압과 폭력뿐 이느니 시비요 생기느니 싸움뿐입니다.","어인 일로 이렇듯이 애매한 일을 당하게 하시고 이 고생살이를 못 본 체하십니까? 보이느니 약탈과 억압뿐이요, 터지느니 시비와 말다툼뿐입니다.","어찌하여 내게 죄악을 보게 하시며 패역을 눈으로 보게 하시나이까 겁탈과 강포가 내 앞에 있고 변론과 분쟁이 일어났나이다","어찌하여 나로 간악을 보게 하시며 패역을 목도하게 하시나이까 대저 겁탈과 강포가 내 앞에 있고 변론과 분쟁이 일어났나이다","왜 나에게 악하고 거짓된 일들을 보게 하십니까? 왜 이토록 고통스러운 일들을 그저 보고만 계십니까? 이 나라에는 어디에나 탄압과 폭력이 가득차 있고, 싸움과 불화가 꼬리를 물고 일어납니다.","Why do you let me see iniquity? why do you simply gaze at evil? Destruction and violence are before me; there is strife and discord.","Why dost thou shew me iniquity, and cause me to behold grievance? for spoiling and violence are before me: and there are that raise up strife and contention.","Why do you make me look at injustice? Why do you tolerate wrong? Destruction and violence are before me; there is strife, and conflict abounds.","Quare ostendisti mihi iniquitatem et malitiam vides? Et vastitas et violentia est coram me, et facta est contentio, et iurgium exoritur.","למה תראני און ועמל תביט ושד וחמס לנגדי ויהי ריב ומדון ישא׃"],["42","1","4","그러니 법은 스러지고 공정은 영영 모습을 드러내지도 못합니다. 악인이 의인을 에워싸니 왜곡된 공정만 모습을 드러냅니다.","법은 땅에 떨어지고 정의는 끝내 무너졌습니다. 못된 자들이 착한 사람을 등쳐먹는 세상, 정의가 짓밟히는 세상이 되었습니다.\"","이러므로 율법이 해이하고 정의가 전혀 시행되지 못하오니 이는 악인이 의인을 에워쌌으므로 정의가 굽게 행하여짐이니이다","이러므로 율법이 해이하고 공의가 아주 시행되지 못하오니 이는 악인이 의인을 에워쌌으므로 공의가 굽게 행함이니이다","그렇기 때문에 주의 율법은 힘을 못 쓰고, 국가의 법은 효력을 나타내지 못합니다. 저 악인들이 이 땅의 의인들을 붙잡아 자기들의 폭력 밑에 가두어 놓았기 때문입니다. 그래서 정의가 짓밟히는 세상이 되었습니다.","This is why the law is numb and justice never comes, For the wicked surround the just; this is why justice comes forth perverted.","Therefore the law is slacked, and judgment doth never go forth: for the wicked doth compass about the righteous; therefore wrong judgment proceedeth.","Therefore the law is paralyzed, and justice never prevails. The wicked hem in the righteous, so that justice is perverted.","Propter hoc languet lex, et non pervenit usque ad finem iudicium. Quia impius praevalet adversus iustum, propterea egreditur iudicium perversum.","על כן תפוג תורה ולא יצא לנצח משפט כי רשע מכתיר את הצדיק על כן יצא משפט מעקל׃"],["42","1","5","너희는 민족들을 보고 또 바라보아라. 잘겁하고 또 질겁하여라. 너희 시대에 어떤 일이 이루어지리니 그것을 듣더라도 너희는 믿지 못하리라.","\"1)이 반역하는 무리들아, 똑똑히 보아라. 너희 생전에 놀라 질겁할 일이 벌어지리라. 귀를 의심할 만한 일이 일어나리라. 칠십인역을 따랐다.","여호와께서 이르시되 너희는 여러 나라를 보고 또 보고 놀라고 또 놀랄지어다 너희의 생전에 내가 한 가지 일을 행할 것이라 누가 너희에게 말할지라도 너희가 믿지 아니하리라","여호와께서 가라사대 너희는 열국을 보고 또 보고 놀라고 또 놀랄찌어다 너희 생전에 내가 한 일을 행할 것이라 혹이 너희에게 고할찌라도 너희가 믿지 아니하리라","너희 유다의 반역자들아, 너희는 똑똑히 보고 또 쳐다보고, 어안이 벙벙하여 서로 얼굴만 바라보며 기가 막히게 놀라라. 왜냐하면 내가 너희의 시대에 그토록 무서운 일을 할 것이기 때문이다. 이런 일은 누가 이야기를 해주어도 너희가 믿지 않을 것이니, 너희가 직접 보고 겪어야 할 것이다.","Look over the nations and see! Be utterly amazed! For a work is being done in your days that you would not believe, were it told.","Behold ye among the heathen, and regard, and wonder marvelously: for I will work a work in your days which ye will not believe, though it be told you.","\"Look at the nations and watch--and be utterly amazed. For I am going to do something in your days that you would not believe, even if you were told."," “Aspicite in gentibus et videte, admiramini et obstupescite, quia opus facio in diebus vestris, quod nemo credet, cum narrabitur.","ראו בגוים והביטו והתמהו תמהו כי פעל פעל בימיכם לא תאמינו כי יספר׃"],["42","1","6","이제 내가 사납고 격렬한 민족 칼데아인들을 일으키리니 그들은 넓은 세상으로 진군하여 남들이 사는 곳을 차지하리라.","보아라, 내가 바빌론을 일으키리니 그들은 사납고 날랜 족속이라, 남의 보금자리를 빼앗으며 천하를 주름잡는다.","보라 내가 사납고 성급한 백성 곧 땅이 넓은 곳으로 다니며 자기의 소유가 아닌 거처들을 점령하는 갈대아 사람을 일으켰나니","보라 내가 사납고 성급한 백성 곧 땅의 넓은 곳으로 다니며 자기의 소유 아닌 거할 곳들을 점령하는 갈대아 사람을 일으켰나니","내가 갈대아 백성을 새로운 세력으로 키우고 있다. 그 포학하고 성급한 족속을, 점점 더 넓은 세상으로 진출하며 다른 나라들을 정복하는 그 족속을 바로 내가 있으켜 세우고 있다.","For now I am raising up the Chaldeans, that bitter and impulsive people, Who march the breadth of the land to take dwellings not their own.","For, lo, I raise up the Chaldeans, that bitter and hasty nation, which shall march through the breadth of the land, to possess the dwellingplaces that are not their's.","I am raising up the Babylonians, that ruthless and impetuous people, who sweep across the whole earth to seize dwelling places not their own.","Quia ecce ego suscitabo Chaldaeos, gentem amaram et velocem, ambulantem super latitudinem terrae, ut possideat tabernacula non sua.","כי הנני מקים את הכשדים הגוי המר והנמהר ההולך למרחבי ארץ לרשת משכנות לא לו׃"],["42","1","7","그들은 두렵고 무서운 민족 법과 권위를 멋대로 내세운다.","제 힘을 믿고 멋대로 법을 세우는 무섭고도 영악한 족속이다.","그들은 두렵고 무서우며 당당함과 위엄이 자기들에게서 나오며","그들은 두렵고 무서우며 심판과 위령이 자기로 말미암으며","그들은 잔인하고 무서운 자들이며 자기들이 좋아하는 대로 행동한다. 어느 누구도 간섭할 수가 없다.","They are terrifying and dreadful; their right and their exalted position are of their own making.","They are terrible and dreadful: their judgment and their dignity shall proceed of themselves.","They are a feared and dreaded people; they are a law to themselves and promote their own honor.","Horribilis et terribilis est, ex semetipsa iudicium eius et maiestas eius egredietur.","אים ונורא הוא ממנו משפטו ושאתו יצא׃"],["42","1","8","그들의 말들은 표범보다 날렵하고 저녁 이리보다 민첩하며 그 군마들은 당당히 내달린다. 기병들은 먼 곳에서 달려온다. 먹이를 덮치는 독수리처럼 잽싸게 날아온다.","표범보다도 날래고 저녁에 나오는 늑대보다도 사나운 말을 탄 기병들이 먼 곳으로부터 먹이를 찾아 덮치는 독수리같이","그들의 군마는 표범보다 빠르고 저녁 이리보다 사나우며 그들의 마병은 먼 곳에서부터 빨리 달려오는 마병이라 마치 먹이를 움키려 하는 독수리의 날음과 같으니라","그 말은 표범보다 빠르고 저녁 이리보다 사나우며 그 기병은 원방에서부터 빨리 달려오는 기병이라 마치 식물을 움키려하는 독수리의 날음과 같으니라","그 족속의 군마들은 표범들보다 더 빠르고 초원지대의 늑대들보다 더 민첩하다. 그 족속의 기마병들이 먼 곳에서 달려오는 모습은 짐승을 잡아먹으려고 내리 덮치는 독수리와 같다.","Swifter than leopards are their horses, and faster than desert wolves. Their horses spring forward; they come from far away; they fly like an eagle hastening to devour.","Their horses also are swifter than the leopards, and are more fierce than the evening wolves: and their horsemen shall spread themselves, and their horsemen shall come from far; they shall fly as the eagle that hasteth to eat.","Their horses are swifter than leopards, fiercer than wolves at dusk. Their cavalry gallops headlong; their horsemen come from afar. They fly like a vulture swooping to devour;","Leviores pardis equi eius et saeviores lupis deserti; et accurrunt equites eius: equites namque eius de longe venient, volabunt quasi aquila festinans ad comedendum.","וקלו מנמרים סוסיו וחדו מזאבי ערב ופשו פרשיו ופרשיו מרחוק יבאו יעפו כנשר חש לאכול׃"],["42","1","9","얼굴은 모두 앞을 향하고 저마다 폭력을 휘두르러 와서는 포로들을 모래알처럼 모아 놓는다.","닥치는 대로 휩쓸려고 전군을 휘몰아온다. 얼굴마다 열풍 같은 노기를 띠고 포로들을 끌어다 모랫더미처럼 쌓는다.","그들은 다 강포를 행하러 오는데 앞을 향하여 나아가며 사람을 사로잡아 모으기를 모래 같이 많이 할 것이요","그들은 다 강포를 행하러 오는데 앞을 향하여 나아가며 사람을 사로잡아 모으기를 모래 같이 많이 할 것이요","그들은 모두 다 폭력을 휘두르려고 몰려온다. 열풍처럼 흥분된 얼굴로 달려들어 포로들을 모래알처럼 몰아다가 모아 놓을 것이다.","All of them come for violence, their combined onslaught, a stormwind to gather up captives like sand.","They shall come all for violence: their faces shall sup up as the east wind, and they shall gather the captivity as the sand.","they all come bent on violence. Their hordes advance like a desert wind and gather prisoners like sand.","Omnes, ut violentiam faciant, venient, omnes facies eorum ventus urens; et congregabunt quasi arenam captivos.","כלה לחמס יבוא מגמת פניהם קדימה ויאסף כחול שבי׃"],["42","1","10","그들은 임금들을 업신여기고 통치자들을 비웃는다. 어떤 성채도 우습게 여기며 흙을 쌓아 그것을 점령한다.","고관쯤은 우습게 여기고 임금은 노리개로 삼으며, 그 어떤 성채건 하찮게 여기고 토성을 쌓아 점령하리니","왕들을 멸시하며 방백을 조소하며 모든 견고한 성들을 비웃고 흉벽을 쌓아 그것을 점령할 것이라","열왕을 멸시하며 방백을 치소하며 모든 견고한 성을 비웃고 흉벽을 쌓아 그것을 취할 것이라","그들은 만백성의 왕들을 조롱하며 고관들을 웃음거리로 밖에 여기지 않는다. 어떤 요새든지 하찮게 여기고 어느 성읍이든지 성벽에 흙무더기를 쌓고 넘어가서 점령해 버린다.","They scoff at kings, ridicule princes; They laugh at any fortress, heap up an earthen ramp, and conquer it.","And they shall scoff at the kings, and the princes shall be a scorn unto them: they shall deride every strong hold; for they shall heap dust, and take it.","They deride kings and scoff at rulers. They laugh at all fortified cities; they build earthen ramps and capture them.","Et ipsa reges subsannabit, tyrannis illudet; ipsa super omnem munitionem ridebit et comportabit aggerem et capiet eam.","והוא במלכים יתקלס ורזנים משחק לו הוא לכל מבצר ישחק ויצבר עפר וילכדה׃"],["42","1","11","그러나 제 힘을 하느님으로 여겨 죄를 지은 자들 그들은 바람처럼 지나가 사라지리라.","제 힘을 하느님처럼 믿다가 죄를 지은 자들은 바람에 날려가듯 사라지리라.\"","그들은 자기들의 힘을 자기들의 신으로 삼는 자들이라 이에 바람 같이 급히 몰아 지나치게 행하여 범죄하리라","그들은 그 힘으로 자기 신을 삼는 자라 이에 바람 같이 급히 몰아 지나치게 행하여 득죄하리라","그들은 폭풍처럼 휩쓸고 지나가서, 더 먼 곳으로 쳐들어간다. 자기의 힘을 자신의 하나님으로 삼은 죄가 이제 그들에게도 있다.","Then they sweep through like the wind and vanish— they make their own strength their god!","Then shall his mind change, and he shall pass over, and offend, imputing this his power unto his god.","Then they sweep past like the wind and go on--guilty men, whose own strength is their god.\"","Tunc ultra progrediens quasi ventus pertransibit et constituet fortitudinem suam deum suum “.","אז חלף רוח ויעבר ואשם זו כחו לאלהו׃"],["42","1","12","주님, 당신은 옛날부터 불멸하시는 저의 하느님, 저의 거룩하신 분이 아니셨습니까? 주님, 당신께서는 심판하시려고 그를 내세우셨습니다. 바위시여, 당신께서는 벌하시려고 그를 세우셨습니다.","\"야훼여, 당신께서는 애초부터 나의 하느님, 이 몸은 하느님의 것인데, 죽을 리야 있겠습니까? 그러나 야훼여, 어찌하여 2)그들을 재판관으로 세우셨습니까? 나의 바위여, 어찌하여 그들을 채찍으로 삼아 벌하십니까? 바빌론을 말한다.","선지자가 이르되 여호와 나의 하나님, 나의 거룩한 이시여 주께서는 만세 전부터 계시지 아니하시니이까 우리가 사망에 이르지 아니하리이다 여호와여 주께서 심판하기 위하여 그들을 두셨나이다 반석이시여 주께서 경계하기 위하여 그들을 세우셨나이다","선지가 가로되 여호와 나의 하나님, 나의 거룩한 자시여 주께서는 만세 전부터 계시지 아니하시니이까 우리가 사망에 이르지 아니하리이다 여호와여 주께서 심판하기 위하여 그를 두셨나이다 반석이시여 주께서 경계하기 위하여 그를 세우셨나이다","여호와여, 주님은 영원히 살아 계신 나의 하나님이시요, 우리의 거룩한 주님이시오니 우리는 결코 죽지 않을 것입니다. 여호와여, 유다 백성을 심판하려고 주께서 갈대아 족속을 세우셨습니다. 오 나의 바위시여, 유다 백성을 징계하려고 주께서 저 족속을 불러오셨습니다.","Are you not from of old, O LORD, my holy God, immortal? LORD, you have appointed them for judgment, O Rock, you have set them in place to punish!","Art thou not from everlasting, O LORD my God, mine Holy One? we shall not die. O LORD, thou hast ordained them for judgment; and, O mighty God, thou hast established them for correction.","O LORD, are you not from everlasting? My God, my Holy One, we will not die. O LORD, you have appointed them to execute judgment; O Rock, you have ordained them to punish.","Numquid non tu a principio, Domine, Deus meus, sanctus meus, qui non morieris? Domine, ad iudicium posuisti eam; petra mea, ad corripiendum fundasti eam.","הלוא אתה מקדם יהוה אלהי קדשי לא נמות יהוה למשפט שמתו וצור להוכיח יסדתו׃"],["42","1","13","당신께서는 눈이 맑으시어 악을 보아 넘기지 못하시고 잘못을 그대로 바라보지 못하시면서 어찌하여 배신자들을 바라보고만 계시며 악인이 자기보다 의로운 이를 집어삼켜도 잠자코 계십니까?","주께서는 눈이 맑으시어 남을 못살게 구는 못된 자들을 그대로 보아 넘기지 않으시면서 어찌 배신자들은 못 본 체하십니까? 나쁜 자들이 착한 사람을 때려잡는데 잠자코 계십니까?","주께서는 눈이 정결하시므로 악을 차마 보지 못하시며 패역을 차마 보지 못하시거늘 어찌하여 거짓된 자들을 방관하시며 악인이 자기보다 의로운 사람을 삼키는데도 잠잠하시나이까","주께서는 눈이 정결하시므로 악을 참아 보지 못하시며 패역을 참아 보지 못하시거늘 어찌하여 궤휼한 자들을 방관하시며 악인이 자기보다 의로운 사람을 삼키되 잠잠하시나이까","주의 두 눈은 진실로 너무나 깨끗해서 악한 일을 구경만 하지 못하시며, 사람들이 고문과 학살을 당할 때에 그저 보고만 계실 수가 없습니다. 그런데 어찌하여 주님은 저 민족의 반역자들을 방관만 하시며, 악인들이 자기들보다 훨씬 더 의롭고 선한 사람들을 삼켜 버릴 때에, 왜 주님은 가만히 계십니까?","Your eyes are too pure to look upon wickedness, and the sight of evil you cannot endure. Why, then, do you gaze on the faithless in silence while the wicked devour those more just than themselves?","Thou art of purer eyes than to behold evil, and canst not look on iniquity: wherefore lookest thou upon them that deal treacherously, and holdest thy tongue when the wicked devoureth the man that is more righteous than he?","Your eyes are too pure to look on evil; you cannot tolerate wrong. Why then do you tolerate the treacherous? Why are you silent while the wicked swallow up those more righteous than themselves?","Mundi sunt oculi tui, ne videas malum; et respicere ad iniquitatem non poteris. Quare respicis super inique agentes et taces, devorante impio iustiorem se?","טהור עינים מראות רע והביט אל עמל לא תוכל למה תביט בוגדים תחריש בבלע רשע צדיק ממנו׃"],["42","1","14","당신께서는 사람을 바다의 물고기처럼 만드시고 우두머리 없이 기어 다니는 것처럼 만드셨습니다.","어찌하여 사람을 바다 고기로 만드시고 왕초 없는 벌레로 만드시어","주께서 어찌하여 사람을 바다의 고기 같게 하시며 다스리는 자 없는 벌레 같게 하시나이까","주께서 어찌하여 사람으로 바다의 어족 같게 하시며 주권자 없는 곤충 같게 하시나이까","어찌하여 주님은 저 갈대아 사람들이 몰려와서 우리 민족을 바닷속의 물고기 떼처럼 취급하고 또 지도자도 없는 벌레들과 같이 다루는 것을 허용하십니까?","You have made mortals like the fish in the sea, like creeping things without a leader.","And makest men as the fishes of the sea, as the creeping things, that have no ruler over them?","You have made men like fish in the sea, like sea creatures that have no ruler.","Fecisti homines quasi pisces maris, quasi reptile non habens principem super se.","ותעשה אדם כדגי הים כרמש לא משל בו׃"],["42","1","15","그는 사람들을 모두 낚시로 낚아 올리고 그물로 끌어 올리며 좽이로 모으고 나서는 기뻐 날뛰며","그자들의 낚시에 걸리게 하십니까? 그물을 쳐서 사람을 끌어내고 좽이로 사람을 잡아내고는 좋아 날뛰며","그가 낚시로 모두 낚으며 그물로 잡으며 투망으로 모으고 그리고는 기뻐하고 즐거워하여","그가 낚시로 모두 취하며 그물로 잡으며 초망으로 모으고 인하여 기뻐하고 즐거워하여","저 갈대아 사람들은 낚시를 들고 우리 민족을 물고기처럼 잡아 올리며 우리를 모두 그물에 몰아넣고 끌어갑니다. 그들은 어부처럼 우리 민족이 모조리 걸려들 물목에 어망을 쳐놓아 물고기를 잡아 모으듯이 하고, 그것이 좋아서 날뛰고 있습니다.","He brings them all up with a hook, and hauls them away with his net; He gathers them in his fishing net, and then rejoices and exults.","They take up all of them with the angle, they catch them in their net, and gather them in their drag: therefore they rejoice and are glad.","The wicked foe pulls all of them up with hooks, he catches them in his net, he gathers them up in his dragnet; and so he rejoices and is glad.","Omnes in hamo sublevat, trahit eos in sagena sua et congregat in rete suo; super hoc laetatur et exsultat.","כלה בחכה העלה יגרהו בחרמו ויאספהו במכמרתו על כן ישמח ויגיל׃"],["42","1","16","자기 그물에다 제물을 바치고 좽이에다 분향을 합니다. 그것들 덕분에 그의 몫이 기름지고 음식이 풍성하기 때문입니다.","그물 덕분에 기름지고 살진 것을 먹는다고 그물에다 고사를 지내고 좽이에다 분향하는 자들입니다.","그물에 제사하며 투망 앞에 분향하오니 이는 그것을 힘입어 소득이 풍부하고 먹을 것이 풍성하게 됨이니이다","그물에 제사하며 초망 앞에 분향하오니 이는 그것을 힘입어 소득이 풍부하고 식물이 풍성케 됨이니이다","그럴 때마다 저들은 그물에다 고사를 지내고 어망에다 분향을 합니다. 그런 것들 덕분에 그들이 풍성한 전리품을 얻고, 점점 더 잘먹고 잘살게 되기 때문입니다.","Therefore he makes sacrifices to his net, and burns incense to his fishing net; For thanks to them his portion is rich, and his meal lavish.","Therefore they sacrifice unto their net, and burn incense unto their drag; because by them their portion is fat, and their meat plenteous.","Therefore he sacrifices to his net and burns incense to his dragnet, for by his net he lives in luxury and enjoys the choicest food.","Propterea immolat sagenae suae et sacrificat reti suo, quia in ipsis incrassata est portio eius, et cibus eius pinguis.","על כן יזבח לחרמו ויקטר למכמרתו כי בהמה שמן חלקו ומאכלו בראה׃"],["42","1","17","이렇게 그가 줄곧 그물을 비워 대고 민족들을 무자비하게 죽여도 됩니까?","그 모양으로 늘 칼을 빼어들고 무자비하게 뭇 민족을 죽이는 자들입니다.\"","그가 그물을 떨고는 계속하여 여러 나라를 무자비하게 멸망시키는 것이 옳으니이까","그가 그물을 떨고는 연하여 늘 열국을 살륙함이 옳으니이까","이런 식으로 그들이 끊임없이 그물을 쳐서 뭇 백성을 잡아다가 무자비하게 학살하여야 옳겠습니까?","Shall they, then, keep on drawing his sword to slaughter nations without mercy?","Shall they therefore empty their net, and not spare continually to slay the nations?","Is he to keep on emptying his net, destroying nations without mercy?","Propter hoc ergo evaginabit gladium suum semper, ut interficiat gentes sine misericordia?","העל כן יריק חרמו ותמיד להרג גוים לא יחמול׃"],["42","2","1","나는 내 초소에 서서, 성벽 위에 자리 잡고서 살펴보리라. 그분께서 나에게 무어라 말씀하시는지, 내 하소연에 어떻게 대답하시는지 보리라.","\"내가 던진 질문에 무슨 말로 대답하실지 내 초소에 버티고 서서 기다려보리라. 눈에 불을 켜고 망대에 서서 기다려보리라.\" 하였더니","내가 내 파수하는 곳에 서며 성루에 서리라 그가 내게 무엇이라 말씀하실는지 기다리고 바라보며 나의 질문에 대하여 어떻게 대답하실는지 보리라 하였더니","내가 내 파수하는 곳에 서며 성루에 서리라 그가 내게 무엇이라 말씀하실는지 기다리고 바라보며 나의 질문에 대하여 1)어떻게 대답하실는지 보리라 그리하였더니 나로 어떻게 대답하게 하실는지","나는 내 경계 초소에 서 있을 작정입니다. 나는 초소 위에 올라서서 주님이 내게 무슨 말씀을 하실지, 나의 탄식에 대하여 주님이 무슨 답변을 하실지 기다리기 위하여 먼 곳을 바라보고 있겠습니다.\" 내가 이렇게 결심하였더니","I will stand at my guard post, and station myself upon the rampart; I will keep watch to see what he will say to me, and what answer he will give to my complaint.","I will stand upon my watch, and set me upon the tower, and will watch to see what he will say unto me, and what I shall answer when I am reproved.","I will stand at my watch and station myself on the ramparts; I will look to see what he will say to me, and what answer I am to give to this complaint.","Super custodiam meam stabo et consistam super speculam et contemplabor, ut videam quid dicat mihi et quid respondeat ad querelam meam.","על משמרתי אעמדה ואתיצבה על מצור ואצפה לראות מה ידבר בי ומה אשיב על תוכחתי׃"],["42","2","2","주님께서 나에게 대답하셨다. “너는 환시를 기록하여라. 누구나 막힘없이 읽어 갈 수 있도록 판에다 분명하게 써라.”","야훼께서 이렇게 대답하셨다. \"네가 받은 말을 누구나 알아보도록 판에 새겨두어라.","여호와께서 내게 대답하여 이르시되 너는 이 묵시를 기록하여 판에 명백히 새기되 달려가면서도 읽을 수 있게 하라","여호와께서 내게 대답하여 가라사대 너는 이 묵시를 기록하여 판에 명백히 새기되 달려 가면서도 읽을 수 있게하라","여호와께서 내게 이같이 대답하셨다. \"내가 이제 네게 보여주는 것을 여러 서판에 명백히 써서 공개하여 그것을 누구나 대번에 읽고 다른 사람들에게 전할 수 있도록 하여라!","Then the LORD answered me and said: Write down the vision; Make it plain upon tablets, so that the one who reads it may run.","And the LORD answered me, and said, Write the vision, and make it plain upon tables, that he may run that readeth it.","Then the LORD replied: \"Write down the revelation and make it plain on tablets so that a herald may run with it.","Et respondit mihi Dominus et dixit:  “Scribe visum et explana eum super tabulas, ut percurrat, qui legerit eum.","ויענני יהוה ויאמר כתוב חזון ובאר על הלחות למען ירוץ קורא בו׃"],["42","2","3","지금 이 환시는 정해진 때를 기다린다. 끝을 향해 치닫는 이 환시는 거짓말하지 않는다. 늦어지는 듯하더라도 너는 기다려라. 그것은 오고야 만다, 지체하지 않는다.","네가 본 일은 때가 되면 이루어진다. 끝날은 반드시 찾아온다. 쉬 오지 않더라도 기다려라. 기어이 오고야 만다.","이 묵시는 정한 때가 있나니 그 종말이 속히 이르겠고 결코 거짓되지 아니하리라 비록 더딜지라도 기다리라 지체되지 않고 반드시 응하리라","이 묵시는 정한 때가 있나니 그 종말이 속히 이르겠고 결코 거짓되지 아니하리라 비록 더딜찌라도 기다리라 지체되지 않고 정녕 응하리라","왜냐하면, 내가 지금 네게 보여주는 계획들이 아직도 정해진 시각을 향하여 가고 있기 때문이다. 이 계획들은 느리지만 꾸준하고 확실하게 이루어질 그 시각을 향하여 달리고 있으니 절대로 실망을 시키지 않을 것이다. 그 성취가 느리고 지체되더라도 꾸준히 기다려라. 그 시각은 틀림없이 올 것이다. 단 하루도 넘기지 않을 것이다.","For the vision is a witness for the appointed time, a testimony to the end; it will not disappoint. If it delays, wait for it, it will surely come, it will not be late.","For the vision is yet for an appointed time, but at the end it shall speak, and not lie: though it tarry, wait for it; because it will surely come, it will not tarry.","For the revelation awaits an appointed time; it speaks of the end and will not prove false. Though it linger, wait for it; it will certainly come and will not delay.","Quia adhuc visus ad tempus constitutum, sed anhelat in finem et non mentietur; si moram fecerit, exspecta illum, quia veniens veniet et non tardabit.","כי עוד חזון למועד ויפח לקץ ולא יכזב אם יתמהמה חכה לו כי בא יבא לא יאחר׃"],["42","2","4","보라, 뻔뻔스러운 자를. 그의 정신은 바르지 않다. 그러나 의인은 성실함으로 산다.","멋대로 설치지 마라. 나는 그런 사람을 옳게 여기지 않는다. 그러나 의로운 사람은 그의 신실함으로써 살리라.\"","보라 그의 마음은 교만하며 그 속에서 정직하지 못하나 의인은 그의 믿음으로 말미암아 살리라","보라 그의 마음은 교만하며 그의 속에서 정직하지 못하니라 그러나 의인은 2)그 믿음으로 말미암아 살리라 진실함으로","이 사실을 깨달아라. ㄱ) 악한 사람들은 제멋대로 허풍을 떨다가 멸망하지만, 의로운 사람은 진실하게 나를 의지하기 때문에 살 수가 있다. (ㄱ. \"그(저 갈대아 사람)의 마음은(교만으로 가득 차서) 부풀어 있고 그 속에 성실함이 없다. 그러나 의인은 자신의 진실함으로써 살 수가 있다!\"라고 번역하는 것이 원문에 더 가깝다)","See, the rash have no integrity; but the just one who is righteous because of faith shall live.","Behold, his soul which is lifted up is not upright in him: but the just shall live by his faith.","\"See, he is puffed up; his desires are not upright--but the righteous will live by his faith--","Ecce languidus, in quo non est anima recta; iustus autem in fide sua vivet “.","הנה עפלה לא ישרה נפשו בו וצדיק באמונתו יחיה׃"],["42","2","5","참으로 재물은 믿을 수 없다. 거만한 사람은 견디어 낼 수 없다. 저승처럼 목구멍을 넓게 벌린 그자는 죽음과 같아 만족할 줄 모르고 모든 민족들을 끌어들이며 모든 백성들을 모아들인다.","재물은 조금도 믿을 것이 못 된다. 돈이 있다고 우쭐대다가는 나둥그러지리라. 목구멍은 죽음의 구렁처럼 삼켜도 삼켜도 성차지 않아 뭇 민족을 끌어들이고 만백성을 모아들였건만,","그는 술을 즐기며 거짓되고 교만하여 가만히 있지 아니하고 스올처럼 자기의 욕심을 넓히며 또 그는 사망 같아서 족한 줄을 모르고 자기에게로 여러 나라를 모으며 여러 백성을 모으나니","그는 술을 즐기며 궤휼하며 교만하여 가만히 있지 아니하고 그 욕심을 음부처럼 넓히며 또 그는 사망 같아서 족한줄을 모르고 자기에게로 만국을 모으며 만민을 모으나니","그런데 저 갈대아의 폭행자들이, 저 강도 떼들이, 건방지게 힘만을 믿고서 으쓱대는 것들이 모든 민족들을 모아다가 자기들의 것으로 삼고 또 모든 백성들을 몰아다가 자기들에게 붙여 놓았다. 진실로 그들은 죽은 자들의 세계처럼 넓은 목구멍을 벌리고 또 주검처럼 만족할 줄 모르기 때문에 절대로 만족한 상태에 도달할 수가 없다.","Indeed wealth is treacherous; a proud man does not succeed. He who opens wide his throat like Sheol, and is insatiable as death, Who gathers to himself all the nations, and collects for himself all the peoples—","Yea also, because he transgresseth by wine, he is a proud man, neither keepeth at home, who enlargeth his desire as hell, and is as death, and cannot be satisfied, but gathereth unto him all nations, and heapeth unto him all people:","indeed, wine betrays him; he is arrogant and never at rest. Because he is as greedy as the grave and like death is never satisfied, he gathers to himself all the nations and takes captive all the peoples.","Et profecto divitiae decipiunt virum superbum, et non perveniet ad finem; qui dilatat quasi infernus fauces suas et ipse quasi mors et non adimpletur: et congregat ad se omnes gentes et coacervat ad se omnes populos.","ואף כי היין בוגד גבר יהיר ולא ינוה אשר הרחיב כשאול נפשו והוא כמות ולא ישבע ויאסף אליו כל הגוים ויקבץ אליו כל העמים׃"],["42","2","6","그러나 이들은 모두 그를 두고 조롱의 노래를 부르고 이렇게 그를 비웃는 수수께끼를 지어 내지 않겠느냐? 불행하여라, 남의 것을 긁어모으고 담보로 잡은 것을 쌓아 두는 자! 언제까지 그러할 셈인가?","그들이 모두 풍자시로 비웃으며 조롱하는 시로 욕설을 퍼부으리라.1) \"화를 입으리라! 남의 것을 먼지까지 긁어 모으고 남의 것을 전당잡아 치부하는 것들아, 이하에 나오는 욕설들은 피정복자들이 정복자를 두고 하는 말인 듯하다.","그 무리가 다 속담으로 그를 평론하며 조롱하는 시로 그를 풍자하지 않겠느냐 곧 이르기를 화 있을진저 자기 소유 아닌 것을 모으는 자여 언제까지 이르겠느냐 볼모 잡은 것으로 무겁게 짐진 자여","그 무리가 다 속담으로 그를 평론하며 조롱하는 시로 그를 풍자하지 않겠느냐 곧 이르기를 화 있을찐저 자기 소유 아닌 것을 모으는 자여 언제까지 이르겠느냐 볼모잡은 것으로 무겁게 짐진 자여","오히려 세계 만민들이 그 탄압자들의 폭행에 대하여 비웃는 노래를 부르고 또 그들을 멸시하고 저주하는 시를 짓지 않겠느냐?  네게 정복당한 백성들은 외칠 것이다. 너희가 다른 민족의 재산을 강탈해 가져다가 쌓아 두었으니 죽음과 멸망의 저주를 받아라! 너희가 언제까지 그런 짓을 계속할 작정이냐? 너희는 세계 만민들을 너희의 채무자들처럼 취급하면서, 그들의 물건을 마음대로 집어가 버렸다.","Shall not all these take up a taunt against him, and make a riddle about him, saying: Ah! you who store up what is not yours —how long can it last!— you who load yourself down with collateral.","Shall not all these take up a parable against him, and a taunting proverb against him, and say, Woe to him that increaseth that which is not his! how long? and to him that ladeth himself with thick clay!","\"Will not all of them taunt him with ridicule and scorn, saying, \"'Woe to him who piles up stolen goods and makes himself wealthy by extortion! How long must this go on?'","Numquid non omnes isti super eum parabolam sument et loquelam aenigmatum dicentes:  “Vae ei, qui multiplicat non sua ? usquequo? C et aggravat pignora super se! “.","הלוא אלה כלם עליו משל ישאו ומליצה חידות לו ויאמר הוי המרבה לא לו עד מתי ומכביד עליו עבטיט׃"],["42","2","7","갑자기 너의 빚쟁이들이 일어나고 너를 떨게 하는 자들이 깨어나지 않겠느냐? 그러면 너는 그들의 약탈물이 되리라.","빚쟁이들이 갑자기 달려들 날이 오리라. 너에게 시달리던 자들이 머리를 쳐들고 너를 털 날이 오고야 말리라.","너를 억누를 자들이 갑자기 일어나지 않겠느냐 너를 괴롭힐 자들이 깨어나지 않겠느냐 네가 그들에게 노략을 당하지 않겠느냐","너를 물 자들이 홀연히 일어나지 않겠느냐 너를 괴롭게 할 자들이 깨지 않겠느냐 네가 그들에게 노략을 당하지 않겠느냐","그러나 이 착취를 당한 자들이 아주 돌연히 일어나지 않겠느냐? 너희를 벌벌 떨게할 자들이 깨어나지 않겠느냐? 그때에는 너희 강도 떼들이 모조리 털리고 말 것이다.","Will your debtors not rise suddenly? Will they not awake, those who make you tremble? You will become their spoil!","Shall they not rise up suddenly that shall bite thee, and awake that shall vex thee, and thou shalt be for booties unto them?","Will not your debtors suddenly arise? Will they not wake up and make you tremble? Then you will become their victim.","Numquid non repente consurgent, qui mordeant te, et evigilabunt agitantes te, et eris in rapinam eis?","הלוא פתע יקומו נשכיך ויקצו מזעזעיך והיית למשסות למו׃"],["42","2","8","네가 수많은 민족을 강탈하였으니 살아남은 모든 백성이 너를 강탈하리라. 네가 사람의 피를 흘리고 세상과 성읍과 그 주민들에게 폭력을 휘두른 탓이다.","그토록 수많은 백성을 털었으니, 그 남은 백성에게 이제는 너희가 털리리라. 죄없는 사람을 죽이고 마을을 짓밟고 성읍마다 쳐들어가 주민들을 무찌른 탓이다.","네가 여러 나라를 노략하였으므로 그 모든 민족의 남은 자가 너를 노략하리니 이는 네가 사람의 피를 흘렸음이요 또 땅과 성읍과 그 안의 모든 주민에게 강포를 행하였음이니라","네가 여러 나라를 노략하였으므로 그 모든 민족의 남은 자가 너를 노략하리니 이는 네가 사람의 피를 흘렸음이요 또 땅에, 성읍에, 그 안의 모든 거민에게 강포를 행하였음이니라 하리라","너희가 수많은 백성들을 약탈하였으니, 그때에는 그들의 남은 자들이 모두 너희를 약탈할 것이다. 그러면 너희가 모든 나라와 모든 도성에 들어가 흘리게 한 사람들의 피와 주민들에게 행한 폭력 통치에 대하여 보복을 받을 것이다!","Because you plundered many nations, the remaining peoples shall plunder you; Because of the shedding of human blood, and violence done to the land, to the city and to all who live in it.","Because thou hast spoiled many nations, all the remnant of the people shall spoil thee; because of men's blood, and for the violence of the land, of the city, and of all that dwell therein.","Because you have plundered many nations, the peoples who are left will plunder you. For you have shed man's blood; you have destroyed lands and cities and everyone in them.","Quia tu spoliasti gentes multas, spoliabunt te omnes, qui reliqui fuerint de populis; propter sanguinem hominum et oppressionem terrae, civitatum et omnium habitantium in eis.","כי אתה שלות גוים רבים ישלוך כל יתר עמים מדמי אדם וחמס ארץ קריה וכל ישבי בה׃"],["42","2","9","불행하여라, 자기 집안을 위하여 부당한 이득을 취하고 재앙의 손길에서 벗어나려고 높은 곳에 둥지를 트는 자!","화를 입으리라. 저만 잘 살겠다고 남을 등쳐먹는 것들아, 재앙의 소용돌이에서 벗어나려고 높은 곳에 둥지를 틀었지만","재앙을 피하기 위하여 높은 데 깃들이려 하며 자기 집을 위하여 부당한 이익을 취하는 자에게 화 있을진저","재앙을 피하기 위하여 높은데 깃들이려 하며 자기 집을 위하여 불의의 이를 취하는 자에게 화 있을찐저","너희가 불의한 수단으로 재산을 늘렸으니 죽음과 멸망의 저주를 받아라! 그런 재산이 너희와 너희 후손들에게 전혀 도움을 주지 못한다. 너희는 독수리처럼 높은 곳에 집을 짓고, 누구도 손댈 수 없이 안전한 곳에 산다고 생각한다.","Ah! you who pursue evil gain for your household, setting your nest on high to escape the reach of misfortune!","Woe to him that coveteth an evil covetousness to his house, that he may set his nest on high, that he may be delivered from the power of evil!","\"Woe to him who builds his realm by unjust gain to set his nest on high, to escape the clutches of ruin!","Vae, qui congregat lucrum iniustum in malum domui suae, ut ponat in excelso nidum suum et salvet se de manu mali!","הוי בצע בצע רע לביתו לשום במרום קנו להנצל מכף רע׃"],["42","2","10","네가 수많은 민족을 멸망시키며 꾀한 것이 네 집안에 수치가 되고 너 자신에게도 죄가 되었다.","너희가 꾸민 것은 패가망신할 일뿐, 뭇 백성을 망치다가 죄를 받게 되었다.","네가 많은 민족을 멸한 것이 네 집에 욕을 부르며 네 영혼에게 죄를 범하게 하는 것이 되었도다","네가 여러 민족을 멸한 것이 네 집에 욕을 부르며 너로 네 영혼에게 죄를 범하게 하는 것이 되었도다","그러나 너희는 수많은 민족들을 멸절시킴으로써 너희의 집안을 수치스럽게 파멸시키고 너희의 생명을 위험에 빠뜨릴 궁리를 하였다.","You have devised shame for your household, cutting off many peoples, forfeiting your own life;","Thou hast consulted shame to thy house by cutting off many people, and hast sinned against thy soul.","You have plotted the ruin of many peoples, shaming your own house and forfeiting your life.","Consilium cepisti in confusionem domui tuae concidendi populos multos et peccasti in animam tuam.","יעצת בשת לביתך קצות עמים רבים וחוטא נפשך׃"],["42","2","11","벽에서 돌이 울부짖으면 골조에서 들보가 대답하리라.","담벼락 돌이 원수갚아 달라고 울부짖으면, 집 안에선 들보가 맞장구치리라.","담에서 돌이 부르짖고 집에서 들보가 응답하리라","담에서 돌이 부르짖고 집에서 들보가 응답하리라","너희가 지은 집의 벽에 박힌 돌들도 소리질러 너희의 불법을 고발하고 지붕의 서까래들도 그 말이 옳다고 답변을 한다.","For the stone in the wall shall cry out, and the beam in the frame shall answer it!","For the stone shall cry out of the wall, and the beam out of the timber shall answer it.","The stones of the wall will cry out, and the beams of the woodwork will echo it.","Quia lapis de pariete clamabit, et trabes de contignatione respondebit ei.","כי אבן מקיר תזעק וכפיס מעץ יעננה׃"],["42","2","12","불행하여라, 피로 성읍을 세우고 불의로 성을 쌓는 자!","화를 입으리라. 죄없는 사람의 피를 빨아 성읍을 세우는 것들아, 남의 진액을 짜서 성을 쌓는 것들아,","피로 성읍을 건설하며 불의로 성을 건축하는 자에게 화 있을진저","피로 읍을 건설하며 불의로 성을 건축하는 자에게 화 있을찐저","너희가 살인과 강탈로 돈을 벌어다가 성읍들을 건설하였으니 죽음과 멸망의 저주를 받아라!","Ah! you who build a city by bloodshed, and who establish a town with injustice!","Woe to him that buildeth a town with blood, and stablisheth a city by iniquity!","\"Woe to him who builds a city with bloodshed and establishes a town by crime!","Vae, qui aedificat civitatem in sanguinibus et condit urbem in iniquitate!","הוי בנה עיר בדמים וכונן קריה בעולה׃"],["42","2","13","백성들이 애써 한 일이 불에 타 버리고 민족들이 힘들여 한 일이 쓸모없게 된 것은 만군의 주님의 뜻이 아니겠느냐?","뭇 민족이 일껏 쌓은 것이 불타버리고 뭇 종족이 애써 세운 것이 허사가 되리니 이것이 바로 만군의 야훼께서 하시는 일 아니냐?","민족들이 불탈 것으로 수고하는 것과 나라들이 헛된 일로 피곤하게 되는 것이 만군의 여호와께로 말미암음이 아니냐","민족들이 불 탈 것으로 수고하는 것과 열국이 헛된 일로 곤비하게 되는 것이 만군의 여호와께로서 말미암음이 아니냐","민족들이 불에 타없어질 것들을 위하여 피곤하게 일하고 나라들이 공허한 것들을 위하여 국력을 다 쓰게 되는데, 이런 것들이 바로 온 세계의 주인이신 하나님 여호와로부터 말미암은 것임을 너희는 눈치 채지 못하느냐?","Is this not from the LORD of hosts: peoples toil for what the flames consume, and nations grow weary for nothing!","Behold, is it not of the LORD of hosts that the people shall labour in the very fire, and the people shall weary themselves for very vanity?","Has not the LORD Almighty determined that the people's labor is only fuel for the fire, that the nations exhaust themselves for nothing?","Numquid non haec a Domino sunt exercituum, ut laborent populi pro igne, et gentes in vacuum fatigentur?","הלוא הנה מאת יהוה צבאות וייגעו עמים בדי אש ולאמים בדי ריק יעפו׃"],["42","2","14","물이 바다를 뒤덮듯 땅은 주님의 영광을 아는 지식으로 가득하리라.","바다에 물이 넘실거리듯, 땅 위에는 야훼의 영광을 모르는 사람이 없으리라.","이는 물이 바다를 덮음 같이 여호와의 영광을 인정하는 것이 세상에 가득함이니라","대저 물이 바다를 덮음 같이 여호와의 영광을 인정하는 것이 세상에 가득하리라","바다가 물로 가득히 덮이는 것처럼 온 세상이 여호와의 영광을 아는 지식으로 가득 찰 때가 올 것이기 때문이다.","But the earth shall be filled with the knowledge of the LORD’s glory, just as the water covers the sea.","For the earth shall be filled with the knowledge of the glory of the LORD, as the waters cover the sea.","For the earth will be filled with the knowledge of the glory of the LORD, as the waters cover the sea.","Quia replebitur terra cognitione gloriae Domini, sicut aquae operiunt mare.","כי תמלא הארץ לדעת את כבוד יהוה כמים יכסו על ים׃"],["42","2","15","불행하여라, 이웃들에게 술을 먹이고 취할 때까지 화를 퍼붓고는 그들의 알몸을 바라보는 자!","화를 입으리라. 홧김에 이웃에게 술을 퍼먹여 곯아떨어지게 하고는 그 알몸을 헤쳐보는 것들아,","이웃에게 술을 마시게 하되 자기의 분노를 더하여 그에게 취하게 하고 그 하체를 드러내려 하는 자에게 화 있을진저","이웃에게 술을 마시우되 자기의 분노를 더하여 그로 취케 하고 그 하체를 드러내려 하는 자에게 화 있을찐저","너희가 이웃 백성들에게 너희의 분노를 포도주처럼 마시게 하고 거기다가 너희의 독까지 섞어서 취하게 만들고 그들이 벌거벗고 실신해 있는 모습을 고소하게 바라보았으니, 죽음과 멸망의 저주를 받아라!","Ah! you who give your neighbors the cup of your wrath to drink, and make them drunk, until their nakedness is seen!","Woe unto him that giveth his neighbour drink, that puttest thy bottle to him, and makest him drunken also, that thou mayest look on their nakedness!","\"Woe to him who gives drink to his neighbors, pouring it from the wineskin till they are drunk, so that he can gaze on their naked bodies.","Vae, qui potum dat amico suo mittens venenum suum et inebrians eum, ut aspiciat nuditatem eius!","הוי משקה רעהו מספח חמתך ואף שכר למען הביט על מעוריהם׃"],["42","2","16","너는 영광은커녕 능욕이나 실컷 당하리라. 너도 술을 마시고 포피를 드러내어라. 주님의 오른손에 들린 잔이 너에게 돌아가고 수치가 네 영광을 덮으리라.","그러고도 네가 영광을 누릴 듯싶으냐? 실컷 능욕이나 당하리라. 이제는 네가 잔을 받을 차례다. 마시고 벌거숭이가 될 차례다. 야훼의 오른손에 들린 잔이 너에게 이르렀다. 영광을 누린 그만큼 창피를 당하리라.","네게 영광이 아니요 수치가 가득한즉 너도 마시고 너의 할례 받지 아니한 것을 드러내라 여호와의 오른손의 잔이 네게로 돌아올 것이라 더러운 욕이 네 영광을 가리리라","네게 영광이 아니요 수치가 가득한즉 너도 마시고 너의 할례 아니한 것을 드러내라 여호와의 오른손의 잔이 네게로 돌아올 것이라 더러운 욕이 네 영광을 가리우리라","너희는 영광이 아니라 수치로 포식하였다. 너희도 이제 마시고 비틀거려라! 여호와께서 자기의 오른손에 든 진노의 잔을 네게도 마시게 하시고 모든 사람들이 보는 앞에서 너를 지극히 깊은 수치 속으로 떨어뜨리신다.","You are filled with shame instead of glory; drink, you too, and stagger! The cup from the LORD’s right hand shall come around to you, and utter shame shall cover your glory.","Thou art filled with shame for glory: drink thou also, and let thy foreskin be uncovered: the cup of the LORD's right hand shall be turned unto thee, and shameful spewing shall be on thy glory.","You will be filled with shame instead of glory. Now it is your turn! Drink and be exposed! The cup from the LORD'S right hand is coming around to you, and disgrace will cover your glory.","Repleris ignominia pro gloria; bibe tu quoque et denudare! Transibit ad te calix dexterae Domini, et veniet ignominia super gloriam tuam.","שבעת קלון מכבוד שתה גם אתה והערל תסוב עליך כוס ימין יהוה וקיקלון על כבודך׃"],["42","2","17","레바논에게 휘두른 폭력이 너를 뒤덮고 짐승들에게 저지른 살육이 너를 질겁하게 하리라. 네가 사람들의 피를 흘리고 세상과 성읍과 그 주민들에게 폭력을 휘두른 탓이다.","레바논을 내리친 그 힘이 너를 휩쓸겠고 짐승들을 살육하던 그 무서움이 너를 덮치리라. 죄없는 사람을 죽이고 마을을 짓밟고 성읍마다 쳐들어가 주민들을 무찌른 탓이다.","이는 네가 레바논에 강포를 행한 것과 짐승을 죽인 것 곧 사람의 피를 흘리며 땅과 성읍과 그 안의 모든 주민에게 강포를 행한 것이 네게로 돌아오리라","대저 네가 레바논에 강포를 행한 것과 짐승을 두렵게하여 잔해한 것 곧 사람의 피를 흘리며 땅과 성읍과 그 모든 거민에게 강포를 행한 것이 네게로 돌아오리라","너희가 레바논산의 나무들을 폭력으로 부러뜨렸으니 이제는 너희도 부러뜨려질 것이다! 너희가 숲속의 들짐승들도 씨를 말려 놓았으니 이제는 너희도 씨가 마를 것이다! 그러면 너희가 모든 나라와 모든 도성에 들어가서 흘린 사람들의 피와 주민들에게 행한 폭력 통치에 대하여 보복을 받을 것이다!","For the violence done to Lebanon shall cover you, and the destruction of the animals shall terrify you; Because of the shedding of human blood, and violence done to the land, to the city and to all who live in it.","For the violence of Lebanon shall cover thee, and the spoil of beasts, which made them afraid, because of men's blood, and for the violence of the land, of the city, and of all that dwell therein.","The violence you have done to Lebanon will overwhelm you, and your destruction of animals will terrify you. For you have shed man's blood; you have destroyed lands and cities and everyone in them.","Quia vastitas Libani operiet te, et miseria animalium deterrebit te propter sanguinem hominum et oppressionem terrae, civitatum et omnium habitantium in eis.","כי חמס לבנון יכסך ושד בהמות יחיתן מדמי אדם וחמס ארץ קריה וכל ישבי בה׃"],["42","2","18","조각 신상이 무슨 소용이 있느냐? 장인이 조각한 것일 따름이다. 주조 신상은 또 거짓 스승일 뿐이다. 장인이 자기가 빚은 것에 의지함은 벙어리 우상을 만드는 짓일 따름이다.","그런 우상을 새겨 무슨 덕이라도 볼 성싶으냐? 말 못하는 허수아비를 만들어놓고 무슨 이익이라도 볼 성싶으냐?\"","새긴 우상은 그 새겨 만든 자에게 무엇이 유익하겠느냐 부어 만든 우상은 거짓 스승이라 만든 자가 이 말하지 못하는 우상을 의지하니 무엇이 유익하겠느냐","새긴 우상은 그 새겨 만든 자에게 무엇이 유익하겠느냐 부어 만든 우상은 거짓 스승이라 만든 자가 이 말하지 못하는 우상을 의지하니 무엇이 유익하겠느냐","너희가 나뭇조각들을 향하여 \"깨어나소서!\" 하며 말없는 돌멩이들을 향하여 \"일어나소서!\" 하고 호소하였으니, 죽음과 멸망의 저주를 받아라! 그런 것들이 무엇을 가르쳐 줄 수가 있느냐? 그런 것들은 비록 금과 은으로 화려하게 꾸며 놓았으나 그 속에는 생명도 없고 정신도 없다. 나무나 돌멩이로 사람들이 우상을 새겨 만들지만, 그것들이 무슨 유익을 줄 수가 있느냐? 금속을 녹여서 만든 신상과 거짓된 예언이 무슨 유익이 있느냐? 그것을 만든 사람이 어떻게 그것을 의지할 수가 있느냐? 인간은 말도 못하는 무익한 우상들을 만드는 것에 불과하다.","Of what use is the carved image, that its maker should carve it? Or the molten image, the lying oracle, that its very maker should trust in it, and make mute idols?","What profiteth the graven image that the maker thereof hath graven it; the molten image, and a teacher of lies, that the maker of his work trusteth therein, to make dumb idols?","\"Of what value is an idol, since a man has carved it? Or an image that teaches lies? For he who makes it trusts in his own creation; he makes idols that cannot speak.","Quid prodest sculptile, quia sculpsit illud fictor suus; conflatile et oraculum mendax, quia speravit in figmento fictor eius, ut faceret simulacra muta?","מה הועיל פסל כי פסלו יצרו מסכה ומורה שקר כי בטח יצר יצרו עליו לעשות אלילים אלמים׃"],["42","2","19","불행하여라, 나무에게 “깨어나십시오.” 하고 말 못하는 돌에게 “일어나십시오.” 하는 자! 그것이 가르칠 수 있느냐? 금과 은으로 입힌 것일 뿐 그 안에 숨결이라고는 전혀 없다.","화를 입으리라! 나뭇조각을 보고 '일어나십시오.' 하며 말 못하는 돌멩이를 보고 '그만 주무십시오.' 하는 자들아, 그런 것에게서 무엇을 배우겠다는 말이냐? 금과 은으로 싸고 꾸렸지만, 가슴에는 숨기도 없는 것,","나무에게 깨라 하며 말하지 못하는 돌에게 일어나라 하는 자에게 화 있을진저 그것이 교훈을 베풀겠느냐 보라 이는 금과 은으로 입힌 것인즉 그 속에는 생기가 도무지 없느니라","나무더러 깨라 하며 말하지 못하는 돌더러 일어나라 하는 자에게 화 있을찐저 그것이 교훈을 베풀겠느냐 보라 이는 금과 은으로 입힌 것인즉 그 속에는 생기가 도무지 없느니라","(18절에 포함되어 있음)","Ah! you who say to wood, “Awake!” to silent stone, “Arise!” Can any such thing give oracles? It is only overlaid with gold and silver, there is no breath in it at all.","Woe unto him that saith to the wood, Awake; to the dumb stone, Arise, it shall teach! Behold, it is laid over with gold and silver, and there is no breath at all in the midst of it.","Woe to him who says to wood, 'Come to life!' Or to lifeless stone, 'Wake up!' Can it give guidance? It is covered with gold and silver; there is no breath in it.","Vae, qui dicit ligno:  “Expergiscere! “,  “Surge! “ lapidi tacenti! Numquid ipse docere poterit? Ecce iste coopertus est auro et argento, et omnis spiritus non est in visceribus eius.","הוי אמר לעץ הקיצה עורי לאבן דומם הוא יורה הנה הוא תפוש זהב וכסף וכל רוח אין בקרבו׃"],["42","2","20","주님께서는 당신의 거룩한 성전에 계시다. 온 세상은 그분 앞에서 조용히 하여라.","야훼께서 당신의 거룩한 전에 계신다. 온 세상은 그의 앞에서 잠잠하여라.","오직 여호와는 그 성전에 계시니 온 땅은 그 앞에서 잠잠할지니라 하시니라","오직 여호와는 그 성전에 계시니 온 천하는 그 앞에서 잠잠할찌니라","그러나 여호와께서는 당신의 거룩한 성전에 계신다. 온 세상에 있는 너희 인간들아, 너희는 그분께 영광을 돌리고 잠잠하여라!\"","But the LORD is in his holy temple; silence before him, all the earth!","But the LORD is in his holy temple: let all the earth keep silence before him.","But the LORD is in his holy temple; let all the earth be silent before him.\"","Dominus autem in templo sancto suo; sileat a facie eius omnis terra.","ויהוה בהיכל קדשו הס מפניו כל הארץ׃"],["42","3","1","하바쿡 예언자의 기도. 시그요놋에 맞추어.","예언자 하바꾹의 기도. 만가조로 읊을 것.","시기오놋에 맞춘 선지자 하박국의 기도라","시기오놋에 맞춘바 선지자 하박국의 기도라","예언자 하박국의 기도. 탄식시의 곡조로 읊을 것.","Prayer of Habakkuk, the prophet. According to Shigyonot.","A prayer of Habakkuk the prophet upon Shigionoth.","A prayer of Habakkuk the prophet. On shigionoth.","Oratio Habacuc prophetae. Secundum melodiam lamentationum.","תפלה לחבקוק הנביא על שגינות׃"],["42","3","2","주님, 저는 당신의 명성을 들었습니다. 주님, 저는 당신의 업적을 두려워합니다. 저희 시대에도 그것을 되살리시고 저희 시대에도 그것을 알게 해 주십시오. 노여우셔도 자비를 잊지 마십시오.","야훼여, 우리가 당신의 명성을 들었습니다. 우리는 야훼께서 하신 일을 보았습니다. 우리 시대에도 그 일을 보여주십시오. 아무리 노여우셔도, 잊지 마시고 자비를 베풀어주십시오.","여호와여 내가 주께 대한 소문을 듣고 놀랐나이다 여호와여 주는 주의 일을 이 수년 내에 부흥하게 하옵소서 이 수년 내에 나타내시옵소서 진노 중에라도 긍휼을 잊지 마옵소서","여호와여 내가 주께 대한 소문을 듣고 놀랐나이다 여호와여 주는 주의 일을 이 수년 내에 부흥케 하옵소서 이 수년 내에 나타내시옵소서 진노 중에라도 긍휼을 잊지 마옵소서","오 주님, 제가 방금 주님의 답변을 들었습니다. 주께서 계획하신 그 무서운 일들이 두려워 저는 떨립니다. 그 일을 너무 먼 미래에 하지 마시고 속히 이루어 주소서! 주께서 간섭하시는 모습을 저도 직접 체험하게 하여 주소서! 주님의 진노가 폭발할 때에도 우리에게는 긍휼을 베풀어 주소서!","O LORD, I have heard your renown, and am in awe, O LORD, of your work. In the course of years revive it, in the course of years make yourself known; in your wrath remember compassion!","O LORD, I have heard thy speech, and was afraid: O LORD, revive thy work in the midst of the years, in the midst of the years make known; in wrath remember mercy.","LORD, I have heard of your fame; I stand in awe of your deeds, O LORD. Renew them in our day, in our time make them known; in wrath remember mercy.","Domine, audivi auditionem tuam et timui, Domine, opus tuum. In medio annorum vivifica illud, in medio annorum notum facies. Cum iratus fueris, misericordiae recordaberis.","יהוה שמעתי שמעך יראתי יהוה פעלך בקרב שנים חייהו בקרב שנים תודיע ברגז רחם תזכור׃"],["42","3","3","하느님께서 테만에서 오신다. 거룩하신 분께서 파란 산에서 오신다. 셀라 그분의 영광이 하늘을 뒤덮고 그분을 찬미하는 소리가 땅을 가득 채운다.","하느님께서 데만에서 오신다. 거룩하신 이가 바란 산에서 오신다. (셀라) 하늘엔 당신의 빛이 찬란하게 퍼지고 땅엔 당신의 광채가 차고 넘치니","하나님이 데만에서부터 오시며 거룩한 자가 바란 산에서부터 오시는도다 (셀라) 그의 영광이 하늘을 덮었고 그의 찬송이 세계에 가득하도다","하나님이 데만에서부터 오시며 거룩한 자가 바란산에서부터 오시도다 (셀라) 그 영광이 하늘을 덮었고 그 찬송이 세계에 가득하도다","ㄱ) 하나님께서 시내산에서부터 저 드넓은 사막들을 가로질러 오시는 모습이 보인다! (셀라) 그분의 존귀한 영광이 하늘을 환하게 비추고 그분의 빛난 광채가 온 땅을 가득 채운다. (ㄱ. 원문은 \"데만 도성에서...바란 산맥에서\". 시내산에서 나오시는 주님의 모습을 묘사하고 있다)","God came from Teman, the Holy One from Mount Paran. Selah His glory covered the heavens, and his praise filled the earth;","God came from Teman, and the Holy One from mount Paran. Selah. His glory covered the heavens, and the earth was full of his praise.","God came from Teman, the Holy One from Mount Paran. Selah His glory covered the heavens and his praise filled the earth.","Deus a Theman veniet, et Sanctus de monte Pharan. ? Selah. Operit caelos gloria eius, et laudis eius plena est terra.","אלוה מתימן יבוא וקדוש מהר פארן סלה כסה שמים הודו ותהלתו מלאה הארץ׃"],["42","3","4","그분의 광채는 빛과 같고 두 줄기 빛이 그분 손에서 뻗어 나온다. 거기에 그분의 힘이 숨어 있다.","그 밝음은 대낮 같구나. 힘있는 당신의 손, 두 줄기 빛이 그 손에서 뻗어나네.","그의 광명이 햇빛 같고 광선이 그의 손에서 나오니 그의 권능이 그 속에 감추어졌도다","그 광명이 햇빛 같고 광선이 그 손에서 나오니 그 권능이 그 속에 감취었도다","그분은 사방으로 해처럼 빛을 발하시고 두 손에서 불빛이 뻗어 나온다. 그 속에 그분의 큰 권능이 숨겨져 있다.","his splendor spread like the light. He raised his horns high, he rejoiced on the day of his strength.","And his brightness was as the light; he had horns coming out of his hand: and there was the hiding of his power.","His splendor was like the sunrise; rays flashed from his hand, where his power was hidden.","Splendor eius ut lux erit, radii ex manibus eius: ibi abscondita est fortitudo eius.","ונגה כאור תהיה קרנים מידו לו ושם חביון עזה׃"],["42","3","5","흑사병이 그분 앞에 서서 가고 열병이 그분 발꿈치의 뒤를 따른다.","역신이 앞장서고 열병이 뒤따르는구나.","역병이 그 앞에서 행하며 불덩이가 그의 발 밑에서 나오는도다","온역이 그 앞에서 행하며 불덩이가 그 발밑에서 나오도다","그분의 앞에서는 전염병이 진군하며 질병이 그분을 뒤따른다.","Before him went pestilence, and plague followed in his steps.","Before him went the pestilence, and burning coals went forth at his feet.","Plague went before him; pestilence followed his steps.","Ante faciem eius ibit mors, et egredietur pestis post pedes eius.","לפניו ילך דבר ויצא רשף לרגליו׃"],["42","3","6","그분께서 멈추시고 땅을 흔드시며 그분께서 보시고 민족들을 떨게 하신다. 예로부터 있던 산들이 무너지고 처음부터 있던 언덕들이 내려앉는다. 그분의 길만이 영원하다.","발길을 멈추시면 땅이 흔들리고 노려보시면 민족들이 떠네. 한 옛날 산들이 갈라지고 태곳적 언덕들이 주저앉아 아득한 행차 길이 열렸구나.","그가 서신즉 땅이 진동하며 그가 보신즉 여러 나라가 전율하며 영원한 산이 무너지며 무궁한 작은 산이 엎드러지나니 그의 행하심이 예로부터 그러하시도다","그가 서신즉 땅이 진동하며 그가 보신즉 열국이 1)전률하며 영원한 산이 무너지며 무궁한 작은 산이 엎드러지나니 그 행하심이 예로부터 그러하시도다 흩어지며","그분이 발을 디디시면 땅이 지진을 일으키고 그분이 군대들을 노려 보시면 모두 겁에 질려 뿔뿔이 흩어져 버린다. 영원히 견고할 듯한 산들이 무너지고 태고적 언덕들도 주저 앉아버린다. 그분이 땅위로 걸어가시면 아득한 옛날부터 그러하였었다!","He stood and shook the earth; he looked and made the nations tremble. Ancient mountains were shattered, the age-old hills bowed low, age-old orbits collapsed.","He stood, and measured the earth: he beheld, and drove asunder the nations; and the everlasting mountains were scattered, the perpetual hills did bow: his ways are everlasting.","He stood, and shook the earth; he looked, and made the nations tremble. The ancient mountains crumbled and the age-old hills collapsed. His ways are eternal.","Stetit et concussit terram, aspexit et dissolvit gentes. Et contriti sunt montes saeculi, incurvati sunt colles antiqui ab itineribus aeternitatis eius.","עמד וימדד ארץ ראה ויתר גוים ויתפצצו הררי עד שחו גבעות עולם הליכות עולם לו׃"],["42","3","7","나는 쿠산의 천막들이 환난을 당하고 미디안 땅의 천막 휘장들이 흔들리는 것을 보았다.","떨며 흩날리는 구산의 천막들과 펄럭이는 미디안의 장막 휘장들이 이 어려움 가운데서 보이네.","내가 본즉 구산의 장막이 환난을 당하고 미디안 땅의 휘장이 흔들리는도다","내가 본즉 구산의 장막이 환난을 당하고 미디안 땅의 휘장이 흔들리도다","그 재난 속에서 내가 보니 구산의 천막들이 지진을 만난듯 흔들리고 미디안의 천막 지붕들도 벗겨져서 흩날린다!","The tents of Cushan trembled, the pavilions of the land of Midian.","I saw the tents of Cushan in affliction: and the curtains of the land of Midian did tremble.","I saw the tents of Cushan in distress, the dwellings of Midian in anguish.","In afflictione vidi tentoria Chusan; turbantur pelles terrae Madian.","תחת און ראיתי אהלי כושן ירגזון יריעות ארץ מדין׃"],["42","3","8","당신께서 말을 모시고 승리의 병거를 모시니 주님, 강들에게 진노하시는 것입니까? 강들에게 화가 나셨습니까? 바다에게 분노하시는 것입니까?","야훼여, 어찌하여 우리 물귀신에게 화를 내십니까? 우리 바다 귀신들에게 분풀이를 하십니까? 어인 일로 병거를 타고 말을 몰아 우리를 쳐부수시러 오십니까?","여호와여 주께서 말을 타시며 구원의 병거를 모시오니 강들을 분히 여기심이니이까 강들을 노여워하심이니이까 바다를 향하여 성내심이니이까","여호와여 주께서 말을 타시며 구원의 병거를 모시오니 하수를 분히 여기심이니이까 강을 노여워하심이니이까 바다를 대하여 성내심이니이까","\"오 여호와여, 주님의 분노가 모든 강물 위에 폭발하고, 당신의 울화가 바다를 향하여 터졌습니까? 무슨 일로 주께서 승리의 전차들을 타시고 그 위로 군마들을 몰아가십니까?","Was your anger against the rivers, O LORD? your wrath against the rivers, your rage against the sea, That you mounted your steeds, your victorious chariot?","Was the LORD displeased against the rivers? was thine anger against the rivers? was thy wrath against the sea, that thou didst ride upon thine horses and thy chariots of salvation?","Were you angry with the rivers, O LORD? Was your wrath against the streams? Did you rage against the sea when you rode with your horses and your victorious chariots?","Numquid in fluminibus iratus es, Domine, aut in fluminibus furor tuus vel in mari indignatio tua? Quia ascendes super equos tuos, quadrigas tuas victrices.","הבנהרים חרה יהוה אם בנהרים אפך אם בים עברתך כי תרכב על סוסיך מרכבתיך ישועה׃"],["42","3","9","당신께서는 활을 꺼내시어 시위에 화살을 메우십니다. 셀라 당신께서는 강줄기로 땅을 가르십니다.","어인 일로 활을 꺼내어 살을 메우시고 힘껏 잡아당기십니까? (셀라) 1)노여움으로 땅을 가르시니 히브리어 본문은 \"노여움\" 대신에 \"강줄기들\"로 되어 있다.","주께서 활을 꺼내시고 화살을 바로 쏘셨나이다 (셀라) 주께서 강들로 땅을 쪼개셨나이다","주께서 활을 꺼내시고 2)살을 바로 발하셨나이다 (셀라) 주께서 하수들로 땅을 쪼개셨나이다 지파에게 맹세하셨나이다","주님은 활을 꺼내어 사격 자세를 취하셨고, 주님의 화살통에는 화살이 가득 차 있습니다. (셀라) 주께서 땅을 가르시니 온 땅에 강들이 흘러갑니다.","You readied your bow, you filled your bowstring with arrows. Selah You split the earth with rivers;","Thy bow was made quite naked, according to the oaths of the tribes, even thy word. Selah. Thou didst cleave the earth with rivers.","You uncovered your bow, you called for many arrows. Selah You split the earth with rivers;","Suscitans suscitabis arcum tuum, sagittis replevisti pharetram tuam. ? Selah. In fluvios scindes terram,","עריה תעור קשתך שבעות מטות אמר סלה נהרות תבקע ארץ׃"],["42","3","10","산들이 당신을 보고 몸부림칩니다. 폭우가 휩쓸고 지나갑니다. 심연은 소리를 지르고 그 물줄기가 치솟습니다.","멧부리들은 당신을 보고 부르르 떱니다. 먹구름은 물을 퍼부으며 깊은 바다는 손을 높이 들고 아우성칩니다.","산들이 주를 보고 흔들리며 창수가 넘치고 바다가 소리를 지르며 손을 높이 들었나이다","산들이 주를 보고 흔들리며 창수가 넘치고 바다가 소리를 지르며 손을 높이 들었나이다","산들도 주님을 보고서 해산하는 여인처럼 몸부림을 칩니다. 하늘의 구름도 후두두 소나기를 퍼붓고, 바다의 물결들도 높이 치솟으며 아우성을 칩니다.","at the sight of you the mountains writhed. The clouds poured down water; the deep roared loudly. The sun forgot to rise,","The mountains saw thee, and they trembled: the overflowing of the water passed by: the deep uttered his voice, and lifted up his hands on high.","the mountains saw you and writhed. Torrents of water swept by; the deep roared and lifted its waves on high.","viderunt te et doluerunt montes. Effuderunt aquas nubes, dedit abyssus vocem suam, in altum levavit manus suas.","ראוך יחילו הרים זרם מים עבר נתן תהום קולו רום ידיהו נשא׃"],["42","3","11","당신의 화살이 날아갈 때 번쩍이는 빛 때문에 당신의 번뜩이는 창의 광채 때문에 해와 달은 그 높은 거처에 멈추어 섭니다.","번쩍이며 화살을 쏘시고 시퍼런 창을 내던지시면, 해는 뜨지도 못하고 달은 반공에 멎습니다.","날아가는 주의 화살의 빛과 번쩍이는 주의 창의 광채로 말미암아 해와 달이 그 처소에 멈추었나이다","주의 날으는 살의 빛과 주의 번쩍이는 창의 광채로 인하여 해와 달이 그 처소에 멈추었나이다","주님의 화살들이 휙휙 날며 불꽃을 일으키고 주님의 창들이 번갯불처럼 번쩍일 때에 해와 달은 빛을 잃고 자기들의 집으로 들어가서 숨었습니다.","the moon left its lofty station, At the light of your flying arrows, at the gleam of your flashing spear.","The sun and moon stood still in their habitation: at the light of thine arrows they went, and at the shining of thy glittering spear.","Sun and moon stood still in the heavens at the glint of your flying arrows, at the lightning of your flashing spear.","Sol et luna steterunt in habitaculo suo, prae luce sagittarum tuarum discedunt, prae splendore fulgurantis hastae tuae.","שמש ירח עמד זבלה לאור חציך יהלכו לנגה ברק חניתך׃"],["42","3","12","당신께서는 진노하시어 땅을 짓밟으시고 분노하시어 민족들을 내리밟으십니다.","주께서는 크게 노하시어 땅을 주름잡으시며 분노로써 뭇 민족을 밟으십니다.","주께서 노를 발하사 땅을 두르셨으며 분을 내사 여러 나라를 밟으셨나이다","주께서 노를 발하사 땅에 둘리셨으며 분을 내사 열국을 밟으셨나이다","주님은 원한에 사무쳐 온 땅을 밟고 다니시며 분통이 터져서 세계 만민들을 짓밟아 으깨어 놓으십니다.","In wrath you marched on the earth, in fury you trampled the nations.","Thou didst march through the land in indignation, thou didst thresh the heathen in anger.","In wrath you strode through the earth and in anger you threshed the nations.","In fremitu calcabis terram, in furore conteres gentes.","בזעם תצעד ארץ באף תדוש גוים׃"],["42","3","13","당신께서는 당신 백성을 구원하시려고, 당신의 기름부음받은이를 구원하시려고 나오셨습니다. 악인의 집 지붕을 부수시고 그 집을 주춧돌에서 천장까지 발가벗겨 버리셨습니다. 셀라","주께서는 주의 백성을, 친히 기름 부으신 자를 구하러 거둥하셨습니다. 악인의 소굴을 짓부수시고 그 기초를 송두리째 뽑아버리셨습니다. (셀라)","주께서 주의 백성을 구원하시려고, 기름 부음 받은 자를 구원하시려고 나오사 악인의 집의 머리를 치시며 그 기초를 바닥까지 드러내셨나이다 (셀라)","주께서 주의 백성을 구원하시려고, 기름 받은 자를 구원하시려고 나오사 악인의 집머리를 치시며 그 기초를 끝까지 드러내셨나이다 (셀라)","주님의 백성을 돕기 위하여 주께서 세우신 왕을 돕기 위하여 주님이 지금 나오셨습니다. 저 악한 나라의 왕궁을 지붕까지 바싹 깨뜨려 놓으시고 허허벌판에 앙상한 성벽들만이 하늘을 바라보게 하십니다. (셀라)","You came forth to save your people, to save your anointed one. You crushed the back of the wicked, you laid him bare, bottom to neck. Selah","Thou wentest forth for the salvation of thy people, even for salvation with thine anointed; thou woundedst the head out of the house of the wicked, by discovering the foundation unto the neck. Selah.","You came out to deliver your people, to save your anointed one. You crushed the leader of the land of wickedness, you stripped him from head to foot. Selah","Egressus es in salutem populi tui, in salutem cum christo tuo. Percussisti caput de domo impii, denudasti fundamentum usque ad petram. ? Selah.","יצאת לישע עמך לישע את משיחך מחצת ראש מבית רשע ערות יסוד עד צואר סלה׃"],["42","3","14","숨어 있는 가련한 이를 삼키려는 듯이 그의 용사들이 기뻐 날뛰며 저희를 흩으려고 들이닥쳤지만 당신께서는 당신의 화살로 그들의 머리를 꿰뚫으셨습니다.","그의 전사들의 우두머리를 몽치로 치시자 졸개들은 검불처럼 흩어집니다. 눈에 쌍심지를 켜고 가련한 사람들을 널름널름 집어삼키다가 날려갑니다.","그들이 회오리바람처럼 이르러 나를 흩으려 하며 가만히 가난한 자 삼키기를 즐거워하나 오직 주께서 그들의 전사의 머리를 그들의 창으로 찌르셨나이다","그들이 회리바람처럼 이르러 나를 흩으려 하며 가만히 가난한 자 삼키기를 즐거워하나 오직 주께서 그들의 전사의 머리를 그들의 창으로 찌르셨나이다","그 나라의 군대 지휘관들은 우리를 분쇄할 작전을 세우고 폭풍처럼 우리에게 몰려왔습니다. 사자가 짐승을 잡아서 제 은신처로 끌고 가 삼키듯이 불쌍한 우리들을 잡아다 먹으려고 환호성을 올리며 달려왔습니다. 그러나 주님은 그들의 창을 빼앗아 그들을 찔러서 관통시키셨습니다.","You pierced his head with your shafts; his princes you scattered with your stormwind, as food for the poor in unknown places.","Thou didst strike through with his staves the head of his villages: they came out as a whirlwind to scatter me: their rejoicing was as to devour the poor secretly.","With his own spear you pierced his head when his warriors stormed out to scatter us, gloating as though about to devour the wretched who were in hiding.","Confodisti iaculis tuis caput bellatorum eius, venientium ut turbo ad dispergendum me; exsultatio eorum, sicut eius, qui devorat pauperem in abscondito.","נקבת במטיו ראש פרזו יסערו להפיצני עליצתם כמו לאכל עני במסתר׃"],["42","3","15","당신께서는 거대한 물결이 출렁이는 바다를 말을 타고 짓밟으셨습니다.","주께서 말을 타고 바다 위를 달리시니 바다 큰 물결이 들끓습니다.","주께서 말을 타시고 바다 곧 큰 물의 파도를 밟으셨나이다","주께서 말을 타시고 바다 곧 큰 물의 파도를 밟으셨나이다","주님이 바다 위로 군마들을 몰아 달리시니 그 많은 물이 끓어오릅니다.\"","You trampled the sea with your horses amid the churning of the deep waters.","Thou didst walk through the sea with thine horses, through the heap of great waters.","You trampled the sea with your horses, churning the great waters.","Viam fecisti in mari equis tuis, in luto aquarum multarum.","דרכת בים סוסיך חמר מים רבים׃"],["42","3","16","그것을 듣고 내 배 속이 뒤틀린다. 그 소리에 내 입술이 떨린다. 뼈는 썩어 들어가는 듯하고 다리는 밑에서 후들거린다. 그러나 나는 우리를 공격하는 백성에게 들이닥칠 환난의 날을 조용히 기다린다.","그 소리를 듣고 나의 뱃속이 뒤틀립니다. 입술이 떨리고 뼛속이 녹아내리며 아랫도리가 후들거립니다. 우리를 덮쳐오던 백성에게 재앙이 떨어지는 날만 나는 기다리고 있습니다.","내가 들었으므로 내 창자가 흔들렸고 그 목소리로 말미암아 내 입술이 떨렸도다 무리가 우리를 치러 올라오는 환난 날을 내가 기다리므로 썩이는 것이 내 뼈에 들어왔으며 내 몸은 내 처소에서 떨리는도다","내가 들었으므로 내 창자가 흔들렸고 그 목소리로 인하여 내 입술이 떨렸도다 무리가 우리를 치러 올라오는 환난날을 내가 기다리므로 내 뼈에 썩이는 것이 들어 왔으며 내 몸은 내 처소에서 떨리는도다","주께서 이 모든 일을 내게 들려주셨을 때 내 뱃속의 창자가 모두 뒤틀렸고 내가 주님의 우렁찬 음성을 들었을 때 두 입술이 떨리기 시작하였습니다. 내 모든 뼈가 물러지고 내 두 무릎은 후들거렸습니다. 그러나 나는 그날을 기다리겠습니다. 우리를 공격한 그 백성에게 망국의 재앙을 내리는 그날을 나는 여전히 기다리겠습니다.","I hear, and my body trembles; at the sound, my lips quiver. Decay invades my bones, my legs tremble beneath me. I await the day of distress that will come upon the people who attack us.","When I heard, my belly trembled; my lips quivered at the voice: rottenness entered into my bones, and I trembled in myself, that I might rest in the day of trouble: when he cometh up unto the people, he will invade them with his troops.","I heard and my heart pounded, my lips quivered at the sound; decay crept into my bones, and my legs trembled. Yet I will wait patiently for the day of calamity to come on the nation invading us.","Audivi, et conturbatus est venter meus, ad vocem contremuerunt labia mea. Ingreditur putredo in ossibus meis, et subter me vacillant gressus mei. Conquiescam in die tribulationis, ut ascendat super populum, qui invadit nos.","שמעתי ותרגז בטני לקול צללו שפתי יבוא רקב בעצמי ותחתי ארגז אשר אנוח ליום צרה לעלות לעם יגודנו׃"],["42","3","17","무화과나무는 꽃을 피우지 못하고 포도나무에는 열매가 없을지라도 올리브 나무에는 딸 것이 없고 밭은 먹을 것을 내지 못할지라도 우리에서는 양 떼가 없어지고 외양간에는 소 떼가 없을지라도","비록 무화과는 아니 열리고 포도는 달리지 않고 올리브 농사는 망하고 밭곡식은 나지 않아도 비록, 우리에 있던 양떼는 간데없고 목장에는 소떼가 보이지 않아도","비록 무화과나무가 무성하지 못하며 포도나무에 열매가 없으며 감람나무에 소출이 없으며 밭에 먹을 것이 없으며 우리에 양이 없으며 외양간에 소가 없을지라도","비록 무화과나무가 무성치 못하며 포도나무에 열매가 없으며 감람나무에 소출이 없으며 밭에 식물이 없으며 우리에 양이 없으며 외양간에 소가 없을찌라도","무화과나무는 싹도 내지 않고 포도 덩굴에는 열매가 없습니다. 올리브나무의 소출은 실망뿐이고 논밭의 곡식들은 먹을 것이 없습니다. 목장의 양 떼들은 모두 다 사라졌고 외양간에는 소 한 마리 남아 있지 않습니다.","For though the fig tree does not blossom, and no fruit appears on the vine, Though the yield of the olive fails and the terraces produce no nourishment, Though the flocks disappear from the fold and there is no herd in the stalls,","Although the fig tree shall not blossom, neither shall fruit be in the vines; the labour of the olive shall fail, and the fields shall yield no meat; the flock shall be cut off from the fold, and there shall be no herd in the stalls:","Though the fig tree does not bud and there are no grapes on the vines, though the olive crop fails and the fields produce no food, though there are no sheep in the pen and no cattle in the stalls,","Ficus enim non florebit, et non erit fructus in vineis; mentietur opus olivae, et arva non afferent cibum; abscissum est de ovili pecus, et non est armentum in praesepibus.","כי תאנה לא תפרח ואין יבול בגפנים כחש מעשה זית ושדמות לא עשה אכל גזר ממכלה צאן ואין בקר ברפתים׃"],["42","3","18","나는 주님 안에서 즐거워하고 내 구원의 하느님 안에서 기뻐하리라.","나는 야훼 안에서 환성을 올리렵니다. 나를 구원하신 하느님 안에서 기뻐 뛰렵니다.","나는 여호와로 말미암아 즐거워하며 나의 구원의 하나님으로 말미암아 기뻐하리로다","나는 여호와를 인하여 즐거워하며 나의 구원의 하나님을 인하여 기뻐하리로다","그렇더라도 나는 여호와때문에 기뻐 뛰겠습니다. 나를 도와주겠다고 약속하셨으니 나는 즐거워하겠습니다.","Yet I will rejoice in the LORD and exult in my saving God.","Yet I will rejoice in the LORD, I will joy in the God of my salvation.","yet I will rejoice in the LORD, I will be joyful in God my Savior.","Ego autem in Domino gaudebo et exsultabo in Deo salvatore meo.","ואני ביהוה אעלוזה אגילה באלהי ישעי׃"],["42","3","19","주 하느님은 나의 힘. 그분께서는 내 발을 사슴 같게 하시어 내가 높은 곳을 치닫게 해 주신다. 합창 지휘자에게. 현악기와 더불어.","야훼 나의 주께서 힘이 되어주시고 사슴처럼 날랜 다리를 주시어 나로 하여금 산등성이를 마구 치닫게 하십니다.합창대 지휘자를 따라 수금駙?맞추어 부를 것.","주 여호와는 나의 힘이시라 나의 발을 사슴과 같게 하사 나를 나의 높은 곳으로 다니게 하시리로다 이 노래는 지휘하는 사람을 위하여 내 수금에 맞춘 것이니라","주 여호와는 나의 힘이시라 나의 발을 사슴과 같게 하사 나로 나의 높은 곳에 다니게 하시리로다 이 노래는 영장을 위하여 내 수금에 맞춘 것이니라","여호와 나의 하나님이 나의 힘이십니다. 그분이 나의 두 발을 암사슴의 다리와 같게 하시고 모든 산들의 위에서 안전하게 달리도록 힘을 주십니다. 이 노래는 성가대장의 지휘를 따라 현악기들의 연주에 맞추어 부를 것이다.","GOD, my Lord, is my strength; he makes my feet swift as those of deer and enables me to tread upon the heights. For the leader; with stringed instruments.","The LORD God is my strength, and he will make my feet like hinds' feet, and he will make me to walk upon mine high places. To the chief singer on my stringed instruments.","The Sovereign LORD is my strength; he makes my feet like the feet of a deer, he enables me to go on the heights. For the director of music. On my stringed instruments.","Dominus Deus fortitudo mea et ponet pedes meos quasi cervorum et super excelsa mea deducet me. Magistro chori. Ad sonitum chordarum.","יהוה אדני חילי וישם רגלי כאילות ועל במותי ידרכני למנצח בנגינותי׃"],["43","1","1","아몬의 아들, 유다 임금 요시야 때에 스바니야에게 내린 주님의 말씀. 스바니야는 쿠시의 아들, 쿠시는 그달야의 아들, 그달야는 아마르야의 아들, 아마르야는 히즈키야의 아들이다.","스바니야에게 내린 야훼의 말씀. 스바니야의 아버지는 구시요, 그 윗대는 게달리야, 그 윗대는 아마리야, 그 윗대는 히즈키야이다. 스바니야가 말씀을 받은 것은 아몬의 아들 요시야 왕이 유다를 다스릴 때였다.","아몬의 아들 유다 왕 요시야의 시대에 스바냐에게 임한 여호와의 말씀이라 스바냐는 히스기야의 현손이요 아마랴의 증손이요 그다랴의 손자요 구시의 아들이었더라","아몬의 아들 유다 왕 요시아의 시대에 스바냐에게 임한 여호와의 말씀이라 스바냐는 히스기야의 현손이요 아마랴의 증손이요 그다랴의 손자요 구시의 아들이었더라","여호와께서 스바냐에게 하신 말씀이다. 수신인 : 구시의 아들이며 그다랴의 손자이며, 아마랴의 증손자이며, 히스기야의 고손자인 스바냐. 때 : 아몬의 아들 유다 왕 요시야 통치 시절.","The word of the LORD which came to Zephaniah, the son of Cushi, the son of Gedaliah, the son of Amariah, the son of Hezekiah, in the days of Josiah, the son of Amon, king of Judah.","The word of the LORD which came unto Zephaniah the son of Cushi, the son of Gedaliah, the son of Amariah, the son of Hizkiah, in the days of Josiah the son of Amon, king of Judah.","The word of the LORD that came to Zephaniah son of Cushi, the son of Gedaliah, the son of Amariah, the son of Hezekiah, during the reign of Josiah son of Amon king of Judah:","Verbum Domini, quod factum est ad Sophoniam filium Chusi filii Godoliae filii Amariae filii Ezechiae, in diebus Iosiae filii Amon regis Iudae.","דבר יהוה אשר היה אל צפניה בן כושי בן גדליה בן אמריה בן חזקיה בימי יאשיהו בן אמון מלך יהודה׃"],["43","1","2","나는 모든 것을 땅 위에서 말끔히 쓸어버리리라. 주님의 말씀이다.","\"땅 위에 있는 것은 무엇이건 나 말끔히 쓸어버리리라.\" 야훼의 말씀이시다.","여호와께서 이르시되 내가 땅 위에서 모든 것을 진멸하리라","여호와께서 가라사대 내가 지면에서 모든 것을 진멸하리라","여호와께서 말씀하셨다. \"지구상에 있는 모든 것들을 내가 완전히 쓸어 버리겠다.","I will completely sweep away all things from the face of the land—oracle of the LORD.","I will utterly consume all things from off the land, saith the LORD.","\"I will sweep away everything from the face of the earth,\" declares the LORD."," “Auferens auferam omnia a facie terrae, dicit Dominus,","אסף אסף כל מעל פני האדמה נאם יהוה׃"],["43","1","3","나는 사람도 짐승도 쓸어버리고 하늘의 새와 바다의 물고기도 쓸어버리며 악인들을 비틀거리게 하리라. 사람도 땅 위에서 없애 버리리라. 주님의 말씀이다.","\"사람도 짐승도 쓸어버리고 공중의 새도 바다의 고기도 쓸어버리리라. 악당들을 거꾸러뜨리며 땅에서 사람의 씨를 말리리라.\" 야훼의 말씀이시다.","내가 사람과 짐승을 진멸하고 공중의 새와 바다의 고기와 거치게 하는 것과 악인들을 아울러 진멸할 것이라 내가 사람을 땅 위에서 멸절하리라 나 여호와의 말이니라","내가 사람과 짐승을 진멸하고 공중의 새와 바다의 고기와 거치게 하는 것과 악인들을 아울러 진멸할 것이라 내가 사람을 지면에서 멸절하리라 나 여호와의 말이니라","인간과 짐승들, 공중의 새와 바다의 물고기를 쓸어 버리고, 인간들이 불순종의 길로 이끈 모든 악한 것들을 내가 멸절시키겠다. 그렇다, 내가 사람을 지면에서 소멸시키겠다.\"","I will sweep away human being and beast alike, I will sweep away the birds of the sky, and the fish of the sea. I will make the wicked stumble; I will eliminate the people from the face of the land—oracle of the LORD.","I will consume man and beast; I will consume the fowls of the heaven, and the fishes of the sea, and the stumbling blocks with the wicked: and I will cut off man from off the land, saith the LORD.","\"I will sweep away both men and animals; I will sweep away the birds of the air and the fish of the sea. The wicked will have only heaps of rubble when I cut off man from the face of the earth,\" declares the LORD.","auferam hominem et pecus, auferam volatile caeli et pisces maris. Et ruinae impiorum erunt; et disperdam homines a facie terrae, dicit Dominus.","אסף אדם ובהמה אסף עוף השמים ודגי הים והמכשלות את הרשעים והכרתי את האדם מעל פני האדמה נאם יהוה׃"],["43","1","4","나는 유다에, 예루살렘의 모든 주민에게 손을 뻗어 그곳에서 나머지 바알 신상들을 그 우상 숭배 사제들의 이름과 함께 없애 버리리라.","\"나는 손을 들어 유다 국민과 예루살렘 온 성민을 치리라. 여기 얼마 남지 않은 바알의 신상들을 없애고 그 사제라는 것들을 이름도 없이 쓸어버리리라.","내가 유다와 예루살렘의 모든 주민들 위에 손을 펴서 남아 있는 바알을 그 곳에서 멸절하며 그마림이란 이름과 및 그 제사장들을 아울러 멸절하며","내가 유다와 예루살렘 모든 거민 위에 손을 펴서 바알의 남아 있는 것을 그곳에서 멸절하며 그마림이란 이름과 및 그 제사장들을 아울러 멸절하며","여호와께서 말씀하셨다. \"내가 내 손을 펴서 유다 백성과 예루살렘의 모든 주민을 치고 이 땅에 만연된 우상숭배를 뿌리 뽑아 그 흔적조차 남기지 않겠다. 바알의 제사장이니 ㄱ) 승려 나부라기니 하는 소리도 더 이상 기억되지 못하도록 하겠다. (ㄱ. 또는 \"그마림이니\")","I will stretch out my hand against Judah, and against all the inhabitants of Jerusalem; I will eliminate from this place the last vestige of Baal, the name of the idolatrous priests.","I will also stretch out mine hand upon Judah, and upon all the inhabitants of Jerusalem; and I will cut off the remnant of Baal from this place, and the name of the Chemarims with the priests;","\"I will stretch out my hand against Judah and against all who live in Jerusalem. I will cut off from this place every remnant of Baal, the names of the pagan and the idolatrous priests--","Et extendam manum meam super Iudam et super omnes habitantes Ierusalem; et disperdam de loco hoc reliquias Baal et nomina aedituorum cum sacerdotibus","ונטיתי ידי על יהודה ועל כל יושבי ירושלם והכרתי מן המקום הזה את שאר הבעל את שם הכמרים עם הכהנים׃"],["43","1","5","지붕 위에서 하늘의 군대를 경배하는 자들, 주님을 경배하고 그분께 맹세하면서도 밀콤을 두고 맹세하는 자들,","지붕 위에서 하늘의 별들을 예배하는 것들, 야훼를 예배하면서도 맹세는 1)밀곰을 두고 하는 것들, 암몬 신이다.","또 지붕에서 하늘의 뭇 별에게 경배하는 자들과 경배하며 여호와께 맹세하면서 말감을 가리켜 맹세하는 자들과","무릇 지붕에서 하늘의 일월성신에게 경배하는 자와 경배하며 여호와께 맹세하면서 말감을 가리켜 맹세하는 자와","지붕 위로 올라가서 일월성신을 숭배하는 자들과, 여호와를 섬기면서도 ㄴ) 밀곰을 걸고 맹세하는 자들을 내가 모조리 없애 버리겠다. (ㄴ. 암몬 족속의 민족 신으로 \"밀곰\"을 낮추어 부르는 이름이 \"몰록\"이나 \"몰렉\"이다)","And those who bow down on the roofs to the host of heaven, And those who bow down to the LORD but swear by Milcom;","And them that worship the host of heaven upon the housetops; and them that worship and that swear by the LORD, and that swear by Malcham;","those who bow down on the roofs to worship the starry host, those who bow down and swear by the LORD and who also swear by Molech,","et eos, qui adorant super tecta militiam caeli et adorant et iurant in Domino et iurant in Melchom,","ואת המשתחוים על הגגות לצבא השמים ואת המשתחוים הנשבעים ליהוה והנשבעים במלכם׃"],["43","1","6","주님에게서 돌아선 자들, 주님을 찾지도 않고 주님에게 문의하지도 않는 자들을 나는 없애 버리리라.","알아볼 일이 있어도 야훼를 찾지 아니하고 등지고 떠나가는 것들을 나 없애버리리라.\"","여호와를 배반하고 따르지 아니한 자들과 여호와를 찾지도 아니하며 구하지도 아니한 자들을 멸절하리라","여호와를 배반하고 좇지 아니한 자와 여호와를 찾지도 아니하며 구하지도 아니한 자를 멸절하리라","또 전에는 여호와를 섬기다가 지금은 더 이상 섬기지 않는 자들과, 여호와를 찾지도 않고 여호와께 묻지도 않는 자들을 내가 모조리 멸절시키겠다.\"","And those who have turned away from the LORD, and those who have not sought the LORD, who have not inquired of him.","And them that are turned back from the LORD; and those that have not sought the LORD, nor enquired for him.","those who turn back from following the LORD and neither seek the LORD nor inquire of him.","et qui avertuntur de post tergum Domini, et qui non quaerunt Dominum nec investigant eum “.","ואת הנסוגים מאחרי יהוה ואשר לא בקשו את יהוה ולא דרשהו׃"],["43","1","7","주 하느님 앞에서 조용히 하여라. 주님의 날이 가까웠다. 주님이 희생 제물을 마련하고 초대받은 이들을 성별하였다.","주 야훼 앞에서 입을 다물어라. 야훼께서 오실 날이 다가왔다. 야훼께서는 이미 제물을 마련하시고 손님들을 목욕재계시키셨다.2)부정을 벗어야 제물을 먹을 수 있다. 여기에서 제물은 유다를 말한다.","주 여호와 앞에서 잠잠할지어다 이는 여호와의 날이 가까웠으므로 여호와께서 희생을 준비하고 그가 청할 자들을 구별하셨음이니라","주 여호와 앞에서 잠잠할찌어다 이는 여호와의 날이 가까왔으므로 여호와가 희생을 준비하고 그 청할 자를 구별하였음이니라","너희는 잠잠하여라! 여호와께서 오신다. 여호와께서 심판하실 날이 가까이 왔다. 여호와께서 자기 백성을 모조리 살육할 큰 희생제사를 준비하셨고, 이 일을 집행할 유다의 적들을 이미 손님으로 초대하셨다.","Silence in the presence of the Lord GOD! for near is the day of the LORD, Yes, the LORD has prepared a sacrifice, he has consecrated his guests.","Hold thy peace at the presence of the Lord GOD: for the day of the LORD is at hand: for the LORD hath prepared a sacrifice, he hath bid his guests.","Be silent before the Sovereign LORD, for the day of the LORD is near. The LORD has prepared a sacrifice; he has consecrated those he has invited.","Silete a facie Domini Dei, quia iuxta est dies Domini; quia praeparavit Dominus hostiam, sanctificavit vocatos suos.","הס מפני אדני יהוה כי קרוב יום יהוה כי הכין יהוה זבח הקדיש קראיו׃"],["43","1","8","주님이 희생 제물을 잡는 날 대신들과 왕자들과 외국 옷을 입은 자들을 벌하리라.","\"나 야훼가 제물을 잡을 날이 온다. 그 날에 남의 나라 옷을 입고 거들먹거리는 고관들과 왕족들을 나는 벌하리라.","여호와의 희생의 날에 내가 방백들과 왕자들과 이방인의 옷을 입은 자들을 벌할 것이며","여호와의 희생의 날에 내가 방백들과 왕자들과 이방의 의복을 입은 자들을 벌할 것이며","\"유다 백성을 희생의 제물로 살육하는 여호와의 날이 오면, 내가 이 나라의 지도자들과 왕가의 후손들을 징벌하고, 이방의 풍속에 빠져서 남의 나라에서 유행하는 옷을 입고 다니는 것들을 모조리 처벌하겠다.","On the day of the LORD’s sacrifice I will punish the officials and the king’s sons, and all who dress in foreign apparel.","And it shall come to pass in the day of the LORD's sacrifice, that I will punish the princes, and the king's children, and all such as are clothed with strange apparel.","On the day of the LORD'S sacrifice I will punish the princes and the king's sons and all those clad in foreign clothes."," “Et erit in die hostiae Domini: visitabo super principes et super filios regis et super omnes, qui induti sunt veste peregrina;","והיה ביום זבח יהוה ופקדתי על השרים ועל בני המלך ועל כל הלבשים מלבוש נכרי׃"],["43","1","9","그날에 나는 문지방을 뛰어넘는 자들을 모두 벌하리라. 제 주인의 집을 폭력과 속임수로 가득 채우는 자들을 벌하리라.","문지방이 닳게 넘나들며 속임수로 남을 등쳐 상전의 궁궐을 채우는 것들을 그 날 나는 벌하리라.\"","그 날에 문턱을 뛰어넘어서 포악과 거짓을 자기 주인의 집에 채운 자들을 내가 벌하리라","그 날에 문턱을 뛰어 넘어서 강포와 궤휼로 자기 주인의 집에 채운 자들을 내가 벌하리라","또 그날이 오면, 문턱을 밟지 말라는 이방 풍속을 지키느라고 지극히 정성스럽게 문턱들을 넘어 다니면서도, 상전들의 집 문턱이 달도록 드나들면서 폭력과 사기로 탈취한 재물을 쌓아주는 자들을 내가 모조리 처치하겠다\"","I will punish, on that day, all who leap over the threshold, Who fill the house of their master with violence and deceit.","In the same day also will I punish all those that leap on the threshold, which fill their masters' houses with violence and deceit.","On that day I will punish all who avoid stepping on the threshold, who fill the temple of their gods with violence and deceit.","et visitabo super omnem, qui arroganter ingreditur super limen in die illa, qui complent domum domini sui iniquitate et dolo.","ופקדתי על כל הדולג על המפתן ביום ההוא הממלאים בית אדניהם חמס ומרמה׃"],["43","1","10","주님의 말씀이다. 그날에 ‘물고기 대문’에서는 아우성 소리가, 신시가지에서는 울부짖는 소리가, 언덕들에서는 크게 부서지는 소리가 나리라.","\"그 날이 오면,\" 야훼의 말씀이시다. \"생선문에서 아우성 소리가, 새 장터에서 울부짖는 소리가, 이 언덕 저 언덕에서 무섭게 깨지는 소리가 나리라.","나 여호와가 말하노라 그 날에 어문에서는 부르짖는 소리가, 제 이 구역에서는 울음 소리가, 작은 산들에서는 무너지는 소리가 일어나리라","나 여호와가 말하노라 그 날에 어문에서는 곡성이, 제 이 구역에서는 부르짖는 소리가, 작은 산들에서는 무너지는 소리가 일어나리라","여호와께서 말씀하셨다. \"그날이 오면 물고기문에서 전쟁의 함성이, 성안의 신설 구역에서는 슬피 울부짖는 소리가, 시내의 모든 언덕에서는 비명 소리가 드높게 울려날 것이다.","On that day—oracle of the LORD— A cry will be heard from the Fish Gate, a wail from the Second Quarter, loud crashing from the hills.","And it shall come to pass in that day, saith the LORD, that there shall be the noise of a cry from the fish gate, and an howling from the second, and a great crashing from the hills.","\"On that day,\" declares the LORD, \"a cry will go up from the Fish Gate, wailing from the New Quarter, and a loud crash from the hills.","Et erit in die illa, dicit Dominus, vox clamoris a porta Piscium, et ululatus ab urbe Nova, et contritio magna a collibus.","והיה ביום ההוא נאם יהוה קול צעקה משער הדגים ויללה מן המשנה ושבר גדול מהגבעות׃"],["43","1","11","막테스의 주민들아, 울부짖어라. 상인들이 모두 멸망하고 장사꾼들이 없어졌다.","방앗간 거리 사람들아, 울부짖어라. 장사치들은 간데없고 돈 거래하는 자들도 자취를 감추리라.\"","막데스 주민들아 너희는 슬피 울라 가나안 백성이 다 패망하고 은을 거래하는 자들이 끊어졌음이라","막데스 거민들아 너희는 애곡하라 1)가나안 백성이 다 패망하고 은을 수운하는 자가 끊어졌음이니라 장사하는","ㄷ) 성안 낮은 곳에 살면서 장사하는 자들아, 너희는 슬피 울고 탄식하여라! 장사하는 무리들이 모조리 사라지고, 항상 돈을 주무르며 탐욕을 부리던 자들이 모두 멸망할 것이기 때문이다.\" (ㄷ. 또는 \"막데스 거민들아\")","Wail, O inhabitants of Maktesh! for all the merchants are destroyed, all who weigh out silver, done away with.","Howl, ye inhabitants of Maktesh, for all the merchant people are cut down; all they that bear silver are cut off.","Wail, you who live in the market district; all your merchants will be wiped out, all who trade with silver will be ruined.","Ululate, habitatores Pilae, quia interiit omnis populus Chanaan, disperierunt omnes involuti argento.","הילילו ישבי המכתש כי נדמה כל עם כנען נכרתו כל נטילי כסף׃"],["43","1","12","그때에 나는 등불을 켜 들고 예루살렘을 뒤지리라. 하는 일 없이 태평스럽게 ‘주님은 선을 베풀지도 않고 악을 내리지도 않으신다.’ 하고 마음속으로 생각하는 자들을 나는 벌하리라.","\"그 때가 되면 나는 불을 켜들고 예루살렘을 뒤지리라. 팔자가 늘어져 스스로 말하기를 '야훼가 무슨 복을 주랴? 무슨 화를 주랴?' 하는 자들을 벌하리라.","그 때에 내가 예루살렘에서 찌꺼기 같이 가라앉아서 마음속에 스스로 이르기를 여호와께서는 복도 내리지 아니하시며 화도 내리지 아니하시리라 하는 자를 등불로 두루 찾아 벌하리니","그 때에 내가 등불로 예루살렘에 두루 찾아 무릇 찌끼 같이 가라앉아서 심중에 스스로 이르기를 여호와께서는 복도 내리지 아니하시며 화도 내리지 아니하시리라 하는 자를 벌하리니","\"그때가 되면 내가 등불을 들고 예루살렘을 구석구석 뒤져서, 걱정 없이 태평성대를 누리는 사람들, 자기들의 온갖 죄악에 인이 박혀서 마음속으로 \"하나님은 선한 일도 하지 않고 악한 일도 하지 않는다\"고 말하는 것들을 모조리 찾아내어 처치하겠다.","At that time, I will search Jerusalem with lamps, I will punish the people who settle like dregs in wine, Who say in their hearts, “The Lord will not do good, nor will he do harm.”","And it shall come to pass at that time, that I will search Jerusalem with candles, and punish the men that are settled on their lees: that say in their heart, The LORD will not do good, neither will he do evil.","At that time I will search Jerusalem with lamps and punish those who are complacent, who are like wine left on its dregs, who think, 'The LORD will do nothing, either good or bad.'","Et erit in tempore illo: scrutabor Ierusalem in lucernis et visitabo super viros defixos in faecibus suis, qui dicunt in cordibus suis: “Non faciet bene Dominus et non faciet male”.","והיה בעת ההיא אחפש את ירושלם בנרות ופקדתי על האנשים הקפאים על שמריהם האמרים בלבבם לא ייטיב יהוה ולא ירע׃"],["43","1","13","그들의 재산은 약탈당하고 그들의 집은 황폐하게 되리라. 그들이 집을 짓는다 해도 거기에서 살지 못하고 포도밭을 가꾼다 해도 거기에서 난 포도주를 마시지 못하리라.","그들의 재산은 털리고 집은 헐리리니, 일껏 집을 짓고도 거기에서 살지 못하고 일껏 포도 농사를 하고도 술을 빚어 마시지 못하리라.\"","그들의 재물이 노략되며 그들의 집이 황폐할 것이라 그들이 집을 건축하나 거기에 살지 못하며 포도원을 가꾸나 그 포도주를 마시지 못하리라","그들의 재물이 노략되며 그들의 집이 황무할 것이라 그들이 집을 건축하나 거기 거하지 못하며 포도원을 심으나 그 포도주를 마시지 못하리라","그때에 그들의 재산은 약탈을 당하고 그들의 집은 모두 잿더미가 될 것이다. 그들이 새 집을 지어도 거기에서 살지 못하고, 새 포도원을 만들어도 거기서 나는 포도주 한 방울도 마시지 못할 것이다.\"","Their wealth shall be given to plunder and their houses to devastation; They will build houses, but not dwell in them; They will plant vineyards, but not drink their wine.","Therefore their goods shall become a booty, and their houses a desolation: they shall also build houses, but not inhabit them; and they shall plant vineyards, but not drink the wine thereof.","Their wealth will be plundered, their houses demolished. They will build houses but not live in them; they will plant vineyards but not drink the wine.","Et erunt opes eorum in direptionem, et domus eorum in desertum; et aedificabunt domos et non habitabunt, et plantabunt vineas et non bibent vinum earum “.","והיה חילם למשסה ובתיהם לשממה ובנו בתים ולא ישבו ונטעו כרמים ולא ישתו את יינם׃"],["43","1","14","주님의 위대한 날이 가까웠다. 가까울뿐더러 득달같이 다가온다. 주님의 날에 들리는 소리는 쓰라리니 용사조차 비명을 지르리라.","야훼께서 오실 무서운 날이 다가왔다. 득달같이 다가왔다. 야훼께서 오실 날, 역마보다 날쌔게 오는구나. 군인보다도 잽싸게 닥치는구나.","여호와의 큰 날이 가깝도다 가깝고도 빠르도다 여호와의 날의 소리로다 용사가 거기서 심히 슬피 우는도다","여호와의 큰 날이 가깝도다 가깝고도 심히 빠르도다 여호와의 날의 소리로다 용사가 거기서 심히 애곡하는도다","그 무서운 여호와의 날이 가까이 왔다. 가까이 오고 또 매우 빠르게 다가온다. ㄱ) 여호와의 날은 경주자보다도 더 빠르게 오고, 어떤 용사보다도 더 신속하게 온다. (ㄱ. 또는 \"여호와의 날에 용사마저도 그 살육을 당하는 곳에서 비통하게 울부짖으며 살려 달라고 호소하는 소리를 들어 보라\")","Near is the great day of the LORD, near and very swiftly coming. The sound of the day of the LORD! Piercing— there a warrior shrieks!","The great day of the LORD is near, it is near, and hasteth greatly, even the voice of the day of the LORD: the mighty man shall cry there bitterly.","\"The great day of the LORD is near--near and coming quickly. Listen! The cry on the day of the LORD will be bitter, the shouting of the warrior there.","Iuxta est dies Domini magnus, iuxta et velox nimis; vox diei Domini amara, tribulabitur ibi fortis.","קרוב יום יהוה הגדול קרוב ומהר מאד קול יום יהוה מר צרח שם גבור׃"],["43","1","15","그날은 분노의 날 환난과 고난의 날 파멸과 파괴의 날 어둠과 암흑의 날 구름과 먹구름의 날이다.","그 날은 야훼의 분노가 터지는 날, 모두들 죽도록 고생하는 날, 폭풍에 휩쓸려가는 날, 먹구름이 뒤덮이는 어두운 날,","그날은 분노의 날이요 환난과 고통의 날이요 황폐와 패망의 날이요 캄캄하고 어두운 날이요 구름과 흑암의 날이요","그 날은 분노의 날이요 환난과 고통의 날이요 황무와 패괴의 날이요 캄캄하고 어두운 날이요 구름과 흑암의 날이요","그날은 여호와의 분노가 폭발하여 넘치는 날이요, 막다른 골목으로 몰리는 날이요, 부서지고 무너지는 날이요, 어둡고 어두워 칠흑같이 캄캄한 날이요, 짙고 짙은 먹구름이 뒤덮인 날이요,","A day of wrath is that day, a day of distress and anguish, a day of ruin and desolation, A day of darkness and gloom, a day of thick black clouds,","That day is a day of wrath, a day of trouble and distress, a day of wasteness and desolation, a day of darkness and gloominess, a day of clouds and thick darkness,","That day will be a day of wrath, a day of distress and anguish, a day of trouble and ruin, a day of darkness and gloom, a day of clouds and blackness,","Dies irae dies illa, dies tribulationis et angustiae, dies vastitatis et desolationis, dies tenebrarum et caliginis, dies nebulae et turbinis,","יום עברה היום ההוא יום צרה ומצוקה יום שאה ומשואה יום חשך ואפלה יום ענן וערפל׃"],["43","1","16","견고한 성읍과 드높은 망대를 향하여 뿔 나팔 소리와 전쟁의 함성이 터지는 날이다.","나팔 소리 울리며 함성이 터지는 날이다. \"저 든든한 성을 쳐라. 귀퉁이에 솟아 있는 망대를 쳐라.\"","나팔을 불어 경고하며 견고한 성읍들을 치며 높은 망대를 치는 날이로다","나팔을 불어 경고하며 견고한 성읍을 치며 높은 망대를 치는 날이로다","절벽 위에 앉은 성읍들과 드높은 방어탑들을 향해 날카롭게 울려 퍼지는 나팔 소리와 전쟁의 아우성이 가득 찬 날이다.","A day of trumpet blasts and battle cries against fortified cities, against lofty battlements.","A day of the trumpet and alarm against the fenced cities, and against the high towers.","a day of trumpet and battle cry against the fortified cities and against the corner towers.","dies tubae et clangoris super civitates munitas et super angulos excelsos.","יום שופר ותרועה על הערים הבצרות ועל הפנות הגבהות׃"],["43","1","17","내가 사람들에게 환난을 보내리니 그들은 눈먼 이들처럼 걸으리라. 그들이 주님에게 죄를 지은 까닭이다. 그들의 피는 먼지처럼 쏟아지고 그들의 살은 오물처럼 쏟아지리라.","\"내가 사람들을 몰아치리니, 그들은 소경처럼 더듬거리다가 피를 땅에 뿌리고 배알을 거름덩이처럼 쏟으리라. 그들이 나에게 죄를 지은 탓이다.","내가 사람들에게 고난을 내려 맹인 같이 행하게 하리니 이는 그들이 나 여호와께 범죄하였음이라 또 그들의 피는 쏟아져서 티끌 같이 되며 그들의 살은 분토 같이 될지라","내가 사람들에게 고난을 내려 소경 같이 행하게 하리니 이는 그들이 나 여호와께 범죄하였음이라 또 그들의 피는 흘리워서 티끌 같이 되며 그들의 살은 분토 같이 될찌라","사람들은 궁지에 몰리어 모두 소경처럼 더듬거릴 것이다. 그들이 적의를 품고 여호와께 반항하였기 때문이다. 그러면 그들의 피가 흙탕물처럼 쏟아져 나올 것이고, 그들의 내장이 노폐물처럼 터져 나오게 될 것이다.\"","I will hem the people in till they walk like the blind, because they have sinned against the LORD; And their blood shall be poured out like dust, and their bowels like dung.","And I will bring distress upon men, that they shall walk like blind men, because they have sinned against the LORD: and their blood shall be poured out as dust, and their flesh as the dung.","I will bring distress on the people and they will walk like blind men, because they have sinned against the LORD. Their blood will be poured out like dust and their entrails like filth.","Et tribulabo homines, et ambulabunt ut caeci, quia Domino peccaverunt; et effundetur sanguis eorum sicut humus, et viscera eorum sicut stercora.","והצרתי לאדם והלכו כעורים כי ליהוה חטאו ושפך דמם כעפר ולחמם כגללים׃"],["43","1","18","주님의 분노의 날에 그들의 은도 그들의 금도 그들을 구하지 못하리라. 온 땅은 주님의 열정의 불에 타 버리리라. 주님은 세상의 모든 주민에게 정녕 무서운 파멸을 내리리라.","은과 금이 아무리 많아도 그것으로 그 난을 면하지는 못하리라.\" 야훼의 분노가 타오르는 날, 온 세상은 활활 타버리리라. 그가 세상 사람을 송두리째 순식간에 멸하시리라.","그들의 은과 금이 여호와의 분노의 날에 능히 그들을 건지지 못할 것이며 이 온 땅이 여호와의 질투의 불에 삼켜지리니 이는 여호와가 이 땅 모든 주민을 멸절하되 놀랍게 멸절할 것임이라","그들의 은과 금이 여호와의 분노의 날에 능히 그들을 건지지 못할 것이며 이 온 땅이 여호와의 질투의 불에 삼키우리니 이는 여호와가 이 땅 모든 거민을 멸절하되 놀랍게 멸절할 것임이니라","여호와의 분노가 폭발하여 넘치는 날에는 그들의 은도 그들을 살릴 수가 없고 그들의 금도 그들의 목숨을 건질 수가 없다. 그때에는 온 땅이 그분의 질투하시는 분노의 불꽃 속에서 사그러질 것이다. 그분이 땅 위에 사는 모든 사람들을 순식간에 멸망시키실 것이기 때문이다.","Neither their silver nor their gold will be able to save them. On the day of the LORD’s wrath, in the fire of his passion, all the earth will be consumed. For he will make an end, yes, a sudden end, of all who live on the earth. : : : : : : : : : : : : :","Neither their silver nor their gold shall be able to deliver them in the day of the LORD's wrath; but the whole land shall be devoured by the fire of his jealousy: for he shall make even a speedy riddance of all them that dwell in the land.","Neither their silver nor their gold will be able to save them on the day of the LORD'S wrath. In the fire of his jealousy the whole world will be consumed, for he will make a sudden end of all who live in the earth.\"","Sed et argentum eorum et aurum eorum non poterit liberare eos in die irae Domini; in igne zeli eius devorabitur omnis terra, quia consummationem cum festinatione faciet cunctis habitantibus terram.","גם כספם גם זהבם לא יוכל להצילם ביום עברת יהוה ובאש קנאתו תאכל כל הארץ כי כלה אך נבהלה יעשה את כל ישבי הארץ׃"],["43","2","1","함께 모여라, 모여 오너라, 수치를 모르는 민족아!","너희 천대받는 겨레들아, 야훼께서 진노를 터뜨리시기 전에 모여오너라. 야훼께서 크게 노하시면, 검불처럼 쓸려가리니, 그 날이 오기 전에 모여오너라.","수치를 모르는 백성아 모일지어다 모일지어다","수치를 모르는 백성아 모일찌어다 모일찌어다","너희 부끄러운 줄을 모르는 자들아, 흉악한 폭행도 두려운 줄 모르고 감행하는 모든 자들아, 이제 자신을 돌아보고 주님 앞으로 나아와서 굴복하여라!","Gather, gather yourselves together, O nation without shame!","Gather yourselves together, yea, gather together, O nation not desired;","Gather together, gather together, O shameful nation,","Convenite, congregamini, gens non amabilis,","התקוששו וקושו הגוי לא נכסף׃"],["43","2","2","쓸려 가는 검불처럼 너희가 내쫓기기 전에 주님의 타오르는 분노가 너희에게 닥치기 전에 주님의 분노의 날이 너희에게 닥치기 전에",null,"명령이 시행되어 날이 겨 같이 지나가기 전, 여호와의 진노가 너희에게 내리기 전, 여호와의 분노의 날이 너희에게 이르기 전에 그리할지어다","명령이 시행되기 전, 광음이 겨 같이 날아 지나가기 전, 여호와의 진노가 너희에게 임하기 전, 여호와의 분노의 날이 너희에게 이르기 전에 그리할찌어다","주께서 자신의 판결을 집행하시기 전에, 때를 놓치지 말고 돌아서거라. 하루라는 시간은 바람에 날리는 쭉정이처럼 가볍게 흘러 간다는 것을 기억하여라! 주께서 심판을 시작하시는 날, 주께서 이글이글 타오르는 자신의 분노를 너희에게 쏟아 부으시는 그날이 오기 전에, 너희는 돌이켜라!","Before you are driven away, like chaff that disappears; Before there comes upon you the blazing anger of the LORD; Before there comes upon you the day of the LORD’s anger.","Before the decree bring forth, before the day pass as the chaff, before the fierce anger of the LORD come upon you, before the day of the LORD's anger come upon you.","before the appointed time arrives and that day sweeps on like chaff, before the fierce anger of the LORD comes upon you, before the day of the LORD'S wrath comes upon you.","priusquam dispergamini quasi pulvis transeuntes, antequam veniat super vos ira furoris Domini, antequam veniat super vos dies furoris Domini.","בטרם לדת חק כמץ עבר יום בטרם לא יבוא עליכם חרון אף יהוה בטרם לא יבוא עליכם יום אף יהוה׃"],["43","2","3","주님을 찾아라, 그분의 법규를 실천하는 이 땅의 모든 겸손한 이들아! 의로움을 찾아라. 겸손함을 찾아라. 그러면 주님의 분노의 날에 너희가 화를 피할 수 있으리라.","너희는 야훼를 찾아라. 하느님의 법대로 살다가 고생하는 이 땅 모든 백성들아, 바로 살도록 힘써라. 겸손한 마음을 갖도록 애써라. 그리하면 야훼께서 크게 노하시는 날 너희만은 화를 면하리라.","여호와의 규례를 지키는 세상의 모든 겸손한 자들아 너희는 여호와를 찾으며 공의와 겸손을 구하라 너희가 혹시 여호와의 분노의 날에 숨김을 얻으리라","여호와의 규례를 지키는 세상의 모든 겸손한 자들아 너희는 여호와를 찾으며 공의와 겸손을 구하라 너희가 혹시 여호와의 분노의 날에 숨김을 얻으리라","이미 주께 복종하고 주님의 말씀에 따라서 살아온 사람들이여, 주님 앞에서 올바른 일을 계속하고 항상 겸손하게 사시오! 그러면 주께서 진노의 심판을 집행하시는 날, 혹시 주님의 보호를 받게 될지도 모릅니다\"","Seek the LORD, all you humble of the land, who have observed his law; Seek justice, seek humility; Perhaps you will be sheltered on the day of the LORD’s anger.","Seek ye the LORD, all ye meek of the earth, which have wrought his judgment; seek righteousness, seek meekness: it may be ye shall be hid in the day of the LORD's anger.","Seek the LORD, all you humble of the land, you who do what he commands. Seek righteousness, seek humility; perhaps you will be sheltered on the day of the LORD'S anger.","Quaerite Dominum, omnes mansueti terrae, qui iudicium eius estis operati; quaerite iustitiam, quaerite mansuetudinem, si quomodo abscondamini in die furoris Domini.","בקשו את יהוה כל ענוי הארץ אשר משפטו פעלו בקשו צדק בקשו ענוה אולי תסתרו ביום אף יהוה׃"],["43","2","4","정녕 가자는 인적이 끊기고 아스클론은 폐허가 되리라. 아스돗 주민들은 대낮에 쫓겨나고 에크론 사람들은 모조리 내몰리리라.","가자는 정녕 벌을 받아 황폐하게 되고 아스클론은 쑥밭이 되리라. 아스돗 시민들은 대낮에 쫓겨나고 에크론은 뿌리째 뽑히리라.","가사는 버림을 당하며 아스글론은 폐허가 되며 아스돗은 대낮에 쫓겨나며 에그론은 뽑히리라","가사가 버리우며 아스글론이 황폐되며 아스돗이 백주에 쫓겨나며 에그론이 뽑히우리라","가사 성읍은 주민들이 모두 피난하여 아주 버림받은 마을이 될 것이며 아스글론은 쑥대밭이 될 것이다. 아스돗 주민들은 백주에 기습을 받아 쫓겨날 것이며 에그론은 언제 그런 성읍이 있었느냐는 듯이 사라질 것이다.","For Gaza shall be forsaken, and Ashkelon shall be a waste, Ashdod they shall drive out at midday, and Ekron shall be uprooted.","For Gaza shall be forsaken, and Ashkelon a desolation: they shall drive out Ashdod at the noon day, and Ekron shall be rooted up.","Gaza will be abandoned and Ashkelon left in ruins. At midday Ashdod will be emptied and Ekron uprooted.","Quia Gaza deserta erit, et Ascalon desolata, Azotum in meridie eicient, et Accaron eradicabitur.","כי עזה עזובה תהיה ואשקלון לשממה אשדוד בצהרים יגרשוה ועקרון תעקר׃"],["43","2","5","불행하여라, 해안 지방에 사는 크렛 민족! ─ 주님께서 너희를 거슬러 말씀하신다. ─ 필리스티아 땅 가나안아 내가 너를 없애 버려 주민들이 하나도 남지 않게 하리라.","바닷가 일대에 사는 사람들, 그렛 섬에서 온 민족들은 망하리라. 야훼께서 이렇게 언도를 내리셨다. \"내가 불레셋 온 나라를 굴복시켜 주민이 하나도 없게 멸하리라.\"","해변 주민 그렛 족속에게 화 있을진저 블레셋 사람의 땅 가나안아 여호와의 말씀이 너희를 치나니 내가 너를 멸하여 주민이 없게 하리라","해변 거민 그렛 족속에게 화 있을찐저 블레셋 사람의 땅 가나안아 여호와의 말이 너희를 치나니 내가 너를 멸하여 거민이 없게 하리라","너희 해안에 거주하는 자들아, 너희 그렛 섬에서 침투해 들어온 자들아, 너희가 멸망할 날이 가까이 왔다. 주께서 너희에 대하여 이같이 결정을 내리셨다. \"블레셋 족속들이 사는 땅아, 내가 너를 쳐서 더 이상 네 땅에 사는 사람이 아무도 없도록 하겠다.\"","Ah! You who dwell by the seacoast, the nation of Cherethites, the word of the LORD is against you! O Canaan, land of the Philistines, I will leave you to perish without an inhabitant!","Woe unto the inhabitants of the sea coast, the nation of the Cherethites! the word of the LORD is against you; O Canaan, the land of the Philistines, I will even destroy thee, that there shall be no inhabitant.","Woe to you who live by the sea, O Kerethite people; the word of the LORD is against you, O Canaan, land of the Philistines. \"I will destroy you, and none will be left.\"","Vae, qui habitatis funiculum maris, gens Cretensium! Verbum Domini super vos, Chanaan, terra Philisthinorum:  “Disperdam te, ita ut non sit inhabitator “.","הוי ישבי חבל הים גוי כרתים דבר יהוה עליכם כנען ארץ פלשתים והאבדתיך מאין יושב׃"],["43","2","6","해안 지방은 풀밭이 되고 목자들의 움막이 되며 양 떼의 우리가 되리라.","바닷가 일대는 풀밭이 되어 목자들이 양떼나 몰고 다니는 목장이 되고 돌담을 쌓아 양떼들을 쉬게 하는 곳이 되리라.","해변은 풀밭이 되어 목자의 움막과 양 떼의 우리가 거기에 있을 것이며","해변은 초장이 되어 목자의 움과 양떼의 우리가 거기 있을 것이며","그 해안 지역은 초원지대가 되어 목자들이 양 떼를 몰고 돌아다닐 것이며 밤에 양이 자는 우리들을 지어 놓을 것이다.","You shall become fields for shepherds, and folds for flocks.","And the sea coast shall be dwellings and cottages for shepherds, and folds for flocks.","The land by the sea, where the Kerethites dwell, will be a place for shepherds and sheep pens.","Et erit funiculus maris requies pastorum et caulae pecorum.","והיתה חבל הים נות כרת רעים וגדרות צאן׃"],["43","2","7","그 지방은 유다 집안의 남은 자들 소유가 되리라. 그들은 거기에서 양 떼를 먹이다가 저녁에는 아스클론에 있는 집에 누우리라. 정녕 주 그들의 하느님께서 찾아오시어 그들의 운명을 되돌려 주실 것이다.","바닷가 일대는 살아 남은 유다 가문이 차지하여, 양떼에게 풀을 뜯기다가 저녁이 되면 아스클론 집에 가서 쉬리라. 그들의 하느님 야훼께서 찾아오시어 포로 생활을 마치고 돌아오게 하시리라.","그 지경은 유다 족속의 남은 자에게로 돌아갈지라 그들이 거기에서 양 떼를 먹이고 저녁에는 아스글론 집들에 누우리니 이는 그들의 하나님 여호와가 그들을 보살피사 그들이 사로잡힘을 돌이킬 것임이라","그 지경은 유다 족속의 남은 자에게로 돌아갈찌라 그들이 거기서 양떼를 먹이고 저녁에는 아스글론 집들에 누우리니 이는 그들의 하나님 여호와가 그들을 권고하여 그 사로잡힘을 돌이킬 것임이니라","해안 지역 전체가 유다 백성의 남은 자들에게 돌아갈 것이다. 유다 지파에서 살아 남은 소수가 거기서 양 떼를 먹이고 저녁에는 아스글론의 버려진 집들에 들어가 쉴 것이다. 왜냐하면, 그들의 하나님 여호와께서 자기 백성을 친절하게 찾아가 그들을 다시 번영시켜 주실 것이기 때문이다.","The seacoast shall belong to the remnant of the house of Judah; by the sea they shall pasture. In the houses of Ashkelon they shall lie down in the evening. For the LORD their God will take care of them, and bring about their restoration.","And the coast shall be for the remnant of the house of Judah; they shall feed thereupon: in the houses of Ashkelon shall they lie down in the evening: for the LORD their God shall visit them, and turn away their captivity.","It will belong to the remnant of the house of Judah; there they will find pasture. In the evening they will lie down in the houses of Ashkelon. The LORD their God will care for them; he will restore their fortunes.","Et erit funiculus maris reliquiis domus Iudae: ibi pascentur, in domibus Ascalonis ad vesperam requiescent, quia visitabit eos Dominus Deus eorum et convertet sortem eorum.","והיה חבל לשארית בית יהודה עליהם ירעון בבתי אשקלון בערב ירבצון כי יפקדם יהוה אלהיהם ושב שבותם׃"],["43","2","8","나는 모압이 모욕하고 암몬 자손들이 야유하는 소리를 들었다. 그들은 내 백성을 모욕하고 자기들의 국경에 서서 으스대었다.","\"모압이 퍼붓는 욕설을 나는 들었다. 암몬족이 퍼붓는 악담도 들었다. 그들은 이 나라 접경까지 와서 거만을 떨며 내 백성에게 욕설을 퍼부었다.","내가 모압의 비방과 암몬 자손이 조롱하는 말을 들었나니 그들이 내 백성을 비방하고 자기들의 경계에 대하여 교만하였느니라","내가 모압의 훼방과 암몬 자손의 후욕을 들었나니 그들이 내 백성을 훼방하고 스스로 커서 그 경계를 침범하였느니라","주께서 말씀하셨다. \"모압 족속이 흉보는 소리와 암몬 족속이 퍼붓는 악담을 내가 다 들었다. 내 백성을 흉보고 그들의 땅을 탈취하겠다고 뻐기는 소리를 내가 다 들었다.","I have heard the taunts uttered by Moab, and the insults of the Ammonites, When they taunted my people and made boasts against their territory.","I have heard the reproach of Moab, and the revilings of the children of Ammon, whereby they have reproached my people, and magnified themselves against their border.","\"I have heard the insults of Moab and the taunts of the Ammonites, who insulted my people and made threats against their land."," “Audivi opprobrium Moab et blasphemias filiorum Ammon, qui exprobraverunt populo meo et magnificati sunt super terminos eorum.","שמעתי חרפת מואב וגדופי בני עמון אשר חרפו את עמי ויגדילו על גבולם׃"],["43","2","9","이스라엘의 하느님, 만군의 주님의 말씀이다. 그러므로 내가 살아 있는 한 모압은 소돔처럼 되고 암몬 자손들은 고모라처럼 되리라. 쐐기풀이 자라는 땅이 되고 소금 구덩이가 되어 영원한 폐허가 되리라. 내 백성의 남은 자들이 그들을 털고 내 민족의 살아남은 자들이 그것들을 차지하리라.","그래서 나는 어떤 일이 있어도,\" 이스라엘의 하느님, 만군의 야훼께서 하시는 말씀이시다. \"모압을 소돔처럼 만들리라. 암몬족을 고모라처럼 만들리라. 잡초나 우거지고 소금이나 캐는 곳, 언제까지나 쑥밭으로 남게 하리라. 살아 남은 내 백성, 이 겨레가 그들을 털고 그 땅을 차지하리라.\"","그러므로 만군의 여호와 이스라엘의 하나님이 말하노라 내가 나의 삶을 두고 맹세하노니 장차 모압은 소돔 같으며 암몬 자손은 고모라 같을 것이라 찔레가 나며 소금 구덩이가 되어 영원히 황폐하리니 내 백성의 남은 자들이 그들을 노략하며 나의 남은 백성이 그것을 기업으로 얻을 것이라","그러므로 만군의 여호와 이스라엘의 하나님이 말하노라 내가 나의 삶을 두고 맹세하노니 장차 모압은 소돔 같으며 암몬 자손은 고모라 같을 것이라 찔레가 나며 소금 구덩이가 되어 영원히 황무하리니 나의 끼친 백성이 그들을 노략하며 나의 남은 국민이 그것을 기업으로 얻을 것이라","그러므로 내가 확실히 살아 있음을 걸고 분명히 말한다. \"온 세상의 주인인 내가 이스라엘의 하나님으로서 말한다. 모압은 소돔과 같은 꼴이 되고 암몬은 고모라 꼴이 될 것이다. 그들의 땅은 소금 구덩이로 가득 찬 황무지가 되고 따가운 쐐기풀들만이 영원히 무성할 것이다. 내 백성 중에서 남은 자들이 모압과 암몬 족속을 약탈할 것이고, 내 민족 중에서 살아 남은 자들이 그들의 땅을 차지할 것이다.\"","Therefore, as I live— oracle of the LORD of hosts— the God of Israel, Moab shall become like Sodom, the Ammonites like Gomorrah: A field of weeds, a salt pit, a waste forever. The remnant of my people shall plunder them, the survivors of my nation dispossess them.","Therefore as I live, saith the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel, Surely Moab shall be as Sodom, and the children of Ammon as Gomorrah, even the breeding of nettles, and saltpits, and a perpetual desolation: the residue of my people shall spoil them, and the remnant of my people shall possess them.","Therefore, as surely as I live,\" declares the LORD Almighty, the God of Israel, \"surely Moab will become like Sodom, the Ammonites like Gomorrah--a place of weeds and salt pits, a wasteland forever. The remnant of my people will plunder them; the survivors of my nation will inherit their land.\"","Propterea vivo ego, dicit Dominus exercituum, Deus Israel, quia Moab ut Sodoma erit, et filii Ammon quasi Gomorra, possessio spinarum et acervi salis et desertum usque in aeternum; reliquiae populi mei diripient eos, et residui gentis meae possidebunt illos “.","לכן חי אני נאם יהוה צבאות אלהי ישראל כי מואב כסדם תהיה ובני עמון כעמרה ממשק חרול ומכרה מלח ושממה עד עולם שארית עמי יבזום ויתר גוי ינחלום׃"],["43","2","10","이것은 그들 교만의 대가이니, 그들이 만군의 주님의 백성을 모욕하며 으스댄 탓이다.","모압과 암몬은 으스대며 만군의 야훼의 백성에게 욕설을 퍼부었다. 그렇게 거만을 떨다가 이 모양이 된 것이다.","그들이 이런 일을 당할 것은 그들이 만군의 여호와의 백성을 훼방하고 교만하여졌음이라","그들이 이런 일을 당할 것은 교만하여 스스로 커서 만군의 여호와의 백성을 훼방함이니라","모압과 암몬이 교만하게 하나님의 백성을 비웃고 온 세상의 주인이신 여호와의 백성을 깔보며 뻐기는 소리를 하였기 때문에 이 같은 형벌을 받는 것이다.","This will be the recompense for their pride, because they taunted and boasted against the people of the LORD of hosts.","This shall they have for their pride, because they have reproached and magnified themselves against the people of the LORD of hosts.","This is what they will get in return for their pride, for insulting and mocking the people of the LORD Almighty.","Hoc eis eveniet pro superbia sua, quia blasphemaverunt et magnificati sunt super populum Domini exercituum.","זאת להם תחת גאונם כי חרפו ויגדלו על עם יהוה צבאות׃"],["43","2","11","주님께서는 그들에게 두려우신 분으로 드러나실 것이다. 정녕 그분께서는 세상의 신들을 모두 사라지게 하실 것이다. 모든 섬나라 민족들이 저마다 제고장에서 그분을 경배할 것이다.","야훼께서 세상의 모든 신을 맥 못쓰게 만드시리니, 그 날에 사람들은 야훼를 공경하리라. 바다를 끼고 사는 뭇 민족들도 모두 저희의 고장에서 야훼를 예배하리라.","여호와가 그들에게 두렵게 되어서 세상의 모든 신을 쇠약하게 하리니 이방의 모든 해변 사람들이 각각 자기 처소에서 여호와께 경배하리라","여호와가 그들에게 두렵게 되어서 세상의 모든 신을 쇠진케 하리니 이방의 모든 해변 사람들이 각각 자기 처소에서 여호와께 경배하리라","여호와께서 세상의 모든 신들을 쓸모없게 만들어 모든 이들에게 무서운 분이 되실 것이다. 그때에는 세상 만민이, ㄱ) 아무리 먼 곳에 사는 백성이라도 각기 자기 땅에서 주님을 섬기며 그분에게 영광을 돌릴 것이다. (ㄱ. 원문에는 \"이방의 섬에 사는 족속도\")","The LORD shall inspire them with terror when he makes all the gods of earth waste away; Then the distant shores of the nations, each from its own place, shall bow down to him.","The LORD will be terrible unto them: for he will famish all the gods of the earth; and men shall worship him, every one from his place, even all the isles of the heathen.","The LORD will be awesome to them when he destroys all the gods of the land. The nations on every shore will worship him, every one in its own land.","Horribilis Dominus super eos, quia attenuabit omnes deos terrae; et adorabunt eum, singuli de loco suo, omnes insulae gentium.","נורא יהוה עליהם כי רזה את כל אלהי הארץ וישתחוו לו איש ממקומו כל איי הגוים׃"],["43","2","12","에티오피아 사람들아 너희도 내 칼에 맞아 죽으리라.","\"에티오피아 사람들아, 너희도 내 칼에 맞아 죽으리라.\"","구스 사람들아 너희도 내 칼에 죽임을 당하리라","구스 사람아 너희도 내 칼에 살륙을 당하리라","ㄴ) 구스 사람들아, 너희도 내 칼에 관통되도록 찔려서 죽을 것이다. (ㄴ. 애굽 백성을 가리킨다. 스바냐가 활동하기 직전에 이집트는 제 25왕조인 구스 왕조의 통치를 받았다.(BC 715-663년))","You too, O Cushites, shall be slain by the sword of the LORD.","Ye Ethiopians also, ye shall be slain by my sword.","\"You too, O Cushites, will be slain by my sword.\""," “Sed et vos, Aethiopes, interfecti gladio meo eritis “.","גם אתם כושים חללי חרבי המה׃"],["43","2","13","그분께서는 북녘으로 손을 뻗으시어 아시리아를 없애시고 니네베를 폐허로, 광야처럼 메마른 땅으로 만드시리라.","야훼께서 북녘으로 손을 뻗으시어 아시리아를 멸하시리라. 니느웨를 쑥밭으로 만드시리니, 사막처럼 메마른 곳이 되리라.","여호와가 북쪽을 향하여 손을 펴서 앗수르를 멸하며 니느웨를 황폐하게 하여 사막 같이 메마르게 하리니","여호와가 북방을 향하여 손을 펴서 앗수르를 멸하며 니느웨로 황무케 하여 사막 같이 메마르게 하리니","여호와께서 북쪽으로도 손을 펴서 앗수르를 멸망시키시고, 그 도성 니느웨를 잿더미로 만드셔서 인적이 끊어진 황야가 되게 하실 것이다.","He will stretch out his hand against the north, to destroy Assyria; He will make Nineveh a waste, dry as the desert.","And he will stretch out his hand against the north, and destroy Assyria; and will make Nineveh a desolation, and dry like a wilderness.","He will stretch out his hand against the north and destroy Assyria, leaving Nineveh utterly desolate and dry as the desert.","Et extendet manum suam super aquilonem et perdet Assyriam; et ponet Nineven in solitudinem et in aridam, quasi desertum.","ויט ידו על צפון ויאבד את אשור וישם את נינוה לשממה ציה כמדבר׃"],["43","2","14","가축 떼가, 골짜기의 온갖 짐승이 그 한가운데에 눕고 사다새와 부엉이도 니네베 기둥 꼭대기에서 지내리라. 올빼미는 창문턱에서, 까마귀는 문지방에서 노래하리니 향백나무 들보가 드러났기 때문이다.","골짜기에 사는 갖가지 짐승떼가 그 복판에서 쉬고 남은 돌기둥 위에서는 갈가마귀나 올빼미가 밤을 지새우며 송백 재목은 삭아버리고 까마귀들이 창문턱에 모여앉아 지저귀리라.","각종 짐승이 그 가운데에 떼로 누울 것이며 당아와 고슴도치가 그 기둥 꼭대기에 깃들이고 그것들이 창에서 울 것이며 문턱이 적막하리니 백향목으로 지은 것이 벗겨졌음이라","각양 짐승이 그 가운데 떼로 누울 것이며 당아와 고슴도치가 그 기둥 꼭대기에 깃들일 것이며 창에서 울 것이며 문턱이 적막하리니 백향목으로 지은 것이 벗겨졌음이라","한때는 화려했던 그 도성이 그때에는 양들의 목초지로 바뀔 것이다. 온갖 들짐승들이 우글거리는 곳이 될 것이다. 넘어진 기둥들 틈에서는 고슴도치와 멧새들이 살 것이다. 텅빈 왕궁 안에서는 올빼미들이 구슬프게 울고 창문 턱마다 갈가마귀들이 앉아서 울 것이다. 송백의 화려한 널빤지들은 썩어서 떨어진 지가 오래되었다.","In her midst flocks shall lie down, all the wild life of the hollows; The screech owl and the desert owl shall roost in her columns; The owl shall hoot from the window, the raven croak from the doorway.","And flocks shall lie down in the midst of her, all the beasts of the nations: both the cormorant and the bittern shall lodge in the upper lintels of it; their voice shall sing in the windows; desolation shall be in the thresholds; for he shall uncover the cedar work.","Flocks and herds will lie down there, creatures of every kind. The desert owl and the screech owl will roost on her columns. Their calls will echo through the windows, rubble will be in the doorways, the beams of cedar will be exposed.","Et accubabunt in medio eius greges, omne genus animalium. Et onocrotalus et ulula in capitellis eius morabuntur; vox cantat in fenestra, corvus in limine, quoniam tabulatum cedrinum sublatum est.","ורבצו בתוכה עדרים כל חיתו גוי גם קאת גם קפד בכפתריה ילינו קול ישורר בחלון חרב בסף כי ארזה ערה׃"],["43","2","15","이것이 “나야, 나밖에 없어!” 하면서 희희낙락 태평스레 지내던 그 성읍이냐? 어찌하여 그 성읍은 들짐승이 깃들이는 폐허가 되었는가? 그곳을 지나가는 사람마다 휘파람을 불며 손을 흔들어 대리라.","천하를 호령하는 자리에 앉아 세상에는 저밖에 없다면서 뽐내고 흥청대더니, '바로 여기가 그 도시렷다. 그런데 어찌 이 모양이 되었지? 짐승이나 깃들이는 곳이 되다니.' 지나가는 사람마다 이렇게 혀를 차며 주먹질을 하리라.","이는 기쁜 성이라 염려 없이 거주하며 마음속에 이르기를 오직 나만 있고 나 외에는 다른 이가 없다 하더니 어찌 이와 같이 황폐하여 들짐승이 엎드릴 곳이 되었는고 지나가는 자마다 비웃으며 손을 흔들리로다","이는 기쁜 성이라 염려 없이 거하며 심중에 이르기를 오직 나만 있고 나 외에는 다른이가 없다 하더니 어찌 이같이 황무하여 들짐승의 엎드릴 곳이 되었는고 지나가는 자마다 치소하여 손을 흔들리로다","그 화려하고 번창하던 도성이 이 꼴이 되었다. 언제나 안전과 번영을 구가하며 \"온 세상에서 여기처럼 위대한 도성은 없다.\" 하고 당당하게 뽐내던 도성이 이렇게 되었다. \"그 도성이 어찌하여 완전한 폐허가 되고 들짐승들이 우글거리는 곳으로 변하였을까?\" 그곳을 지나가는 사람마다 혀를 차고 조롱하며 손가락질할 것이다.","Is this the exultant city that dwelt secure, That told itself, “I and there is no one else”? How it has become a waste, a lair for wild animals! Those who pass by it hiss, and shake their fists!","This is the rejoicing city that dwelt carelessly, that said in her heart, I am, and there is none beside me: how is she become a desolation, a place for beasts to lie down in! every one that passeth by her shall hiss, and wag his hand.","This is the carefree city that lived in safety. She said to herself, \"I am, and there is none besides me.\" What a ruin she has become, a lair for wild beasts! All who pass by her scoff and shake their fists.","Haec est civitas exsultans, habitans in confidentia, quae dicebat in corde suo:  “Ego sum, et extra me non est alia amplius! “. Quomodo facta est in desertum, cubile bestiae? Omnis, qui transit per eam, sibilabit et movebit manum suam.","זאת העיר העליזה היושבת לבטח האמרה בלבבה אני ואפסי עוד איך היתה לשמה מרבץ לחיה כל עובר עליה ישרק יניע ידו׃"],["43","3","1","불행하여라, 반항하는 도성, 더럽혀진 도성 억압을 일삼는 도성!","이 저주받을 도성아, 야훼께 반항이나 하는 더러운 도성아, 압제나 일삼는 도성아,","패역하고 더러운 곳, 포학한 그 성읍이 화 있을진저","패역하고 더러운 곳, 포학한 그 성읍이 화 있을찐저","주님에게 대항하던 도성, 불법과 폭력이 지배하는 예루살렘은 몰락하고 말 것이다.","Ah! Rebellious and polluted, the tyrannical city!","Woe to her that is filthy and polluted, to the oppressing city!","Woe to the city of oppressors, rebellious and defiled!","Vae, provocatrix et inquinata, civitas violenta!","הוי מראה ונגאלה העיר היונה׃"],["43","3","2","말을 듣지 않고 교훈을 받아들이지 않는구나. 주님을 신뢰하지 않고 자기 하느님께 가까이 가지 않는구나.","불러도 듣지 아니하고 징계를 해도 코웃음만 치며 제 하느님 야훼를 멀리하고 의지하지도 않는구나.","그가 명령을 듣지 아니하며 교훈을 받지 아니하며 여호와를 의뢰하지 아니하며 자기 하나님에게 가까이 나아가지 아니하였도다","그가 명령을 듣지 아니하며 교훈을 받지 아니하며 여호와를 의뢰하지 아니하며 자기 하나님에게 가까이 나아가지 아니하였도다","어떤 경고의 음성도 듣지 않고 어떤 책망의 말씀도 받아들이지 않는 도성, 자기 주인을 의지하지 않고 자기의 하나님을 멀리한 도성이다.","It listens to no voice, accepts no correction; In the LORD it has not trusted, nor drawn near to its God.","She obeyed not the voice; she received not correction; she trusted not in the LORD; she drew not near to her God.","She obeys no one, she accepts no correction. She does not trust in the LORD, she does not draw near to her God.","Non audivit vocem, non suscepit disciplinam; in Domino non est confisa, ad Deum suum non appropiavit.","לא שמעה בקול לא לקחה מוסר ביהוה לא בטחה אל אלהיה לא קרבה׃"],["43","3","3","그 안에 있는 대신들은 으르렁거리는 사자들 그 판관들은 저녁 이리 떼 아침까지 아무것도 남기지 않는다.","귀하신 몸들은 성 안에서 사자처럼 으르렁거리고 판사들은 벌판을 주름잡는 늑대처럼 뼈도 안 남기고 사람을 씹어 삼킨다.","그 가운데 방백들은 부르짖는 사자요 그의 재판장들은 이튿날까지 남겨 두는 것이 없는 저녁 이리요","그 가운데 방백들은 부르짖는 사자요 그 재판장들은 이튿날까지 남겨 두는 것이 없는 저녁 이리요","그 지도자들은 으르렁거리며 사냥하는 사자들이며 판사들은 아무리 많이 사냥하여도 새벽에는 뼈도 남기지 않고 밤새워 먹어 치우는 초원의 늑대들이다.","Its officials within it are roaring lions; Its judges are desert wolves that have no bones to gnaw by morning.","Her princes within her are roaring lions; her judges are evening wolves; they gnaw not the bones till the morrow.","Her officials are roaring lions, her rulers are evening wolves, who leave nothing for the morning.","Principes eius in medio eius leones rugientes; iudices eius lupi deserti, ossa non relinquunt in mane.","שריה בקרבה אריות שאגים שפטיה זאבי ערב לא גרמו לבקר׃"],["43","3","4","예언자들은 허풍쟁이 믿을 수 없는 사람들 사제들은 거룩한 것을 더럽히고 율법을 짓밟는다.","예언자들은 제 잘난 멋에 사람들을 속이고 사제들은 성소를 더럽히며 법을 짓밟는다.","그의 선지자들은 경솔하고 간사한 사람들이요 그의 제사장들은 성소를 더럽히고 율법을 범하였도다","그 선지자들은 위인이 경솔하고 간사한 자요 그 제사장들은 성소를 더럽히고 율법을 범하였도다","예언자들은 이익만을 탐하는 오만한 잔소리꾼들이요 사기꾼들이며, 제사장들은 성전을 더럽히고 자기들의 욕심에 맞추어 설교한다.","Its prophets are reckless, treacherous people; Its priests profane what is holy, and do violence to the law.","Her prophets are light and treacherous persons: her priests have polluted the sanctuary, they have done violence to the law.","Her prophets are arrogant; they are treacherous men. Her priests profane the sanctuary and do violence to the law.","Prophetae eius vaniloqui, viri fallaces; sacerdotes eius polluerunt sanctum, iniuste egerunt contra legem.","נביאיה פחזים אנשי בגדות כהניה חללו קדש חמסו תורה׃"],["43","3","5","그 한가운데에 계신 주님은 의로우신 분 불의를 행하지 않으신다. 아침마다 당신의 공정을 펴신다. 동틀 녘마다 어김없이 하신다. 그러나 불의한 자는 수치를 모르는구나.","그러나 그 안에 거하시는 야훼께서는 공변되시어 부당한 일 아니 하신다. 아침마다 햇빛처럼 밝은 판결을 내리시는데 그래도 죄인들은 부끄러움을 모르는구나.","그 가운데에 계시는 여호와는 의로우사 불의를 행하지 아니하시고 아침마다 빠짐없이 자기의 공의를 비추시거늘 불의한 자는 수치를 알지 못하는도다","그 중에 거하신 여호와는 의로우사 불의를 행치 아니하시고 아침마다 간단 없이 자기의 공의를 나타내시거늘 불의한 자는 수치를 알지 못하는도다","그러나 그 도성 안에도 의인이 있어, 의롭지 않은 일을 전혀 하지 않고 매일 자기의 의로운 행실을 드러내며 어떠한 경우에도 거기서 벗어나는 일이 없는데, 악인은 전혀 부끄러움을 느끼지 못하고 있다.","But the LORD in its midst is just, doing no wrong; Morning after morning rendering judgment unfailingly, at dawn; the wicked, however, know no shame.","The just LORD is in the midst thereof; he will not do iniquity: every morning doth he bring his judgment to light, he faileth not; but the unjust knoweth no shame.","The LORD within her is righteous; he does no wrong. Morning by morning he dispenses his justice, and every new day he does not fail, yet the unrighteous know no shame.","Dominus iustus in medio eius non faciet iniquitatem; mane, mane iudicium suum dabit, sicut lucem, quae non deficit; nescivit autem iniquus confusionem.","יהוה צדיק בקרבה לא יעשה עולה בבקר בבקר משפטו יתן לאור לא נעדר ולא יודע עול בשת׃"],["43","3","6","나는 민족들을 없애고 성 모퉁이 망대들을 헐어 버렸다. 그들의 거리를 황폐하게 하고 지나가는 자가 아무도 없게 만들어 버렸다. 그들의 성읍들은 황폐해져 사람이 없다. 주민들이 하나도 없다.","\"나는 뭇 민족을 뿌리뽑으리라. 성 모퉁이 망대를 헐고 성읍들은 사람의 그림자도 비치지 않는 돌무더기로 만들며 거리마다 휩쓸어 사람 하나 살지 못하게 하리라.","내가 여러 나라를 끊어 버렸으므로 그들의 망대가 파괴되었고 내가 그들의 거리를 비게 하여 지나는 자가 없게 하였으므로 그들의 모든 성읍이 황폐하며 사람이 없으며 거주할 자가 없게 되었느니라","내가 열국을 끊어 버렸으므로 그 망대가 황무하였고 내가 그 거리를 비게 하여 지나는 자가 없게 하였으므로 그 모든 성읍이 황폐되며 사람이 없으며 거할 자가 없게 되었느니라","주께서 말씀하셨다. \"내가 많은 민족들을 멸망시켜서, 그들의 드높은 방어탑들이 못쓰게 되었다. 내가 그들의 번화하던 거리를 모두 적막하게 만들어서, 지나가는 사람이 하나도 없도록 하였다. 그들의 도성들이 모두 부서져서 거주자가 한명도 없는 곳이 되었다.","I have cut down nations, their battlements are laid waste; I have made their streets deserted, with no one passing through; Their cities are devastated, with no one dwelling in them.","I have cut off the nations: their towers are desolate; I made their streets waste, that none passeth by: their cities are destroyed, so that there is no man, that there is none inhabitant.","\"I have cut off nations; their strongholds are demolished. I have left their streets deserted, with no one passing through. Their cities are destroyed; no one will be left--no one at all."," “Disperdidi gentes, dissipati sunt anguli earum; desertas feci vias eorum, dum non est qui transeat; desolatae sunt civitates eorum, non remanente viro nec ullo habitatore.","הכרתי גוים נשמו פנותם החרבתי חוצותם מבלי עובר נצדו עריהם מבלי איש מאין יושב׃"],["43","3","7","‘너만은 나를 경외하려니 내 교훈을 받아들이려니 이 도성만은 내가 내린 모든 벌에서 눈을 떼지 않으려니.’ 하고 나는 생각하였다. 그러나 너희는 새벽같이 일어나 모두 못된 짓만 하였다.","1)너만은 나를 공경하려니, 너만은 내 징계를 제대로 받으려니, 너만은 내가 내린 벌들을 잊지 않으려니 하였더니 도리어 새벽부터 돌아가며 못된 짓만 하는구나. 시온을 가리킨다.","내가 이르기를 너는 오직 나를 경외하고 교훈을 받으라 그리하면 내가 형벌을 내리기로 정하기는 하였지만 너의 거처가 끊어지지 아니하리라 하였으나 그들이 부지런히 그들의 모든 행위를 더럽게 하였느니라","내가 이르기를 너는 오직 나를 경외하고 교훈을 받으라 그리하면 내가 형벌을 내리기로 정하기는 하였거니와 너의 거처가 끊어지지 아니하리라 하였으나 그들이 1)부지런히 그 모든 행위를 더럽게 하였느니라 일찌기 일어나서","내가 여기서 생각하였다. \"예루살렘, 이 도성만은 나를 두려워하고 나의 책망을 받아들여 내가 지시한 모든 것들을 항상 마음속에 두고 있겠지!\" 그런데도 이 도성은 점점 더 부지런히, 더욱더 악한 행동을 하였다. 그들의 행실이 모두 악하게 되었다.","I said, “Surely now you will fear me, you will accept correction; They cannot fail to see all I have brought upon them.” Yet the more eagerly they have done all their corrupt deeds.","I said, Surely thou wilt fear me, thou wilt receive instruction; so their dwelling should not be cut off, howsoever I punished them: but they rose early, and corrupted all their doings.","I said to the city, 'Surely you will fear me and accept correction!' Then her dwelling would not be cut off, nor all my punishments come upon her. But they were still eager to act corruptly in all they did.","Dixi: Nunc timebis me, suscipies disciplinam! Et non evanescent ab oculis eius omnia, in quibus visitavi eam. Verumtamen acceleraverunt corrumpere omnes actiones suas.","אמרתי אך תיראי אותי תקחי מוסר ולא יכרת מעונה כל אשר פקדתי עליה אכן השכימו השחיתו כל עלילותם׃"],["43","3","8","그러므로 너희는 나를 기다려라. 주님의 말씀이다. 내가 증인으로 나설 그날을 기다려라. 나는 민족들을 불러 모으고 왕국들을 모아서 그들에게 나의 진노를, 나의 타오르는 분노를 모조리 쏟아 붓기로 결정하였다. 정녕 온 세상이 내 열정의 불에 타 없어지리라.","그러니, 너희는 참고 기다려라.\" 야훼의 말씀이시다. \"내가 몸을 일으켜 그런 것들을 벌할 날이 오면, 만방에서 뭇 민족을 불러모으고 분노를 마구 터뜨려 한꺼번에 벌하리라. 나의 진노가 불같이 타올라 온 땅을 살라버리리라.","나 여호와가 말하노라 그러므로 내가 일어나 벌할 날까지 너희는 나를 기다리라 내가 뜻을 정하고 나의 분노와 모든 진노를 쏟으려고 여러 나라를 소집하며 왕국들을 모으리라 온 땅이 나의 질투의 불에 소멸되리라","나 여호와가 말하노라 그러므로 내가 일어나 2)벌할 날까지 너희는 나를 기다리라 내가 뜻을 정하고 나의 분한과 모든 진노를 쏟으려고 나라들을 소집하며 열국을 모으리라 온 땅이 나의 질투의 불에 소멸되리라 겁탈","그러므로 예루살렘아, 너희는 내가 너희의 죄악을 고발하는 증인으로 나서는 날까지 기다려라!\" 여호와의 말씀이시다. \"내가 뭇백성들을 모으고 뭇 나라들을 집결시켜서 나의 분노를 너희에게 쏟아 붓기로 작정하였기 때문이다. 너희에게 나의 이글거리는 분노를 모두 쏟겠다. 나의 질투의 불꽃 속에서 너희의 온 땅이 소멸될 것이다.\"","Therefore, wait for me—oracle of the LORD— until the day when I arise as accuser; For it is my decision to gather nations, to assemble kingdoms, In order to pour out upon them my wrath, all my blazing anger; For in the fire of my passion all the earth will be consumed.","Therefore wait ye upon me, saith the LORD, until the day that I rise up to the prey: for my determination is to gather the nations, that I may assemble the kingdoms, to pour upon them mine indignation, even all my fierce anger: for all the earth shall be devoured with the fire of my jealousy.","Therefore wait for me,\" declares the LORD, \"for the day I will stand up to testify. I have decided to assemble the nations, to gather the kingdoms and to pour out my wrath on them--all my fierce anger. The whole world will be consumed by the fire of my jealous anger.","Quapropter exspecta me, dicit Dominus, in die qua surgam ut testis; quia iudicium meum, ut congregem gentes et colligam regna, ut effundam super eas indignationem meam, omnem iram furoris mei; in igne enim zeli mei devorabitur omnis terra.","לכן חכו לי נאם יהוה ליום קומי לעד כי משפטי לאסף גוים לקבצי ממלכות לשפך עליהם זעמי כל חרון אפי כי באש קנאתי תאכל כל הארץ׃"],["43","3","9","그때에 나는 민족들의 입술을 깨끗하게 만들어 주리라. 그들이 모두 주님의 이름을 받들어 부르며 어깨를 나란히 하고 주님을 섬기게 하리라.","그런 다음 뭇 민족의 입술을 정하게 하여 모두 야훼의 이름을 부르며 어깨를 나란히 하고 그를 섬기게 하리라.","그 때에 내가 여러 백성의 입술을 깨끗하게 하여 그들이 다 여호와의 이름을 부르며 한 가지로 나를 섬기게 하리니","그 때에 내가 열방의 입술을 깨끗케 하여 그들로 다 나 여호와의 이름을 부르며 일심으로 섬기게 하리니","주께서 말씀하셨다. \"그때가 되면, 내가 뭇 민족들의 생각을 변화시켜서 그들이 더 이상 어떤 우상의 이름도 부르지 않도록 하겠다. 그들은 모두 입술이 정화되어 여호와의 이름만을 부르며 한결같이 여호와를 섬길 것이다.","For then I will make pure the speech of the peoples, That they all may call upon the name of the LORD, to serve him with one accord;","For then will I turn to the people a pure language, that they may all call upon the name of the LORD, to serve him with one consent.","\"Then will I purify the lips of the peoples, that all of them may call on the name of the LORD and serve him shoulder to shoulder.","Quia tunc reddam populis labium purum, ut invocent omnes in nomine Domini et serviant ei umero uno.","כי אז אהפך אל עמים שפה ברורה לקרא כלם בשם יהוה לעבדו שכם אחד׃"],["43","3","10","에티오피아 강 너머에서 나의 숭배자들, 흩어진 이들이 선물을 가지고 나에게 오리라.","에티오피아 강 저편으로 추방했던 자들도 예물을 가지고 강을 건너 나를 예배하러 오게 하리라.\"","내게 구하는 백성들 곧 내가 흩은 자의 딸이 구스 강 건너편에서부터 예물을 가지고 와서 내게 바칠지라","내게 구하는 백성들 곧 내가 흩은 자의 딸이 구스 하수 건너편에서부터 예물을 가지고 와서 내게 드릴찌라","남쪽으로 구스의 끝에서부터 북쪽의 가장 먼 곳에 이르기까지 그곳에서 그들이 모두 예물을 가지고 내게로 올 것이다.","From beyond the rivers of Ethiopia and as far as the recesses of the North, they shall bring me offerings.","From beyond the rivers of Ethiopia my suppliants, even the daughter of my dispersed, shall bring mine offering.","From beyond the rivers of Cush my worshipers, my scattered people, will bring me offerings.","Ultra flumina Aethiopiae, inde supplices mei, filii dispersorum meorum deferent munus mihi.","מעבר לנהרי כוש עתרי בת פוצי יובלון מנחתי׃"],["43","3","11","그날에는 네가 나를 거역하며 저지른 그 모든 행실을 부끄러워하지 않아도 되리라. 그때에는 내가 네 가운데에서 거만스레 흥겨워하는 자들을 치워 버리리라. 그러면 네가 나의 거룩한 산에서 다시는 교만을 부리지 않으리라.","\"그 날이 오면, 나를 거역하여 저지른 온갖 일들을 2)너는 부끄러워하지 않아도 되리라. 그 때에 내가 거만을 떨며 흥청거리는 자를 네 안에서 쓸어버리면 나의 거룩한 산에서는 거만한 모습이 자취를 감출 텐데 무엇을 다시 부끄러워하랴. 예루살렘을 가리킨다.","그 날에 네가 내게 범죄한 모든 행위로 말미암아 수치를 당하지 아니할 것은 그 때에 내가 네 가운데서 교만하여 자랑하는 자들을 제거하여 네가 나의 성산에서 다시는 교만하지 않게 할 것임이라","그 날에 네가 내게 범죄한 모든 행위를 인하여 수치를 당하지 아니할 것은 그 때에 내가 너의 중에서 교만하여 자랑하는 자를 제하여 너로 나의 성산에서 다시는 교만하지 않게 할 것임이니라","그날이 오면, 이스라엘아, 너희가 더 이상 자신을 부끄럽게 여길 필요가 없다. 너희가 더 이상 내게 대항하여 반역하지 않을 것이기 때문이다. 그때가 오면, 내가 교만하게 뻐기는 자들을 너희 가운데서 제거해 버릴 것이기 때문이다. 그러면, 나의 거룩한 산 위에서 더 이상 자신을 높이는 사람이 없을 것이다.","On that day You will not be ashamed of all your deeds, when you rebelled against me; For then I will remove from your midst the proud braggarts, And you shall no longer exalt yourself on my holy mountain.","In that day shalt thou not be ashamed for all thy doings, wherein thou hast transgressed against me: for then I will take away out of the midst of thee them that rejoice in thy pride, and thou shalt no more be haughty because of my holy mountain.","On that day you will not be put to shame for all the wrongs you have done to me, because I will remove from this city those who rejoice in their pride. Never again will you be haughty on my holy hill.","In die illa non confunderis super cunctis actionibus tuis, quibus praevaricata es in me; quia tunc auferam de medio tui magniloquos superbos tuos, et non adicies exaltari amplius in monte sancto meo.","ביום ההוא לא תבושי מכל עלילתיך אשר פשעת בי כי אז אסיר מקרבך עליזי גאותך ולא תוספי לגבהה עוד בהר קדשי׃"],["43","3","12","나는 네 한가운데에 가난하고 가련한 백성을 남기리니 그들은 주님의 이름에 피신하리라.","내가 기를 못 펴는 가난한 사람만을 네 안에 남기리니 이렇게 살아 남은 이스라엘은 야훼의 이름만 믿고 안심하리라.","내가 곤고하고 가난한 백성을 네 가운데에 남겨 두리니 그들이 여호와의 이름을 의탁하여 보호를 받을지라","내가 곤고하고 가난한 백성을 너의 중에 남겨 두리니 그들이 여호와의 이름을 의탁하여 보호를 받을찌라","그때에는 내가 짓눌리고 가난한 사람들만을 이스라엘 백성으로 남겨 놓아서, 그들이 여호와의 이름에 모든 희망을 걸도록 하겠다.","But I will leave as a remnant in your midst a people humble and lowly, Who shall take refuge in the name of the LORD—","I will also leave in the midst of thee an afflicted and poor people, and they shall trust in the name of the LORD.","But I will leave within you the meek and humble, who trust in the name of the LORD.","Et derelinquam in medio tui populum pauperem et egenum “. Et sperabunt in nomine Domini reliquiae Israel.","והשארתי בקרבך עם עני ודל וחסו בשם יהוה׃"],["43","3","13","이스라엘의 남은 자들은 불의를 저지르지 않고 거짓을 말하지 않으며 그들 입에서는 사기 치는 혀를 보지 못하리라. 정녕 그들은 아무런 위협도 받지 않으며 풀을 뜯고 몸을 누이리라.","그들은 남을 억울하게 속일 줄도 모르고 거짓말을 할 줄도 모르며 간사한 혀로 사기칠 줄도 모른다. 그러나 배불리 먹고 편히 쉬리니, 아무도 들볶지 못하리라.\"","이스라엘의 남은 자는 악을 행하지 아니하며 거짓을 말하지 아니하며 입에 거짓된 혀가 없으며 먹고 누울지라도 그들을 두렵게 할 자가 없으리라","이스라엘의 남은 자는 악을 행치 아니하며 거짓을 말하지 아니하며 입에 궤휼한 혀가 없으며 먹으며 누우나 놀라게 할 자가 없으리라","이스라엘의 남은 자들은 전혀 불법을 행하지 않고, 거짓말도 하지 않을 것이다. 그들의 입 속에는 속이는 혀가 없을 것이다. 그들은 고요히 평화롭게 살고 안전하게 누워서 잘 것이며 그들을 놀라게 할 원수가 하나도 없을 것이다.\"","the remnant of Israel. They shall do no wrong and speak no lies; Nor shall there be found in their mouths a deceitful tongue; They shall pasture and lie down with none to disturb them.","The remnant of Israel shall not do iniquity, nor speak lies; neither shall a deceitful tongue be found in their mouth: for they shall feed and lie down, and none shall make them afraid.","The remnant of Israel will do no wrong; they will speak no lies, nor will deceit be found in their mouths. They will eat and lie down and no one will make them afraid.\"","Non facient iniquitatem nec loquentur mendacium; et non invenietur in ore eorum lingua dolosa, quoniam ipsi pascentur et accubabunt, et non erit qui exterreat.","שארית ישראל לא יעשו עולה ולא ידברו כזב ולא ימצא בפיהם לשון תרמית כי המה ירעו ורבצו ואין מחריד׃"],["43","3","14","딸 시온아, 환성을 올려라. 이스라엘아, 크게 소리쳐라. 딸 예루살렘아, 마음껏 기뻐하고 즐거워하여라.","수도 시온아, 환성을 올려라. 이스라엘아, 큰소리로 외쳐라. 수도 예루살렘아, 마음껏 기뻐하며 축제를 베풀어라.","시온의 딸아 노래할지어다 이스라엘아 기쁘게 부를지어다 예루살렘 딸아 전심으로 기뻐하며 즐거워할지어다","시온의 딸아 노래할찌어다 이스라엘아 기쁘게 부를찌어다 예루살렘 딸아 전심으로 기뻐하며 즐거워할찌어다","딸 시온아, 환호성을 올려라! 이스라엘아, 큰소리로 외쳐라! 너 예루살렘아, 마음껏 노래하고 환호성을 외쳐라!","Shout for joy, daughter Zion! sing joyfully, Israel! Be glad and exult with all your heart, daughter Jerusalem!","Sing, O daughter of Zion; shout, O Israel; be glad and rejoice with all the heart, O daughter of Jerusalem.","Sing, O Daughter of Zion; shout aloud, O Israel! Be glad and rejoice with all your heart, O Daughter of Jerusalem!","Lauda, filia Sion; iubilate, Israel! Laetare et exsulta in omni corde, filia Ierusalem!","רני בת ציון הריעו ישראל שמחי ועלזי בכל לב בת ירושלם׃"],["43","3","15","주님께서 너에게 내리신 판결을 거두시고 너의 원수들을 쫓아내셨다. 이스라엘 임금 주님께서 네 한가운데에 계시니 다시는 네가 불행을 두려워하지 않으리라.","야훼께서 원수들을 쫓으셨다. 너를 벌하던 자들을 몰아내셨다. 이스라엘의 임금, 야훼께서 너희와 함께 계시니 다시는 화를 입을까 걱정하지 마라.","여호와가 네 형벌을 제거하였고 네 원수를 쫓아냈으며 이스라엘 왕 여호와가 네 가운데 계시니 네가 다시는 화를 당할까 두려워하지 아니할 것이라","여호와가 너의 형벌을 제하였고 너의 원수를 쫓아내었으며 이스라엘 왕 여호와가 너의 중에 있으니 네가 다시는 화를 당할까 두려워하지 아니할 것이라","주께서 너희의 심판자들을 몰아내시고 너희의 대적들도 제거해 버리셨다. 이스라엘의 임금이신 여호와께서 친히 네 가운데에 계시니, 네가 또 재앙을 당할까 두려워할 필요가 없다.","The LORD has removed the judgment against you, he has turned away your enemies; The King of Israel, the LORD, is in your midst, you have no further misfortune to fear.","The LORD hath taken away thy judgments, he hath cast out thine enemy: the king of Israel, even the LORD, is in the midst of thee: thou shalt not see evil any more.","The LORD has taken away your punishment, he has turned back your enemy. The LORD, the King of Israel, is with you; never again will you fear any harm.","Abstulit Dominus iudicium tuum, avertit inimicos tuos; rex Israel, Dominus, in medio tui, non timebis malum ultra.","הסיר יהוה משפטיך פנה איבך מלך ישראל יהוה בקרבך לא תיראי רע עוד׃"],["43","3","16","그날에 사람들이 예루살렘에게 말하리라. “시온아, 두려워하지 마라. 힘없이 손을 늘어뜨리지 마라.”","그 날이 오면, 예루살렘에 이렇게 일러주어라. \"시온아, 두려워 마라. 기운을 내어라.","그 날에 사람이 예루살렘에 이르기를 두려워하지 말라 시온아 네 손을 늘어뜨리지 말라","그 날에 사람이 예루살렘에게 이르기를 두려워하지 말라 시온아 네 손을 늘어뜨리지 말라","그날이 오면, 예루살렘을 향하여 이렇게 일러라. \"시온산 위의 도성아, 너는 두려워하지 말아라! 네 두 손을 축 늘어뜨리지 말아라!","On that day, it shall be said to Jerusalem: Do not fear, Zion, do not be discouraged!","In that day it shall be said to Jerusalem, Fear thou not: and to Zion, Let not thine hands be slack.","On that day they will say to Jerusalem, \"Do not fear, O Zion; do not let your hands hang limp.","In die illa dicetur Ierusalem:  “Noli timere, Sion; ne dissolvantur manus tuae!","ביום ההוא יאמר לירושלם אל תיראי ציון אל ירפו ידיך׃"],["43","3","17","주 너의 하느님, 승리의 용사께서 네 한가운데에 계시다. 그분께서 너를 두고 기뻐하며 즐거워하신다. 당신 사랑으로 너를 새롭게 해 주시고 너 때문에 환성을 올리며 기뻐하시리라.","너를 구해 내신 용사 네 하느님 야훼께서 네 안에 계신다. 너를 보고 기뻐 반색하시리니 사랑도 새삼스러워라. 명절이라도 된 듯 기쁘게 더덩실 춤을 추시리라.\"","너의 하나님 여호와가 너의 가운데에 계시니 그는 구원을 베푸실 전능자이시라 그가 너로 말미암아 기쁨을 이기지 못하시며 너를 잠잠히 사랑하시며 너로 말미암아 즐거이 부르며 기뻐하시리라 하리라","너의 하나님 여호와가 너의 가운데 계시니 그는 구원을 베푸실 전능자시라 그가 너로 인하여 기쁨을 이기지 못하여 하시며 너를 잠잠히 사랑하시며 너로 인하여 즐거이 부르며 기뻐하시리라 하리라","네 하나님 여호와께서, 너를 강하게 하시는 용사께서 네 가운데로 오셔서 사신다. 그분은 너를 보고 큰 기쁨을 느끼며 즐거워하시고 자신의 사랑으로 너를 새롭게 하실 것이다. 그가 너를 맞이하여 환호성을 올리며 기뻐 뛰시는 모습이","The LORD, your God, is in your midst, a mighty savior, Who will rejoice over you with gladness, and renew you in his love, Who will sing joyfully because of you,","The LORD thy God in the midst of thee is mighty; he will save, he will rejoice over thee with joy; he will rest in his love, he will joy over thee with singing.","The LORD your God is with you, he is mighty to save. He will take great delight in you, he will quiet you with his love, he will rejoice over you with singing.\"","Dominus Deus tuus in medio tui, fortis ipse salvabit; gaudebit super te in laetitia, commotus in dilectione sua; exsultabit super te in laude","יהוה אלהיך בקרבך גבור יושיע ישיש עליך בשמחה יחריש באהבתו יגיל עליך ברנה׃"],["43","3","18","축제의 날인 양 그렇게 하시리라. 나는 너에게서 불행을 치워 버려 네가 모욕을 짊어지지 않게 하리라.","\"나는 너에게 내리던 재앙을 거두어들여 다시는 수모를 받지 않게 하리라.","내가 절기로 말미암아 근심하는 자들을 모으리니 그들은 네게 속한 자라 그들에게 지워진 짐이 치욕이 되었느니라","내가 대회로 인하여 근심하는 자를 모으리니 그들은 네게 속한 자라 너의 치욕이 그들에게 무거운 짐이 되었느니라","마치 명절 잔치 때와도 같으리라\"  \"이스라엘아, 내가 흩어진 사람들을 불러 모아서 네가 더 이상 수치를 당하지 않도록 하겠다.","as on festival days. I will remove disaster from among you, so that no one may recount your disgrace.","I will gather them that are sorrowful for the solemn assembly, who are of thee, to whom the reproach of it was a burden.","\"The sorrows for the appointed feasts I will remove from you; they are a burden and a reproach to you.","sicut in die conventus “.  “Auferam a te calamitatem, ut non ultra habeas super ea opprobrium.","נוגי ממועד אספתי ממך היו משאת עליה חרפה׃"],["43","3","19","그때에 너를 억누르는 자들을 내가 모두 처치하리라. 나는 절뚝거리는 이들을 구하고 흩어진 이들을 모으리라. 온 세상에서 그들의 수치를 칭송과 명성으로 바꾸어 주리라.","그 때가 되면, 너를 억누르던 자를 다 없애버리고 절름발이는 고쳐주며 길 잃은 자들을 찾아내어 고국으로 데려오리라. 그 때가 되면, 온 세상에서 내 백성은 칭송을 자자하게 받으며 이름을 떨치리라.","그 때에 내가 너를 괴롭게 하는 자를 다 벌하고 저는 자를 구원하며 쫓겨난 자를 모으며 온 세상에서 수욕 받는 자에게 칭찬과 명성을 얻게 하리라","그 때에 내가 너를 괴롭게 하는 자를 다 벌하고 저는 자를 구원하며 쫓겨난 자를 모으며 온 세상에서 수욕 받는 자로 칭찬과 명성을 얻게 하리라","보라, 그때가 오면 내가 너희를 괴롭히던 모든 압제자들을 없애 버리고, 나에게 쫓겨나서 온 세상에 흩어진 사람들을 다시 모으며 병들고 지극히 허약한 사람까지도 무사히 고국으로 돌아오도록 도와주겠다. 그래서 온 세상에서 수치와 조롱을 당하던 나의 유랑민들이 다시 칭송과 명성을 얻도록 하겠다.","At that time I will deal with all who oppress you; I will save the lame, and assemble the outcasts; I will give them praise and renown in every land where they were shamed.","Behold, at that time I will undo all that afflict thee: and I will save her that halteth, and gather her that was driven out; and I will get them praise and fame in every land where they have been put to shame.","At that time I will deal with all who oppressed you; I will rescue the lame and gather those who have been scattered. I will give them praise and honor in every land where they were put to shame.","Ecce ego interficiam omnes, qui afflixerunt te in tempore illo; et salvabo claudicantem et eam, quae eiecta fuerat, congregabo; et ponam eos in laudem et in nomen in omni terra confusionis eorum,","הנני עשה את כל מעניך בעת ההיא והושעתי את הצלעה והנדחה אקבץ ושמתים לתהלה ולשם בכל הארץ בשתם׃"],["43","3","20","그때에 내가 너희를 데려오리라. 그때에 내가 너희를 모으리라. 너희가 보는 앞에서 너희의 운명을 되돌릴 때 세상 모든 민족들 가운데에서 너희가 칭송과 명성을 얻게 해 주리라. ─ 주님께서 말씀하신다.","그 때가 되면, 내가 너희를 데려오리라. 너희를 이리로 모아들이리라. 내가 너희의 면전에서 너희에게 광복을 안겨줄 때, 너희는 세계 만방에서 칭송을 자자하게 받으며 이름을 떨치리라.\" 야훼께서 말씀하신다.","내가 그 때에 너희를 이끌고 그 때에 너희를 모을지라 내가 너희 목전에서 너희의 사로잡힘을 돌이킬 때에 너희에게 천하 만민 가운데서 명성과 칭찬을 얻게 하리라 여호와의 말이니라","내가 그 때에 너희를 이끌고 그 때에 너희를 모을찌라 내가 3)너희 목전에서 너희 사로잡힘을 돌이킬 때에 너희로 천하 만민 중에서 명성과 칭찬을 얻게 하리라 나 여호와의 말이니라그들의","그때가 오면, 내가 너희를 모아 고향으로 인도하겠다. 내가 너희의 생전에 너희 민족의 국운을 바꾸어 놓을 때에, 너희가 세계 만민들 속에서 명성과 칭송을 받을 것이다.\" 여호와께서 말씀하셨다.","At that time I will bring you home, and at that time I will gather you; For I will give you renown and praise, among all the peoples of the earth, When I bring about your restoration before your very eyes, says the LORD. : : : : : : : : : : : :","At that time will I bring you again, even in the time that I gather you: for I will make you a name and a praise among all people of the earth, when I turn back your captivity before your eyes, saith the LORD.","At that time I will gather you; at that time I will bring you home. I will give you honor and praise among all the peoples of the earth when I restore your fortunes before your very eyes,\" says the LORD.","in tempore illo, quo adducam vos, et in tempore, quo congregabo vos. Dabo enim vos in nomen et in laudem omnibus populis terrae, cum convertero sortem vestram coram oculis vestris “, dicit Dominus.","בעת ההיא אביא אתכם ובעת קבצי אתכם כי אתן אתכם לשם ולתהלה בכל עמי הארץ בשובי את שבותיכם לעיניכם אמר יהוה׃"],["44","1","1","다리우스 임금 제이년 여섯째 달 초하룻날, 주님의 말씀이 하까이 예언자를 통하여 스알티엘의 아들 즈루빠벨 유다 총독과 여호차닥의 아들 예수아 대사제에게 내렸다.","다리우스 왕 제이년 유월 초하루였다. 야훼께서 예언자 하깨를 시켜 스알디엘의 아들 즈루빠벨 유다 총독과 여호사닥의 아들 여호수아 대사제에게 말씀을 내리셨다.","다리오 왕 제이년 여섯째 달 곧 그 달 초하루에 여호와의 말씀이 선지자 학개로 말미암아 스알디엘의 아들 유다 총독 스룹바벨과 여호사닥의 아들 대제사장 여호수아에게 임하니라 이르시되","다리오왕 이년 유월 곧 그 달 초하루에 여호와의 말씀이 선지자 학개로 말미암아 스알디엘의 아들 유다 총독 스룹바벨과 여호사닥의 아들 대제사장 여호수아에게 임하니라 가라사대","제목 : 여호와께서 하달하신 전통. 전령 : 예언자 학개. 수신 : 스알디엘의 아들인 유다 나라의 총독 스룹바벨과, 여호사닥의 아들인 대제사장 여호수아. 이들은 바벨론에서 포로 생활을 하다가 예루살렘을 재건하기 위하여 귀환한 사람들이다. 날짜 : ㄱ) 다리오왕 1세의 통치 2년 6월 1일. (ㄱ. BC 520년 8월 29일)","On the first day of the sixth month in the second year of Darius the king, the word of the LORD came through Haggai the prophet to the governor of Judah, Zerubbabel, son of Shealtiel, and to the high priest Joshua, son of Jehozadak:","In the second year of Darius the king, in the sixth month, in the first day of the month, came the word of the LORD by Haggai the prophet unto Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel, governor of Judah, and to Joshua the son of Josedech, the high priest, saying,","In the second year of King Darius, on the first day of the sixth month, the word of the LORD came through the prophet Haggai to Zerubbabel son of Shealtiel, governor of Judah, and to Joshua son of Jehozadak, the high priest:","In anno secundo Darii regis, in mense sexto, in die prima men sis, factum est verbum Domini in manu Aggaei prophetae ad Zorobabel filium Salathiel ducem Iudae et ad Iesua filium Iosedec sacerdotem magnum dicens:","בשנת שתים לדריוש המלך בחדש הששי ביום אחד לחדש היה דבר יהוה ביד חגי הנביא אל זרבבל בן שאלתיאל פחת יהודה ואל יהושע בן יהוצדק הכהן הגדול לאמר׃"],["44","1","2","만군의 주님께서 이렇게 말씀하신다. “이 백성은 ‘주님의 집을 지을 때가 되지 않았다.’고 말한다.”","만군의 야훼께서 하신 말씀이다. \"이 백성은 아직 주의 성전을 지을 때가 아니라고 말한다.\"","만군의 여호와가 이같이 말하여 이르노라 이 백성이 말하기를 여호와의 전을 건축할 시기가 이르지 아니하였다 하느니라","만군의 여호와가 말하여 이르노라 이 백성이 말하기를 여호와의 전을 건축할 시기가 이르지 아니하였다 하느니라","온 세상의 주인이신 여호와께서 이렇게 말씀하셨다. \"이 백성은 나의 성전을 재건하기에는 아직도 너무 빠르다고 말한다.\"","Thus says the LORD of hosts: This people has said: “Now is not the time to rebuild the house of the LORD.”","Thus speaketh the LORD of hosts, saying, This people say, The time is not come, the time that the LORD's house should be built.","This is what the LORD Almighty says: \"These people say, 'The time has not yet come for the LORD'S house to be built.'\""," “Haec ait Dominus exercituum dicens: Populus iste dicit: “Nondum venit tempus domus Domini aedificandae” “.","כה אמר יהוה צבאות לאמר העם הזה אמרו לא עת בא עת בית יהוה להבנות׃"],["44","1","3","주님의 말씀이 하까이 예언자를 통하여 내렸다.","야훼께서 예언자 하깨를 시켜 하신 말씀은 이러하다.","여호와의 말씀이 선지자 학개에게 임하여 이르시되","여호와의 말씀이 선지자 학개에게 임하여 가라사대","그렇기 때문에 주님의 말씀이 예언자 학개를 통하여서 다음과 같이 전달되었다.","Then the word of the LORD came through Haggai the prophet:","Then came the word of the LORD by Haggai the prophet, saying,","Then the word of the LORD came through the prophet Haggai:","Et factum est verbum Domini in manu Aggaei prophetae dicens:","ויהי דבר יהוה ביד חגי הנביא לאמר׃"],["44","1","4","“주님의 집이 무너져 있는데 너희가 지금 판벽으로 된 집에서 살 때냐?","\"너희는 어찌하여 성전이 무너졌는데도 아랑곳없이 벽을 널빤지로 꾸민 집에서 사느냐?","이 성전이 황폐하였거늘 너희가 이 때에 판벽한 집에 거주하는 것이 옳으냐","이 전이 황무하였거늘 너희가 이 때에 판벽한 집에 거하는 것이 가하냐","\"나의 성전은 아직도 잿더미 속에 부서져 있는데, 너희는 벌써 화려한 집안에서 살고 있느냐?\"","Is it time for you to dwell in your paneled houses while this house lies in ruins?","Is it time for you, O ye, to dwell in your cieled houses, and this house lie waste?","\"Is it a time for you yourselves to be living in your paneled houses, while this house remains a ruin?\""," “Numquid tempus vobis est, ut habitetis in domibus laqueatis, et domus ista deserta?","העת לכם אתם לשבת בבתיכם ספונים והבית הזה חרב׃"],["44","1","5","─ 만군의 주님께서 이렇게 말씀하신다. ─ 너희가 살아온 길을 돌이켜 보아라.","나 만군의 야훼가 말한다. 너희가 어떻게 지내왔는지 돌아보아라.","그러므로 이제 만군의 여호와가 이같이 말하노니 너희는 너희의 행위를 살필지니라","그러므로 이제 나 만군의 여호와가 말하노니 너희는 자기의 소위를 살펴 볼찌니라","그렇기 때문에 이제는 온 세상의 주인이신 여호와께서 이렇게 말씀하셨다. \"너희가 지금 어떻게 살고 있는지 생각하여 보아라!","Now thus says the LORD of hosts: Reflect on your experience!","Now therefore thus saith the LORD of hosts; Consider your ways.","Now this is what the LORD Almighty says: \"Give careful thought to your ways.","Et nunc haec dicit Dominus exercituum: Ponite corda vestra super vias vestras:","ועתה כה אמר יהוה צבאות שימו לבבכם על דרכיכם׃"],["44","1","6","씨앗을 많이 뿌려도 얼마 거두지 못하고 먹어도 배부르지 않으며 마셔도 만족하지 못하고 입어도 따뜻하지 않으며 품팔이꾼이 품삯을 받아도 구멍 난 주머니에 넣는 꼴이다.","씨는 많이 뿌렸어도 수확은 적었고, 먹어도 배부르지 않으며, 마셔도 성이 차지 않고, 입어도 따뜻하지 않으며, 아무리 벌어들여도 밑빠진 독에 물붓기다.","너희가 많이 뿌릴지라도 수확이 적으며 먹을지라도 배부르지 못하며 마실지라도 흡족하지 못하며 입어도 따뜻하지 못하며 일꾼이 삯을 받아도 그것을 구멍 뚫어진 전대에 넣음이 되느니라","너희가 많이 뿌릴찌라도 수입이 적으며 먹을찌라도 배부르지 못하며 마실찌라도 흡족하지 못하며 입어도 따뜻하지 못하며 일군이 삯을 받아도 그것을 구멍 뚫어진 전대에 넣음이 되느니라","너희가 농사는 많이 짓지만 거두는 것은 별로 없다. 너희가 먹기는 먹어도 배부르게 먹을 양식은 없다. 너희가 마시기는 마셔도 만족하게 마신 포도주는 없다. 너희가 입기는 입어도 따뜻하게 입을 옷은 없다. 너희가 진실로 쉴 사이도 없이 일을 하여 벌어들여도 밑빠진 독에 물붓는 꼴이 되고 있다.\"","You have sown much, but have brought in little; you have eaten, but have not been satisfied; You have drunk, but have not become intoxicated; you have clothed yourselves, but have not been warmed; And the hired worker labors for a bag full of holes.","Ye have sown much, and bring in little; ye eat, but ye have not enough; ye drink, but ye are not filled with drink; ye clothe you, but there is none warm; and he that earneth wages earneth wages to put it into a bag with holes.","You have planted much, but have harvested little. You eat, but never have enough. You drink, but never have your fill. You put on clothes, but are not warm. You earn wages, only to put them in a purse with holes in it.\"","seminastis multum et intulistis parum, comedistis et non estis satiati, bibistis et non estis inebriati, operuistis vos et non estis calefacti, et, qui pro mercede operatus est, misit eam in sacculum pertusum.","זרעתם הרבה והבא מעט אכול ואין לשבעה שתו ואין לשכרה לבוש ואין לחם לו והמשתכר משתכר אל צרור נקוב׃"],["44","1","7","─ 만군의 주님께서 이렇게 말씀하신다. ─ 너희가 살아온 길을 돌이켜 보아라.","나 만군의 야훼가 말한다. 너희가 어떻게 지내왔는지 돌아보아라.","만군의 여호와가 말하노니 너희는 자기의 행위를 살필지니라","나 만군의 여호와가 말하노니 너희는 자기의 소위를 살펴 볼찌니라","그러므로 온 세상의 주인이신 여호와께서 이렇게 말씀하셨다. \"너희 형편이 왜 그토록 어렵게 되었는지를 너희가 아직도 깨닫지 못하느냐?","Thus says the LORD of hosts: Reflect on your experience!","Thus saith the LORD of hosts; Consider your ways.","This is what the LORD Almighty says: \"Give careful thought to your ways.","Haec dicit Dominus exercituum: Ponite corda vestra super vias vestras.","כה אמר יהוה צבאות שימו לבבכם על דרכיכם׃"],["44","1","8","너희는 산에 올라가서 나무를 가져다가 집을 지어라. 그러면 나는 그 집을 기꺼이 여기고 그것으로 영광을 받으리라. ─ 주님께서 말씀하신다. ─","산에 가서 나무를 찍어다가 나의 성전을 지어라. 나는 그 집을 기꺼이 받아들이고 거기에서 내 영광을 드러내리라. 나 야훼의 말이다.","너희는 산에 올라가서 나무를 가져다가 성전을 건축하라 그리하면 내가 그것으로 말미암아 기뻐하고 또 영광을 얻으리라 여호와가 말하였느니라","너희는 산에 올라가서 나무를 가져다가 전을 건축하라 그리하면 내가 그로 인하여 기뻐하고 또 영광을 얻으리라 나 여호와가 말하였느니라","너희는 산에 가시 재목을 베어다가 나의 성전을 건축하여라! 그러면 내가 그 성전을 만족하게 여기고 내가 영광을 받으며 거기서 너희에게 나타나겠다.\" 주께서 말씀하셨다.","Go up into the hill country; bring timber, and build the house that I may be pleased with it, and that I may be glorified, says the LORD.","Go up to the mountain, and bring wood, and build the house; and I will take pleasure in it, and I will be glorified, saith the LORD.","Go up into the mountains and bring down timber and build the house, so that I may take pleasure in it and be honored,\" says the LORD.","Ascendite in montem, portate lignum et aedificate domum, et acceptabilis mihi erit et glorificabor, dicit Dominus.","עלו ההר והבאתם עץ ובנו הבית וארצה בו ואכבד אמר יהוה׃"],["44","1","9","너희는 많이 거두기를 바랐지만 얼마 거두지 못하고 집으로 거두어들인 것조차 내가 날려 버렸다. 무슨 까닭이냐? 만군의 주님의 말씀이다. 내 집이 무너져 있는데도 너희가 저마다 제집 돌보는 데에만 바빴기 때문이다.","많이 거두려니 했지만, 거두고 보니 얼마나 되더냐? 집에 들여온 것마저도 내가 날려버리리라. 만군의 야훼가 그 곡절을 일러주리라. 너희가 나의 성전 무너진 것은 아랑곳하지 않고 제 집만 짓느라고 바삐 돌아다닌 탓이다.","너희가 많은 것을 바랐으나 도리어 적었고 너희가 그것을 집으로 가져갔으나 내가 불어 버렸느니라 나 만군의 여호와가 말하노라 이것이 무슨 까닭이냐 내 집은 황폐하였으되 너희는 각각 자기의 집을 짓기 위하여 빨랐음이라","너희가 많은 것을 바랐으나 도리어 적었고 너희가 그것을 집으로 가져갔으나 내가 불어 버렸느니라 나 만군의 여호와가 말하노라 이것이 무슨 연고뇨 내 집은 황무하였으되 너희는 각각 자기의 집에 빨랐음이니라","\"너희는 많은 것들을 기대하였으나 얻은 것은 지극히 적었다. 너희가 거둔 것을 집으로 많이 가져왔으나 내가 그것을 불어서 날렸다. 내가 왜 그렇게 하였는가를 너희는 도대체 깨닫지 못하느냐?\" 온 세상의 주인이신 여호와께서 물으셨다. \"그것은 잿더미 속에 묻혀 있는 내 성전때문이다. 그런데도 너희들은 누구나 제 집만 잘 짓느라고 정신이 없다.","You expected much, but it came to little; and what you brought home, I blew away. Why is this?—oracle of the LORD of hosts— Because my house is the one which lies in ruins, while each of you runs to your own house.","Ye looked for much, and, lo it came to little; and when ye brought it home, I did blow upon it. Why? saith the LORD of hosts. Because of mine house that is waste, and ye run every man unto his own house.","\"You expected much, but see, it turned out to be little. What you brought home, I blew away. Why?\" declares the LORD Almighty. \"Because of my house, which remains a ruin, while each of you is busy with his own house.","Respexistis ad amplius, et ecce factum est minus; et intulistis in domum, et exsufflavi illud. Quam ob causam?, dicit Dominus exercituum. Quia domus mea deserta est, et vos festinatis unusquisque in domum suam.","פנה אל הרבה והנה למעט והבאתם הבית ונפחתי בו יען מה נאם יהוה צבאות יען ביתי אשר הוא חרב ואתם רצים איש לביתו׃"],["44","1","10","그러므로 하늘은 너희에게 이슬을 내리지 않고 땅은 제 소출을 내주지 않았다.","그러니 하늘이 이슬을 내릴 성싶으냐? 땅이 소출을 낼 성싶으냐?","그러므로 너희로 말미암아 하늘은 이슬을 그쳤고 땅은 산물을 그쳤으며","그러므로 너희로 인하여 하늘은 이슬을 그쳤고 땅은 산물을 그쳤으며","그러므로 하늘이 비를 그치고, 땅이 소출을 내지 않는다.","Therefore, the heavens withheld the dew, and the earth its yield.","Therefore the heaven over you is stayed from dew, and the earth is stayed from her fruit.","Therefore, because of you the heavens have withheld their dew and the earth its crops.","Propter hoc super vos prohibiti sunt caeli, ne darent rorem, et terra prohibita est, ne daret fructum suum.","על כן עליכם כלאו שמים מטל והארץ כלאה יבולה׃"],["44","1","11","나는 땅에 산과 곡식에 햇포도주와 기름에 밭에서 나는 것에 사람과 짐승에게 그들이 하는 모든 일의 결실에 가뭄을 불러들였다.”","나는 평지에도 산에도 가뭄이 들라고 선포하였다. 땅은 밀도, 포도주도, 올리브 기름도, 그 밖의 어떤 소출도 내지 않아 사람도 짐승도 모두 배를 곯게 되었다. 너희가 손이 닳도록 한 일이 모두 허사가 되었다!\"","내가 이 땅과 산과 곡물과 새 포도주와 기름과 땅의 모든 소산과 사람과 가축과 손으로 수고하는 모든 일에 한재를 들게 하였느니라","내가 한재를 불러 이 땅에, 산에, 곡물에, 새 포도주에, 기름에, 땅의 모든 소산에, 사람에게, 육축에게, 손으로 수고하는 모든 일에 임하게 하였느니라","바로 내가 이 나라의 산천에 이토록 심한 가뭄을 내리었다. 저 모든 산에도, 저 곡식 밭에도, 저 포도원에도, 저 올리브나무의 숲 위에도, 땅에서 나오는 모든 초목들 위에도, 모든 사람과 짐승들 위에도, 그리고 너희가 애써 일하는 모든 것 위에도, 내가 가물어서 흉년이 들도록 해놓았다.\"","And I have proclaimed a devastating heat upon the land and upon the mountains, Upon the grain, the new wine, and the olive oil, upon all that the ground brings forth; Upon human being and beast alike, and upon all they produce.","And I called for a drought upon the land, and upon the mountains, and upon the corn, and upon the new wine, and upon the oil, and upon that which the ground bringeth forth, and upon men, and upon cattle, and upon all the labour of the hands.","I called for a drought on the fields and the mountains, on the grain, the new wine, the oil and whatever the ground produces, on men and cattle, and on the labor of your hands.\"","Et vocavi siccitatem super terram et super montes et super triticum et super vinum et super oleum et, quaecumque profert humus, et super homines et super iumenta et super omnem laborem manuum “.","ואקרא חרב על הארץ ועל ההרים ועל הדגן ועל התירוש ועל היצהר ועל אשר תוציא האדמה ועל האדם ועל הבהמה ועל כל יגיע כפים׃"],["44","1","12","스알티엘의 아들 즈루빠벨과 여호차닥의 아들 예수아 대사제와 나머지 모든 백성은, 주 저희 하느님의 말씀과 주 저희 하느님께서 보내신 하까이 예언자의 말을 잘 들었다. 그리고 백성은 주님을 경외하게 되었다.","스알디엘의 아들 즈루빠벨과 여호사닥의 아들 여호수아 대사제와 그 밖에 살아 남은 모든 백성은 저희의 하느님 야훼께서 보내신 예언자 하깨가 전하는 하느님의 말씀을 듣고 야훼를 두려워하게 되었다.","스알디엘의 아들 스룹바벨과 여호사닥의 아들 대제사장 여호수아와 남은 모든 백성이 그들의 하나님 여호와의 목소리와 선지자 학개의 말을 들었으니 이는 그들의 하나님 여호와께서 그를 보내셨음이라 백성이 다 여호와를 경외하매","스알디엘의 아들 스룹바벨과 여호사닥의 아들 대제사장 여호수아와 남은바 모든 백성이 그 하나님 여호와의 목소리와 선지자 학개의 말을 청종하였으니 이는 그들의 하나님 여호와께서 그를 보내셨음을 인함이라 백성이 다 여호와를 경외하매","유다 총독 스룹바벨과 대제사장 여호수아와 살아 남은 백성 전체가 자기들의 하나님 여호와께서 예언자 학개를 시켜서 하신 말씀을 마음에 받아들였다. 그들은 주께서 그 예언자를 자기들에게 보내신 것을 깨달았고, 또 자기들이 진심으로 주님을 섬기지 못한 것을 알고 깜짝 놀랐다.","Then Zerubbabel, son of Shealtiel, and the high priest Joshua, son of Jehozadak, and all the remnant of the people obeyed the LORD their God, and the words of Haggai the prophet, since the LORD their God had sent him; thus the people feared the LORD.","Then Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel, and Joshua the son of Josedech, the high priest, with all the remnant of the people, obeyed the voice of the LORD their God, and the words of Haggai the prophet, as the LORD their God had sent him, and the people did fear before the LORD.","Then Zerubbabel son of Shealtiel, Joshua son of Jehozadak, the high priest, and the whole remnant of the people obeyed the voice of the LORD their God and the message of the prophet Haggai, because the LORD their God had sent him. And the people feared the LORD.","Et audivit Zorobabel filius Salathiel et Iesua filius Iosedec sacerdos magnus et omnes reliquiae populi vocem Domini Dei sui et verba Aggaei prophetae, sicut misit eum Dominus Deus eorum ad ipsos; et timuit populus a facie Domini.","וישמע זרבבל בן שלתיאל ויהושע בן יהוצדק הכהן הגדול וכל שארית העם בקול יהוה אלהיהם ועל דברי חגי הנביא כאשר שלחו יהוה אלהיהם וייראו העם מפני יהוה׃"],["44","1","13","주님의 사자 하까이는 주님의 말씀을 백성에게 전하였다. “내가 너희와 함께 있다. 주님의 말이다.”","그래서 하깨는 야훼의 특사로서 야훼께로부터 받은 말씀을 전하였다. \"나는 너희와 함께 있으리라. 나 야훼의 말이다.\"","그 때에 여호와의 사자 학개가 여호와의 위임을 받아 백성에게 말하여 이르되 여호와가 말하노니 내가 너희와 함께 하노라 하니라","때에 여호와의 사자 학개가 여호와의 명을 의지하여 백성에게 고하여 가로되 나 여호와가 말하노니 내가 너희와 함께하노라 하셨느니라 하니라","그러자 주께서 자기의 심부름꾼인 학개를 시켜서 이렇게 말씀하셨다. \"내가 너희와 함께 있고, 너희에게 복을 내리겠다. 나 여호와의 말이다.\"","Then Haggai, the messenger of the LORD, proclaimed to the people as the message of the LORD: I am with you!—oracle of the LORD.","Then spake Haggai the LORD's messenger in the LORD's message unto the people, saying, I am with you, saith the LORD.","Then Haggai, the LORD'S messenger, gave this message of the LORD to the people: \"I am with you,\" declares the LORD.","Et dixit Aggaeus nuntius Domini secundum mandatum Domini populo dicens:  “Ego vobiscum, dicit Dominus “.","ויאמר חגי מלאך יהוה במלאכות יהוה לעם לאמר אני אתכם נאם יהוה׃"],["44","1","14","주님께서 스알티엘의 아들 즈루빠벨 유다 총독의 영과 여호차닥의 아들 예수아 대사제의 영과 나머지 모든 백성의 영을 일으키셨다. 그래서 그들은 가서 저희 하느님, 만군의 주님의 집을 짓는 일을 하였다.","야훼께서 스알디엘의 아들 즈루빠벨 유다 총독과 여호사닥의 아들 여호수아 대사제와 그 밖에 살아 남은 모든 백성의 마음을 움직이셨다. 그래서 그들은 저희의 하느님, 만군의 야훼의 성전에 들어가 일을 시작하였다.","여호와께서 스알디엘의 아들 유다 총독 스룹바벨의 마음과 여호사닥의 아들 대제사장 여호수아의 마음과 남은 모든 백성의 마음을 감동시키시매 그들이 와서 만군의 여호와 그들의 하나님의 전 공사를 하였으니","여호와께서 스알디엘의 아들 유다 총독 스룹바벨의 마음과 여호사닥의 아들 대제사장 여호수아의 마음과 남은바 모든 백성의 마음을 흥분시키시매 그들이 와서 만군의 여호와 그들의 하나님의 전 역사를 하였으니","여호와께서 이같이 유다 총독 스룹바벨의 열성과 대제사장 여호수아의 열성과 살아남은 백성 전체의 열성을 일깨워서 자기들의 하나님이시요, 온 세상의 주인이신 여호와의 성전을 재건하도록 그들을 보내 주셨다.","And so the LORD stirred up the spirit of the governor of Judah, Zerubbabel, son of Shealtiel, and the spirit of the high priest Joshua, son of Jehozadak, and the spirit of all the remnant of the people, so that they came to do the work in the house of the LORD of hosts, their God,","And the LORD stirred up the spirit of Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel, governor of Judah, and the spirit of Joshua the son of Josedech, the high priest, and the spirit of all the remnant of the people; and they came and did work in the house of the LORD of hosts, their God,","So the LORD stirred up the spirit of Zerubbabel son of Shealtiel, governor of Judah, and the spirit of Joshua son of Jehozadak, the high priest, and the spirit of the whole remnant of the people. They came and began to work on the house of the LORD Almighty, their God,","Et suscitavit Dominus spiritum Zorobabel filii Salathiel ducis Iudae et spiritum Iesua filii Iosedec sacerdotis magni et spiritum reliquorum omnium de populo; et ingressi sunt et faciebant opus in domo Domini exercituum Dei sui.","ויער יהוה את רוח זרבבל בן שלתיאל פחת יהודה ואת רוח יהושע בן יהוצדק הכהן הגדול ואת רוח כל שארית העם ויבאו ויעשו מלאכה בבית יהוה צבאות אלהיהם׃"],["44","1","15","그날은 여섯째 달 스무나흗날이었다. 다리우스 임금 제이년이었다.","때는 유월 이십사일이었다.","그 때는 다리오 왕 제이년 여섯째 달 이십사일이었더라","때는 다리오왕 이년 유월 이십 사일이었더라","ㄱ) 그들이 일을 시작한 그날은 6월 24일이었다. (ㄱ. BC 520년 9월 21일)","on the twenty-fourth day of the sixth month in the second year of Darius the king.","In the four and twentieth day of the sixth month, in the second year of Darius the king.","on the twenty-fourth day of the sixth month in the second year of King Darius.","In die vicesima et quarta mensis, in sexto mense, in anno secundo Darii regis.","ביום עשרים וארבעה לחדש בששי בשנת שתים לדריוש המלך׃"],["44","2","1","그해 일곱째 달 스무하룻날에 주님의 말씀이 하까이 예언자를 통하여 내렸다.","그 해 칠월 이십일일, 주께서 예언자 하깨를 시켜 말씀을 내리셨다.","일곱째 달 곧 그 달 이십일일에 여호와의 말씀이 선지자 학개에게 임하니라 이르시되","칠월 곧 그 달 이십 일일에 여호와의 말씀이 선지자 학개에게 임하니라 가라사대","ㄴ) 다리오왕 2년 7월 21일에 여호와께서 예언자 학개에게 다시 이런 말씀을 시키셨다. (ㄴ. 같은 해 10월 17일)","On the twenty-first day of the seventh month, the word of the LORD came through Haggai the prophet:","In the seventh month, in the one and twentieth day of the month, came the word of the LORD by the prophet Haggai, saying,","On the twenty-first day of the seventh month, the word of the LORD came through the prophet Haggai:","In septimo mense, vicesima et prima mensis, factum est ver bum Domini in manu Aggaei prophetae dicens:","בשביעי בעשרים ואחד לחדש היה דבר יהוה ביד חגי הנביא לאמר׃"],["44","2","2","“너는 스알티엘의 아들 즈루빠벨 유다 총독과 여호차닥의 아들 예수아 대사제와 나머지 백성에게 말하여라.","\"스알디엘의 아들 즈루빠벨 유다 총독과 여호사닥의 아들 여호수아 대사제와 그 밖에 살아 남은 모든 백성에게 일러라.","너는 스알디엘의 아들 유다 총독 스룹바벨과 여호사닥의 아들 대제사장 여호수아와 남은 백성에게 말하여 이르라","너는 스알디엘의 아들 유다 총독 스룹바벨과 여호사닥의 아들 대제사장 여호수아와 남은 백성에게 고하여 이르라","\"너는 유다 총독 스룹바벨과 대제사장 여호수아와 살아 남은 백성 전체에게 이같이 전하여라.","Speak to the governor of Judah, Zerubbabel, son of Shealtiel, and to the high priest Joshua, son of Jehozadak, and to the remnant of the people:","Speak now to Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel, governor of Judah, and to Joshua the son of Josedech, the high priest, and to the residue of the people, saying,","\"Speak to Zerubbabel son of Shealtiel, governor of Judah, to Joshua son of Jehozadak, the high priest, and to the remnant of the people. Ask them,"," “Loquere ad Zorobabel filium Salathiel ducem Iudae et ad Iesua filium Iosedec sacerdotem magnum et ad reliquos populi dicens:","אמר נא אל זרבבל בן שלתיאל פחת יהודה ואל יהושע בן יהוצדק הכהן הגדול ואל שארית העם לאמר׃"],["44","2","3","‘너희 가운데 이 집의 옛 영화를 본 사람들이 남아 있지 않느냐? 지금은 이 집이 너희에게 어떻게 보이느냐? 너희 눈에도 있으나마나 하지 않느냐?","이 성전이 예전에는 얼마나 영광스러웠더냐? 너희 가운데 그것을 본 사람이 더러 남아 있으리라. 그런데 지금 이 성전은 어떠하냐? 너희의 눈에도 이 따위는 있으나마나 하지 않으냐?","너희 가운데에 남아 있는 자 중에서 이 성전의 이전 영광을 본 자가 누구냐 이제 이것이 너희에게 어떻게 보이느냐 이것이 너희 눈에 보잘것없지 아니하냐","너희 중에 남아 있는 자 곧 이 전의 이전 영광을 본 자가 누구냐 이제 이것이 너희에게 어떻게 보이느냐 이것이 너희 눈에 보잘것이 없지 아니하냐","\"이 성전이 본래 얼마나 장엄하고 화려하였던가를 본 사람이 너희 중에 아직도 남아 있느냐? 그런데 너희가 지금 여기서 보는 성전은 얼마나 초라하냐? 이것은 너희가 보기에도 없는 것이나 마찬가지가 아니냐?","Who is left among you who saw this house in its former glory? And how do you see it now? Does it not seem like nothing in your eyes?","Who is left among you that saw this house in her first glory? and how do ye see it now? is it not in your eyes in comparison of it as nothing?","'Who of you is left who saw this house in its former glory? How does it look to you now? Does it not seem to you like nothing?","Quis in vobis est derelictus, qui vidit domum istam in gloria sua prima? Et quid vos videtis eam nunc? Numquid non ita est quasi non sit in oculis vestris?","מי בכם הנשאר אשר ראה את הבית הזה בכבודו הראשון ומה אתם ראים אתו עתה הלוא כמהו כאין בעיניכם׃"],["44","2","4","그러나 즈루빠벨아, 이제 용기를 내어라. 주님의 말씀이다. 여호차닥의 아들 예수아 대사제야 용기를 내어라. 이 땅의 모든 백성아, 용기를 내어라. 주님의 말씀이다. 내가 너희와 함께 있으니 일을 하여라. 만군의 주님의 말씀이다.","그러나 즈루빠벨아, 힘을 내어라. 나 야훼의 말이다. 여호사닥의 아들 대사제 여호수아야, 힘을 내어라. 이 땅 모든 백성들아, 힘을 내어라. 그리고 일을 시작하여라. 내가 너희 곁에 있어주리라. 만군의 야훼가 말한다.","그러나 여호와가 이르노라 스룹바벨아 스스로 굳세게 할지어다 여호사닥의 아들 대제사장 여호수아야 스스로 굳세게 할지어다 여호와의 말이니라 이 땅 모든 백성아 스스로 굳세게 하여 일할지어다 내가 너희와 함께 하노라 만군의 여호와의 말이니라","그러나 나 여호와가 이르노라 스룹바벨아 스스로 굳세게 할찌어다 여호사닥의 아들 대제사장 여호수아야 스스로 굳세게 할찌어다 나 여호와의 말이니라 이 땅 모든 백성아 스스로 굳세게 하여 일할찌어다 내가 너희와 함께 하노라 만군의 여호와의 말이니라","그렇지만 스룹바벨아, 실망하지 말아라! 그리고 대제사장 여호수아야, 실망하지 말아라! 이 땅의 모든 백성들아, 실망하지 말아라! 힘을 내어라! 너희는 계속 일을 하여라! 내가 너희와 함께 하겠다.\" 온 세상의 주인이신 여호와께서 말씀하셨다.","Now be strong, Zerubbabel—oracle of the LORD— be strong, Joshua, son of Jehozadak, high priest, Be strong, all you people of the land—oracle of the LORD— and work! For I am with you—oracle of the LORD of hosts.","Yet now be strong, O Zerubbabel, saith the LORD; and be strong, O Joshua, son of Josedech, the high priest; and be strong, all ye people of the land, saith the LORD, and work: for I am with you, saith the LORD of hosts:","But now be strong, O Zerubbabel,' declares the LORD. 'Be strong, O Joshua son of Jehozadak, the high priest. Be strong, all you people of the land,' declares the LORD, 'and work. For I am with you,' declares the LORD Almighty.","Sed et nunc confortare, Zorobabel, dicit Dominus, et confortare, Iesua fili Iosedec sacerdos magne, et confortare, omnis popule terrae, dicit Dominus exercituum; et facite, quoniam ego vobiscum sum, dicit Dominus exercituum.","ועתה חזק זרבבל נאם יהוה וחזק יהושע בן יהוצדק הכהן הגדול וחזק כל עם הארץ נאם יהוה ועשו כי אני אתכם נאם יהוה צבאות׃"],["44","2","5","너희가 이집트에서 나올 때에 내가 너희와 맺은 언약대로 나의 영이 너희 가운데에 머무를 터이니 너희는 두려워하지 마라.","너희가 이집트에서 나올 때 너희와 계약을 맺으며 약속한 대로 나의 영이 너희 가운데 머물러 있을 터이니, 겁내지 마라","너희가 애굽에서 나올 때에 내가 너희와 언약한 말과 나의 영이 계속하여 너희 가운데에 머물러 있나니 너희는 두려워하지 말지어다","너희가 애굽에서 나올 때에 내가 너희와 언약한 말과 나의 신이 오히려 너희 중에 머물러 있나니 너희는 두려워하지 말찌어다","\"너희가 애굽에서 나올 때에 내가 너희와 맺었던 계약과 같이, 나의 신이 너희 가운데 머물러 있으니 너희는 전혀 두려워하지 말아라\"","This is the commitment I made to you when you came out of Egypt. My spirit remains in your midst; do not fear!","According to the word that I covenanted with you when ye came out of Egypt, so my spirit remaineth among you: fear ye not.","'This is what I covenanted with you when you came out of Egypt. And my Spirit remains among you. Do not fear.'","Verbum quod pepigi vobiscum, cum egrederemini de terra Aegypti, et spiritus meus stat in medio vestrum; nolite timere.","את הדבר אשר כרתי אתכם בצאתכם ממצרים ורוחי עמדת בתוככם אל תיראו׃"],["44","2","6","─ 정녕 만군의 주님께서 이렇게 말씀하신다. ─ 머지않아 나는 다시 하늘과 땅 바다와 뭍을 뒤흔들리라.","나 만군의 야훼가 말한다. 나는 이제 곧 하늘과 땅, 바다와 육지를 뒤흔들고","만군의 여호와가 이같이 말하노라 조금 있으면 내가 하늘과 땅과 바다와 육지를 진동시킬 것이요","나 만군의 여호와가 말하노라 조금 있으면 내가 하늘과 땅과 바다와 육지를 진동시킬 것이요","온 세상의 주인이신 여호와께서 이렇게 말씀하셨기 때문이다. \"이제 조금만 시간이 지나면 내가 하늘과 땅, 바다와 육지를 뒤흔들고","For thus says the LORD of hosts: In just a little while, I will shake the heavens and the earth, the sea and the dry land.","For thus saith the LORD of hosts; Yet once, it is a little while, and I will shake the heavens, and the earth, and the sea, and the dry land;","\"This is what the LORD Almighty says: 'In a little while I will once more shake the heavens and the earth, the sea and the dry land.","Quia haec dicit Dominus exercituum: Adhuc unum modicum est, et ego commovebo caelum et terram et mare et aridam.","כי כה אמר יהוה צבאות עוד אחת מעט היא ואני מרעיש את השמים ואת הארץ ואת הים ואת החרבה׃"],["44","2","7","내가 모든 민족들을 뒤흔들리니 모든 민족들의 보화가 이리 들어오리라. 그리하여 내가 이 집을 영광으로 가득 채우리라. ─ 만군의 주님께서 말씀하신다. ─","뭇 민족도 뒤흔들리라. 그리하면 뭇 민족이 보화를 가지고 오리니, 내가 내리는 영광이 이 성전에 차고 넘치리라. 야훼의 말이다.","또한 모든 나라를 진동시킬 것이며 모든 나라의 보배가 이르리니 내가 이 성전에 영광이 충만하게 하리라 만군의 여호와의 말이니라","또한 만국을 진동시킬 것이며 만국의 1)보배가 이르리니 내가 영광으로 이 전에 충만케 하리라 만군의 여호와의 말이니라 사모하는 것이","또 내가 세계 만민들을 소름이 끼치도록 공포에 몰아넣어 그들이 자기들의 보물을 모두 이곳으로 가져오도록 하겠다. 나의 집이 화려하게 장식되도록 내가 그런 계획을 하고 있다.\" 온 세상의 주인이신 여호와께서 말씀하셨다.","I will shake all the nations, so that the treasures of all the nations will come in. And I will fill this house with glory— says the LORD of hosts.","And I will shake all nations, and the desire of all nations shall come: and I will fill this house with glory, saith the LORD of hosts.","I will shake all nations, and the desired of all nations will come, and I will fill this house with glory,' says the LORD Almighty.","Et movebo omnes gentes, et venient thesauri cunctarum gentium, et implebo domum istam gloria, dicit Dominus exercituum.","והרעשתי את כל הגוים ובאו חמדת כל הגוים ומלאתי את הבית הזה כבוד אמר יהוה צבאות׃"],["44","2","8","은도 나의 것, 금도 나의 것이다. 만군의 주님의 말씀이다.","은도 나의 것이요, 금도 나의 것이다. 만군의 야훼가 말한다.","은도 내 것이요 금도 내 것이니라 만군의 여호와의 말이니라","은도 내 것이요 금도 내 것이니라 만군의 여호와의 말이니라","\"나는 그런 일을 할 수 있는 은과 금을 충분히 가지고 있다!\" 온 세상의 주인이신 여호와께서 하신 말씀이다.","Mine is the silver and mine the gold—oracle of the LORD of hosts.","The silver is mine, and the gold is mine, saith the LORD of hosts.","'The silver is mine and the gold is mine,' declares the LORD Almighty.","Meum est argentum et meum est aurum, dicit Dominus exercituum.","לי הכסף ולי הזהב נאם יהוה צבאות׃"],["44","2","9","이 집의 새 영광이 이전의 영광보다 더 크리라. ─ 만군의 주님께서 말씀하신다. ─ 내가 이곳에 평화를 주리라. 만군의 주님의 말씀이다.’”","지금 짓는 이 성전이 예전의 성전보다 더 영화로울 것이다. 만군의 야훼가 말한다. 나는 이 곳에 평화를 주리라. 만군의 야훼가 말한다.'\"","이 성전의 나중 영광이 이전 영광보다 크리라 만군의 여호와의 말이니라 내가 이 곳에 평강을 주리라 만군의 여호와의 말이니라","이 전의 나중 영광이 이전 영광보다 크리라 만군의 여호와의 말이니라 내가 이곳에 평강을 주리라 만군의 여호와의 말이니라","이 성전의 장래 영광이 본래의 영광보다 더 클 것이다. 온 세상의 주인이신 여호와께서 말씀하셨다. \"또 네가 이곳에서 내 백성에게 평화를 주겠다.\" 온 세상의 주인이신 여호와께서 하신 말씀이다.","Greater will be the glory of this house the latter more than the former—says the LORD of hosts; And in this place I will give you peace— oracle of the LORD of hosts.","The glory of this latter house shall be greater than of the former, saith the LORD of hosts: and in this place will I give peace, saith the LORD of hosts.","'The glory of this present house will be greater than the glory of the former house,' says the LORD Almighty. 'And in this place I will grant peace,' declares the LORD Almighty.\"","Maior erit gloria domus istius novissima plus quam prima, dicit Dominus exercituum; et in loco isto dabo pacem, dicit Dominus exercituum “.","גדול יהיה כבוד הבית הזה האחרון מן הראשון אמר יהוה צבאות ובמקום הזה אתן שלום נאם יהוה צבאות׃"],["44","2","10","다리우스 제이년 아홉째 달 스무나흗날에 주님의 말씀이 하까이 예언자에게 내렸다.","다리우스 제이년 구월 이십사일, 야훼께서 예언자 하깨를 시켜 말씀을 내리셨다.","다리오 왕 제이년 아홉째 달 이십사일에 여호와의 말씀이 선지자 학개에게 임하니라 이르시되","다리오왕 이년 구월 이십 사일에 여호와의 말씀이 선지자 학개에게 임하니라 가라사대","ㄷ) 다리오왕 2년 9월 24일에 여호와께서 예언자 학개에게 다음과 같이 말씀하셨다. (ㄷ. 같은 해 12월 18일)","On the twenty-fourth day of the ninth month in the second year of Darius, the word of the LORD came to Haggai the prophet:","In the four and twentieth day of the ninth month, in the second year of Darius, came the word of the LORD by Haggai the prophet, saying,","On the twenty-fourth day of the ninth month, in the second year of Darius, the word of the LORD came to the prophet Haggai:","In vicesima et quarta noni mensis, in anno secundo Darii, factum est verbum Domini ad Aggaeum prophetam dicens:","בעשרים וארבעה לתשיעי בשנת שתים לדריוש היה דבר יהוה אל חגי הנביא לאמר׃"],["44","2","11","“만군의 주님이 말한다. 너는 사제들이 어떤 가르침을 내릴지 이렇게 물어보아라.","\"나 만군의 야훼가 말한다. 너는 사제들에게 법을 물어보아라.","만군의 여호와가 말하노니 너는 제사장에게 율법에 대하여 물어 이르기를","나 만군의 여호와가 말하노니 너는 제사장에게 율법에 대하여 물어 이르기를","\"온 세상의 주인이신 여호와께서 이렇게 말씀하신다. 너는 제사장들에게 가서 다음과 같은 문제를 물어 보아라!","Thus says the LORD of hosts: Ask the priests for a ruling:","Thus saith the LORD of hosts; Ask now the priests concerning the law, saying,","\"This is what the LORD Almighty says: 'Ask the priests what the law says:"," “Haec dicit Dominus exercituum: Interroga sacerdotes legem dicens:","כה אמר יהוה צבאות שאל נא את הכהנים תורה לאמר׃"],["44","2","12","‘어떤 사람이 봉헌된 고기를 옷자락에 담아 가져가는데, 그 옷자락이 빵이나 삶은 요리나 포도주나 기름이나 다른 어떤 음식에 닿으면, 그것들도 거룩해집니까?’” 그렇게 하자 사제들은 “아닙니다.” 하고 대답하였다.","제물로 바쳤던 고기를 싼 옷자락에 빵이나 익힌 음식이나 포도주나 올리브 기름이나 그 밖에 어떤 음식이 닿았다고 하여, 그런 것이 제물처럼 거룩해지느냐고 물어보아라.\" 사제들은 그렇지 않다고 대답하였다.","사람이 옷자락에 거룩한 고기를 쌌는데 그 옷자락이 만일 떡에나 국에나 포도주에나 기름에나 다른 음식물에 닿았으면 그것이 성물이 되겠느냐 하라 학개가 물으매 제사장들이 대답하여 이르되 아니니라 하는지라","사람이 옷자락에 거룩한 고기를 쌌는데 그 옷자락이 만일 떡에나 국에나 포도주에나 기름에나 다른 식물에 닿았으면 그것이 성물이 되겠느냐 하라 학개가 물으매 제사장들이 대답하여 가로되 아니니라","\"어떤 사람이 거룩한 고기를 자기의 옷자락에 싸서 들고 돌아다니다 떡이나 국, 포도주나 올리브 기름, 또는 어떤 종류의 음식이든지 먹는 것에 그 옷자락을 스친다면, 그 닿은 음식도 거룩해지느냐?\" 학개가 그대로 묻자 제사장들이 이렇게 대답하였다. \"거룩해지지 않는다!\"","If someone carries sanctified meat in the fold of a garment and the fold touches bread, soup, wine, oil, or any other food, do they become sanctified? “No,” the priests answered.","If one bear holy flesh in the skirt of his garment, and with his skirt do touch bread, or pottage, or wine, or oil, or any meat, shall it be holy? And the priests answered and said, No.","If a person carries consecrated meat in the fold of his garment, and that fold touches some bread or stew, some wine, oil or other food, does it become consecrated?'\" The priests answered, \"No.\"","Si tulerit homo carnem sanctificatam in ora vestimenti sui et tetigerit de summitate eius panem aut pulmentum aut vinum aut oleum aut omnem cibum, numquid sanctificabitur? “. Respondentes autem sacerdotes dixerunt:  “Non “.","הן ישא איש בשר קדש בכנף בגדו ונגע בכנפו אל הלחם ואל הנזיד ואל היין ואל שמן ואל כל מאכל היקדש ויענו הכהנים ויאמרו לא׃"],["44","2","13","하까이가 다시 “주검에 닿아서 부정하게 된 이가 이 모든 것 가운데 어느 것에라도 닿으면, 그것이 부정하게 됩니까?” 하고 물으니, 사제들이 “부정하게 됩니다.” 하고 대답하였다.","하깨가 또 \"몸이 시체에 닿아 부정을 탄 사람이 어떤 음식을 만졌다면, 그 음식도 부정을 타느냐?\" 하고 물으니 사제들은 부정을 탄다고 대답하였다.","학개가 이르되 시체를 만져서 부정하여진 자가 만일 그것들 가운데 하나를 만지면 그것이 부정하겠느냐 하니 제사장들이 대답하여 이르되 부정하리라 하더라","학개가 가로되 시체를 만져서 부정하여진 자가 만일 그것들 중에 하나를 만지면 그것이 부정하겠느냐 제사장들이 대답하여 가로되 부정하겠느니라","학개가 주님에게서 받은 대로 또 질문하였다. \"어떤 사람이 시체와 접촉하여 부정하게 되고서 어떤 음식을 만졌을 때, 그 닿은 음식이 부정하게 되느냐?\" 그 제사장들이 대답하였다. \"부정하게 된다!\"","Then Haggai asked: “If a person defiled from contact with a corpse touches any of these, do they become defiled?” The priests answered, “They become defiled.”","Then said Haggai, If one that is unclean by a dead body touch any of these, shall it be unclean? And the priests answered and said, It shall be unclean.","Then Haggai said, \"If a person defiled by contact with a dead body touches one of these things, does it become defiled?\" \"Yes,\" the priests replied, \"it becomes defiled.\"","Et dixit Aggaeus:  “Si tetigerit pollutus cadavere omnia haec, numquid contaminabuntur? “. Et responderunt sacerdotes et dixerunt:  “Contaminabuntur “.","ויאמר חגי אם יגע טמא נפש בכל אלה היטמא ויענו הכהנים ויאמרו יטמא׃"],["44","2","14","그러자 하까이가 말하였다. “내 앞에서는 이 백성도 그러하고 이 민족도 그러하다. 주님의 말씀이다. 그들의 손이 하는 일도 모두 그러하다. 그들이 거기에서 바치는 것들도 다 부정하다.”","이 말을 받아 하깨는 이렇게 전하였다. \"이 백성, 이 민족도 마찬가지다. 그런 사람이 만든 것도 마찬가지다. 야훼의 말이다. 거기에 닿으면 무엇이든지 부정을 탄다.","이에 학개가 대답하여 이르되 여호와의 말씀에 내 앞에서 이 백성이 그러하고 이 나라가 그러하고 그들의 손의 모든 일도 그러하고 그들이 거기에서 드리는 것도 부정하니라","이에 학개가 대답하여 가로되 여호와의 말씀에 내 앞에서 이 백성이 그러하고 이 나라가 그러하고 그 손의 모든 일도 그러하고 그들이 거기서 드리는 것도 부정하니라","그러자 학개가 말하였다. \"내가 보기에 이 백성이 그렇고, 이 민족이 그렇다\" 주님의 말씀이시다. \"또 그들이 손으로 한 모든 일들이 그렇고, 그들이 제단에 바치는 모든 제물들이 부정하게 된다!\"","Then Haggai replied: So is this people, and so is this nation in my sight—oracle of the LORD— And so is all the work of their hands; what they offer there is defiled.","Then answered Haggai, and said, So is this people, and so is this nation before me, saith the LORD; and so is every work of their hands; and that which they offer there is unclean.","Then Haggai said, \"'So it is with this people and this nation in my sight,' declares the LORD. 'Whatever they do and whatever they offer there is defiled.","Et respondit Aggaeus et dixit:  “Sic populus iste et sic gens ista ante faciem meam, dicit Dominus, et sic omne opus manuum eorum et omnia, quae offerunt ibi, contaminata sunt.","ויען חגי ויאמר כן העם הזה וכן הגוי הזה לפני נאם יהוה וכן כל מעשה ידיהם ואשר יקריבו שם טמא הוא׃"],["44","2","15","“그러므로 이제 오늘부터 앞으로 어떻게 될지 생각해 보아라. 주님 성전의 돌을 쌓기 전에","그러니 이제 너희는 주의 성전을 짓기 시작한 이 날부터 일이 어떻게 되어 가는지 눈여겨보아라.","이제 원하건대 너희는 오늘부터 이전 곧 여호와의 전에 돌이 돌 위에 놓이지 아니하였던 때를 기억하라","이제 청컨대 너희는 오늘부터 이전 곧 여호와의 전에 돌이 돌 위에 첩놓이지 않았던 때를 추억하라","주께서 말씀하셨다. \"너희는 이제 오늘부터 지난날을 되돌아보아라! 너희가 여호와의 성전을 재건하기 위하여 돌을 쌓기 전에","Now reflect, from this day forward—before you set stone to stone in the temple of the LORD,","And now, I pray you, consider from this day and upward, from before a stone was laid upon a stone in the temple of the LORD:","\"'Now give careful thought to this from this day on--consider how things were before one stone was laid on another in the LORD'S temple.","Et nunc ponite corda vestra a die hac et supra: Antequam poneretur lapis super lapidem in templo Domini,","ועתה שימו נא לבבכם מן היום הזה ומעלה מטרם שום אבן אל אבן בהיכל יהוה׃"],["44","2","16","너희가 하는 일들이 어떠하였느냐? 누가 스무 섬 더미에 가면 열 섬밖에 없고 쉰 동이를 푸려고 포도 확에 가면 스무 동이밖에 없었다.","이제까지는 곡식 스무 단이 나던 곳에서 열 단밖에 나지 않았고, 포도주 쉰 동이가 나던 술틀에서 스무 동이밖에 나지 않았다.","그 때에는 이십 고르 곡식 더미에 이른즉 십 고르뿐이었고 포도즙 틀에 오십 고르를 길으러 이른즉 이십 고르뿐이었었느니라","그 때에는 이십석 곡식더미에 이른즉 십석 뿐이었고 포도즙 틀에 오십 그릇을 길으려 이른즉 이십 그릇 뿐이었었느니라","너희에게 무슨 일이 일어났느냐? 너희는 스무 말이 나던 밭에서 곡식을 거두어 보아야 겨우 열 말밖에 거두지 못하였고, 쉰 말이 나던 포도원에서 포도주를 짜 보아야 스무 말밖에 나오지 않았다.","what was your experience? When one went to a heap of grain for twenty ephahs, there were only ten; When one went to a vat to draw fifty ephahs, there were only twenty.","Since those days were, when one came to an heap of twenty measures, there were but ten: when one came to the pressfat for to draw out fifty vessels out of the press, there were but twenty.","When anyone came to a heap of twenty measures, there were only ten. When anyone went to a wine vat to draw fifty measures, there were only twenty.","quid fuistis? Cum accederetis ad acervum viginti modiorum, erant decem; cum intraretis ad torcular, ut hauriretis quinquaginta lagenas, erant viginti.","מהיותם בא אל ערמת עשרים והיתה עשרה בא אל היקב לחשף חמשים פורה והיתה עשרים׃"],["44","2","17","내가 마름병과 깜부깃병과 우박으로 너희가 손으로 가꾼 모든 것을 쳤지만 너희는 나에게 돌아오지 않았다. 주님의 말씀이다.","나는 너희가 괘씸하여 너희 손으로 가꾼 것은 다 말라 쭉정이나 깜부기가 되게 하였고, 또 우박으로 짓부수기도 하였다. 그래도 너희는 나에게 마음을 돌리려 하지 않았다. 야훼의 말이다.","만군의 여호와가 말하노라 내가 너희 손으로 지은 모든 일에 곡식을 마르게 하는 재앙과 깜부기 재앙과 우박으로 쳤으나 너희가 내게로 돌이키지 아니하였느니라","나 만군의 여호와가 말하노라 내가 너희 손으로 지은 모든 일에 폭풍과 곰팡과 우박으로 쳤으나 너희가 내게로 돌이키지 아니하였었느니라","내가 깜부기병과 흰가루병과 우박으로 너희를 치고 너희가 하는 일마다 꼬이게 하였으나, 너희는 여전히 내게로 돌아오는 것을 싫어하였다!\" 주님의 말씀이시다.","I struck you, and all the work of your hands, with searing wind, blight, and hail, yet you did not return to me—oracle of the LORD.","I smote you with blasting and with mildew and with hail in all the labours of your hands; yet ye turned not to me, saith the LORD.","I struck all the work of your hands with blight, mildew and hail, yet you did not turn to me,' declares the LORD.","Percussi vos ariditate et rubigine et grandine omnia opera manuum vestrarum, et non fuit in vobis qui reverteretur ad me, dicit Dominus.","הכיתי אתכם בשדפון ובירקון ובברד את כל מעשה ידיכם ואין אתכם אלי נאם יהוה׃"],["44","2","18","오늘부터 앞으로 어떻게 될지 생각해 보아라. 아홉째 달 스무나흗날부터 주님의 성전에 기초를 놓은 날부터 생각해 보아라.","너희는 야훼의 성전 주추를 놓은 구월 이십사일, 바로 이 날부터 앞으로 어떻게 달라지는지 눈여겨보아라.","너희는 오늘 이전을 기억하라 아홉째 달 이십사일 곧 여호와의 성전 지대를 쌓던 날부터 기억하여 보라","너희는 오늘부터 이전을 추억하여 보라 구월 이십 사일 곧 여호와의 전 지대를 쌓던 날부터 추억하여 보라","\"그러나 너희는 이제 오늘부터 모든 일을 잘 살펴보아라! 여호와의 성전 기초공사가 완료된 ㄱ) 9월 24일부터 눈여겨 보아라! (ㄱ. BC 520년 12월 18일)","Reflect from this day forward, from the twenty-fourth day of the ninth month. From the day on which the temple of the LORD was founded, reflect!","Consider now from this day and upward, from the four and twentieth day of the ninth month, even from the day that the foundation of the LORD's temple was laid, consider it.","'From this day on, from this twenty-fourth day of the ninth month, give careful thought to the day when the foundation of the LORD'S temple was laid. Give careful thought:","Ponite corda vestra ex die ista et in futurum, a die vicesima et quarta noni mensis, a die, qua fundamenta iacta sunt templi Domini, ponite super cor vestrum.","שימו נא לבבכם מן היום הזה ומעלה מיום עשרים וארבעה לתשיעי למן היום אשר יסד היכל יהוה שימו לבבכם׃"],["44","2","19","곳집에 씨앗이 없지 않으냐? 포도나무 무화과나무 석류나무 올리브 나무에 열매가 없지 않으냐? 오늘부터 내가 너희에게 복을 내리리라.”","곳간에 둔 종자가 줄어드는지, 포도, 무화과, 석류, 올리브가 열리는지 안 열리는지 두고 보아라. 나는 이 날부터 복을 내리기로 하였다.\"","곡식 종자가 아직도 창고에 있느냐 포도나무, 무화과나무, 석류나무, 감람나무에 열매가 맺지 못하였느니라 그러나 오늘부터는 내가 너희에게 복을 주리라","곡식 종자가 오히려 창고에 있느냐 포도나무, 무화과나무, 석류나무, 감람나무에 열매가 맺지 못하였었느니라 그러나 오늘부터는 내가 너희에게 복을 주리라","이제까지는 광에도 양식이 떨어졌고, 포도나무와 무화과나무, 석류나무와 올리브나무에도 열매가 맺히지 않았다. 그러나 오늘부터는 내가 너희의 땅에 복을 내려서, 모든 곡식과 과일에 풍작이 들도록 하겠다!\"","Is there still seed in the storehouse? Have the vine, the fig, the pomegranate, and the olive tree still not borne fruit? From this day, I will bless you.","Is the seed yet in the barn? yea, as yet the vine, and the fig tree, and the pomegranate, and the olive tree, hath not brought forth: from this day will I bless you.","Is there yet any seed left in the barn? Until now, the vine and the fig tree, the pomegranate and the olive tree have not borne fruit. \"'From this day on I will bless you.'\"","Numquid adhuc semen in horreo est, et adhuc vinea et ficus et malogranatum et lignum olivae non portavit fructum? Ex die hac benedicam “.","העוד הזרע במגורה ועד הגפן והתאנה והרמון ועץ הזית לא נשא מן היום הזה אברך׃"],["44","2","20","그달 스무나흗날에 주님의 말씀이 다시 하까이에게 내렸다.","그 달 이십사일, 야훼께서 하깨에게 또다시 말씀을 내리셨다.","그 달 이십사일에 여호와의 말씀이 다시 학개에게 임하니라 이르시되","그 달 이십 사일에 여호와의 말씀이 다시 학개에게 임하니라 가라사대","여호와께서 9월 24일에 또 한 번 학개에게 말씀하셨다.","The word of the LORD came a second time to Haggai on the twenty-fourth day of the month:","And again the word of the LORD came unto Haggai in the four and twentieth day of the month, saying,","The word of the LORD came to Haggai a second time on the twenty-fourth day of the month:","Et factum est verbum Domini secundo ad Aggaeum in vicesima et quarta mensis dicens:","ויהי דבר יהוה שנית אל חגי בעשרים וארבעה לחדש לאמר׃"],["44","2","21","“너는 유다 총독 즈루빠벨에게 이렇게 말하여라. ‘나는 하늘과 땅을 뒤흔들리라.","\"너는 유다 총독 즈루빠벨에게 이렇게 일러라. '내가 하늘과 땅을 뒤흔들리라.","너는 유다 총독 스룹바벨에게 말하여 이르라 내가 하늘과 땅을 진동시킬 것이요","너는 유다 총독 스룹바벨에게 고하여 이르라 내가 하늘과 땅을 진동시킬 것이요","유다 총독 스룹바벨에게 다음과 같이 전하여라. 내가 하늘과 땅을 뒤흔들 작정이다.","Speak to Zerubbabel, the governor of Judah: I will shake the heavens and the earth;","Speak to Zerubbabel, governor of Judah, saying, I will shake the heavens and the earth;","\"Tell Zerubbabel governor of Judah that I will shake the heavens and the earth."," “Loquere ad Zorobabel ducem Iudae dicens: Ego movebo caelum pariter et terram","אמר אל זרבבל פחת יהודה לאמר אני מרעיש את השמים ואת הארץ׃"],["44","2","22","나는 왕국들의 왕좌를 뒤엎고 민족들의 왕국의 권세를 없애 버리리라. 또 병거와 거기에 탄 자들을 뒤엎으리라. 군마와 기병들은 서로 동료의 칼에 맞아 쓰러지리라.","또 뭇 나라 옥좌를 뒤엎고 뭇 민족의 힘을 꺾으리라. 병거대를 뒤집어엎고 기마대는 저희끼리 싸우다가 서로 칼에 맞아 쓰러지게 하리라.","여러 왕국들의 보좌를 엎을 것이요 여러 나라의 세력을 멸할 것이요 그 병거들과 그 탄 자를 엎드러뜨리리니 말과 그 탄 자가 각각 그의 동료의 칼에 엎드러지리라","열국의 보좌를 엎을 것이요 열방의 세력을 멸할 것이요 그 병거들과 그 탄 자를 엎드러뜨리리니 말과 그 탄 자가 각각 그 동무의 칼에 엎드러지리라","그때에는 내가 뭇 나라의 왕위들을 뒤집어 놓고, 또 내가 뭇 민족의 군사력을 파괴해 버리겠다. 그때에는 내가 무정한 그들의 병력들을 뒤엎어서, 기마병들이 서로 자기들의 칼에 찔려서 군마와 함께 쓰러지도록 하겠다.\"","I will overthrow the thrones of kingdoms, and destroy the power of the kingdoms of the nations. I will overthrow the chariots and their riders, and the riders with their horses will fall by each other’s swords.","And I will overthrow the throne of kingdoms, and I will destroy the strength of the kingdoms of the heathen; and I will overthrow the chariots, and those that ride in them; and the horses and their riders shall come down, every one by the sword of his brother.","I will overturn royal thrones and shatter the power of the foreign kingdoms. I will overthrow chariots and their drivers; horses and their riders will fall, each by the sword of his brother.","et subvertam solium regnorum et conteram fortitudinem regnorum gentium et subvertam quadrigam et ascensores eius; et descendent equi et ascensores eorum, unusquisque percussus gladio fratris sui.","והפכתי כסא ממלכות והשמדתי חזק ממלכות הגוים והפכתי מרכבה ורכביה וירדו סוסים ורכביהם איש בחרב אחיו׃"],["44","2","23","만군의 주님의 말씀이다. 그날에 스알티엘의 아들, 나의 종 즈루빠벨아 ─ 주님의 말씀이다. ─ 내가 너를 받아들여 너를 인장 반지처럼 만들리니 내가 너를 선택하였기 때문이다.’ 만군의 주님의 말씀이다.”","그 날이 오면, 만군의 야훼가 말한다. 스알디엘의 아들 즈루빠벨아, 내가 너를 들어올리리라. 너는 나의 종이다. 만군의 야훼가 말한다. 내가 너를 뽑았으니 너는 옥새처럼 소중하다. 만군의 야훼가 말한다.'\"","만군의 여호와가 말하노라 스알디엘의 아들 내 종 스룹바벨아 여호와가 말하노라 그 날에 내가 너를 세우고 너를 인장으로 삼으리니 이는 내가 너를 택하였음이니라 만군의 여호와의 말이니라 하시니라","나 만군의 여호와가 말하노라 스알디엘의 아들 내 종 스룹바벨아 나 여호와가 말하노라 그 날에 내가 너를 취하고 너로 인을 삼으리니 이는 내가 너를 택하였음이니라 만군의 여호와의 말이니라","온 세상의 주인이신 여호와께서 하신 말씀이다. \"스알디엘의 아들 스룹바벨아, 그날이 오면 내가 너를 나의 종으로 들어올리겠다.\" 주님의 말씀이시다. \"그때에는 내가 너를 옥새와 같이 쓰겠다. 너는 내가 선택한 사람이기 때문이다!\" 온 세상의 주인이신 여호와께서 하신 말씀이다.","On that day—oracle of the LORD of hosts—I will take you, my servant, Zerubbabel, son of Shealtiel—oracle of the LORD—and I will make you like a signet ring, for I have chosen you—oracle of the LORD of hosts.","In that day, saith the LORD of hosts, will I take thee, O Zerubbabel, my servant, the son of Shealtiel, saith the LORD, and will make thee as a signet: for I have chosen thee, saith the LORD of hosts.","\"'On that day,' declares the LORD Almighty, 'I will take you, my servant Zerubbabel son of Shealtiel,' declares the LORD, 'and I will make you like my signet ring, for I have chosen you,' declares the LORD Almighty.\"","In die illo, dicit Dominus exercituum, assumam te, Zorobabel fili Salathiel, serve meus, dicit Dominus, et ponam te quasi signaculum, quia te elegi “, dicit Dominus exercituum.","ביום ההוא נאם יהוה צבאות אקחך זרבבל בן שאלתיאל עבדי נאם יהוה ושמתיך כחותם כי בך בחרתי נאם יהוה צבאות׃"],["45","1","1","다리우스 제이년 여덟째 달에 주님의 말씀이 이또의 손자이며 베레크야의 아들인 즈카르야 예언자에게 내렸다.","다리우스 제이년 팔월에 야훼의 말씀이 예언자 즈가리야에게 내렸다. 즈가리야는 베레기야의 아들이요, 이또의 손자였다.","다리오 왕 제이년 여덟째 달에 여호와의 말씀이 잇도의 손자 베레갸의 아들 선지자 스가랴에게 임하니라 이르시되","다리오왕 이년 팔월에 여호와의 말씀이 잇도의 손자 베레갸의 아들 선지자 스가랴에게 임하니라 가라사대","제목 : 여호와께서 하달하신 전통. 전령 : 베레갸의 아들이며 잇도의 손자인 예언자 스가랴. 수신 : 예루살렘의 주민들. 날짜 : ㄱ) 다리오왕 1세의 통치 2년 8월. (ㄱ. BC 520년 10월 중순-11월 중순)","In the second year of Darius, in the eighth month, the word of the LORD came to the prophet Zechariah, son of Berechiah, son of Iddo:","In the eighth month, in the second year of Darius, came the word of the LORD unto Zechariah, the son of Berechiah, the son of Iddo the prophet, saying,","In the eighth month of the second year of Darius, the word of the LORD came to the prophet Zechariah son of Berekiah, the son of Iddo:","In mense octavo, in anno se cundo Darii, factum est verbum Domini ad Zachariam filium Barachiae filii Addo prophetam dicens:","בחדש השמיני בשנת שתים לדריוש היה דבר יהוה אל זכריה בן ברכיה בן עדו הנביא לאמר׃"],["45","1","2","“주님이 너희 조상들에게 크게 화가 났다.","나 야훼가 너희 조상들에게 크게 노하자","여호와가 너희의 조상들에게 심히 진노하였느니라","나 여호와가 무리의 열조에게 심히 진노하였느니라","\"여호와께서 예루살렘의 주민들에게 전하라고 분부하신 대로 스가랴가 선포하였다. \"온 세상의 주인이신 여호와께서 너희에게 하시는 말씀을 들어라. 나는 너희 조상들에게 크게 화를 내었다. 그러나 너희는 그 길에서 돌아오너라! 너희가 다시 내게로 돌아오면, 나도 다시 너희에게로 돌아가서 더 이상 분노를 품지 않겠다.\" 온 세상의 주인이신 여호와께서 말씀하셨다.","The LORD was very angry with your ancestors.","The LORD hath been sore displeased with your fathers.","\"The LORD was very angry with your forefathers."," “Iratus est Dominus super patres vestros iracundia.","קצף יהוה על אבותיכם קצף׃"],["45","1","3","그러므로 너는 그들에게 말하여라. ‘만군의 주님이 말한다. 너희는 나에게 돌아와라. 만군의 주님의 말씀이다. 그러면 나도 너희에게 돌아가리라. ─ 만군의 주님께서 말씀하신다.’","\"너는 이 백성에게 만군의 야훼께서 하시는 말씀이라고 하며 이렇게 일러라. '나에게로 돌아오너라. 만군의 야훼가 말한다. 나도 너희에게 돌아가리라. 만군의 야훼가 말한다.","그러므로 너는 그들에게 말하기를 만군의 여호와께서 이처럼 이르시되 너희는 내게로 돌아오라 만군의 여호와의 말이니라 그리하면 내가 너희에게로 돌아가리라 만군의 여호와의 말이니라","그러므로 너는 무리에게 고하기를 만군의 여호와께서 이처럼 이르시되 너희는 내게로 돌아오라 나 만군의 여호와의 말이니라 그리하면 내가 너희에게로 돌아가리라 나 만군의 여호와의 말이니라","(2절에 포함되어 있음)","Say to them: Thus says the LORD of hosts, Return to me—oracle of the LORD of hosts—and I will return to you, says the LORD of hosts.","Therefore say thou unto them, Thus saith the LORD of hosts; Turn ye unto me, saith the LORD of hosts, and I will turn unto you, saith the LORD of hosts.","Therefore tell the people: This is what the LORD Almighty says: 'Return to me,' declares the LORD Almighty, 'and I will return to you,' says the LORD Almighty.","Et dices ad eos: Haec dicit Dominus exercituum: Convertimini ad me, ait Dominus exercituum; et convertar ad vos, dicit Dominus exercituum.","ואמרת אלהם כה אמר יהוה צבאות שובו אלי נאם יהוה צבאות ואשוב אליכם אמר יהוה צבאות׃"],["45","1","4","너희는 너희 조상들처럼 되지 마라. 이전의 예언자들은 ‘만군의 주님께서 이렇게 말씀하신다. 너희는 부디 너희의 악한 길과 악한 행동을 버리고 돌아와라.’ 하고 외쳤으나, 그들은 듣지도 않고 나에게 주의를 기울이지도 않았다. 주님의 말씀이다.","너희는 너희 조상들을 본받지 마라. 지난날, 예언자들이 그들에게 만군의 야훼께서 하신 말씀이라고 하며, 악한 길, 악한 행실을 버리고 돌아오라고 외쳤건만, 그들은 내 말을 듣지 아니하고 귓등으로 흘려버렸다. 만군의 야훼가 말한다.","너희 조상들을 본받지 말라 옛적 선지자들이 그들에게 외쳐 이르되 만군의 여호와께서 이같이 말씀하시기를 너희가 악한 길, 악한 행위를 떠나서 돌아오라 하셨다 하나 그들이 듣지 아니하고 내게 귀를 기울이지 아니하였느니라 여호와의 말이니라","너희 열조를 본받지 말라 옛적 선지자들이 그들에게 외쳐 가로되 만군의 여호와께서 말씀하시기를 너희가 악한 길, 악한 행실을 떠나서 돌아오라 하셨다 하나 그들이 듣지 않고 내게 귀를 기울이지 아니하였느니라 나 여호와의 말이니라","\"너희는 조상을 닮지 말아라! 나는 예언자들을 시켜서 너희의 조상들에게 끊임없이 \"너희의 그릇된 길에서 돌아오너라! 너희의 악한 행실에서 깨끗이 손을 떼어라!\" 하고 일러주었다. 그러나 그들은 내 말을 듣지도 않고 나를 존중하지도 않았다.","Do not be like your ancestors to whom the earlier prophets proclaimed: Thus says the LORD of hosts: Turn from your evil ways and from your wicked deeds. But they did not listen or pay attention to me—oracle of the LORD.—","Be ye not as your fathers, unto whom the former prophets have cried, saying, Thus saith the LORD of hosts; Turn ye now from your evil ways, and from your evil doings: but they did not hear, nor hearken unto me, saith the LORD.","Do not be like your forefathers, to whom the earlier prophets proclaimed: This is what the LORD Almighty says: 'Turn from your evil ways and your evil practices.' But they would not listen or pay attention to me, declares the LORD.","Ne sitis sicut patres vestri, ad quos clamabant prophetae priores dicentes: Haec dicit Dominus exercituum: Convertimini de viis vestris malis et de cogitationibus vestris malis; et non audierunt neque attenderunt ad me, dicit Dominus.","אל תהיו כאבתיכם אשר קראו אליהם הנביאים הראשנים לאמר כה אמר יהוה צבאות שובו נא מדרכיכם הרעים ומעליליכם הרעים ולא שמעו ולא הקשיבו אלי נאם יהוה׃"],["45","1","5","너희의 그 조상들은 어디에 있느냐? 또 그 예언자들은 아직도 살아 있느냐?","그러던 너희의 조상들은 어찌 되었느냐? 그 예언자들은 아직 살아 있느냐?","너희 조상들이 어디 있느냐 또 선지자들이 영원히 살겠느냐","너희 열조가 어디 있느냐 선지자들이 영원히 살겠느냐","너희 조상들과 그 예언자들은 이미 오래전에 죽었으나, 그들이 배운 다음과 같은 교훈은 기억하여라. \"하나님의 말씀은 영원히 살아 있다!\" 내가 예언자들을 시켜서 선포한 말씀은 너희의 조상들에게서 이루어졌다. 그래서 너희의 조상들이 마침내 내게로 돌아와서 다음 사실을 확인하였다. \"온 세상의 주인이신 여호와께서 선포하신 말씀과 똑같이, 주께서 우리의 악한 행실과 범죄에 대하여 징벌을 내리셨다.\"","Your ancestors, where are they? And the prophets, can they live forever?","Your fathers, where are they? and the prophets, do they live for ever?","Where are your forefathers now? And the prophets, do they live forever?","Patres vestri ubi sunt? Et prophetae numquid in sempiternum vivent?","אבותיכם איה הם והנבאים הלעולם יחיו׃"],["45","1","6","그러나 내가 나의 종 예언자들에게 내린 말과 규정들이 너희 조상들에게 이루어지지 않았느냐? 그래서 그들은 돌아와, ‘만군의 주님께서 우리를 두고 계획하신 대로, 우리의 길과 행동에 따라 우리를 다루셨다.’ 하고 말하였다.”","그들은 돌아와서, 주께서 우리의 그릇된 행적을 보시고 작정하셨던 대로 벌하셨다고 고백하였다.'\"","내가 나의 종 선지자들에게 명령한 내 말과 내 법도들이 어찌 너희 조상들에게 임하지 아니하였느냐 그러므로 그들이 돌이켜 이르기를 만군의 여호와께서 우리 길대로, 우리 행위대로 우리에게 행하시려고 뜻하신 것을 우리에게 행하셨도다 하였느니라","내가 종 선지자들에게 명한 내 말과 내 전례들이 어찌 네 열조에게 임하지 아니하였느냐 그러므로 그들이 돌쳐 이르기를 만군의 여호와께서 우리 길대로, 우리 행위대로 우리에게 행하시려고 뜻하신 것을 우리에게 행하셨도다 하였다 하셨느니라 하라","(5절에 포함되어 있음)","But my words and my statutes, with which I charged my servants the prophets, did these not overtake your ancestors? Then they repented and admitted: “Just as the LORD of hosts intended to treat us according to our ways and deeds, so the LORD has done.”","But my words and my statutes, which I commanded my servants the prophets, did they not take hold of your fathers? and they returned and said, Like as the LORD of hosts thought to do unto us, according to our ways, and according to our doings, so hath he dealt with us.","But did not my words and my decrees, which I commanded my servants the prophets, overtake your forefathers? \"Then they repented and said, 'The LORD Almighty has done to us what our ways and practices deserve, just as he determined to do.'\"","Verumtamen verba mea et praecepta mea, quae mandavi servis meis prophetis, numquid non attigerunt patres vestros? Et conversi sunt et dixerunt: “Sicut cogitavit Dominus exercituum facere nobis, secundum vias nostras et secundum adinventiones nostras fecit nobis” “.","אך דברי וחקי אשר צויתי את עבדי הנביאים הלוא השיגו אבתיכם וישובו ויאמרו כאשר זמם יהוה צבאות לעשות לנו כדרכינו וכמעללינו כן עשה אתנו׃"],["45","1","7","다리우스 제이년 열한째 달, 곧 스밧 달 스무나흗날에 주님의 말씀이 이또의 손자이며 베레크야의 아들인 즈카르야 예언자에게 내렸다.","다리우스 제이년 십일월 곧 스밧월 이십사일, 야훼의 말씀이 예언자 즈가리야에게 내렸다. 즈가리야는 베레기야의 아들이요, 이또의 손자였다.","다리오 왕 제이년 열한째 달 곧 스밧월 이십사일에 잇도의 손자 베레갸의 아들 선지자 스가랴에게 여호와의 말씀이 임하니라","다리오왕 이년 십일월 곧 스밧월 이십 사일에 잇도의 손자 베레갸의 아들 선지자 스가랴에게 여호와의 말씀이 임하여 이르시니라","ㄴ) 다리오왕 2년 11월 곧 스밧월 24일에 여호와의 말씀이 베레갸의 아들이며 잇도의 손자인 예언자 스가랴에게 임하였다. (ㄴ. BC 519년 2월 15일)","In the second year of Darius, on the twenty-fourth day of Shebat, the eleventh month, the word of the LORD came to the prophet Zechariah, son of Berechiah, son of Iddo:","Upon the four and twentieth day of the eleventh month, which is the month Sebat, in the second year of Darius, came the word of the LORD unto Zechariah, the son of Berechiah, the son of Iddo the prophet, saying,","On the twenty-fourth day of the eleventh month, the month of Shebat, in the second year of Darius, the word of the LORD came to the prophet Zechariah son of Berekiah, the son of Iddo.","In die vicesima et quarta undecimi mensis, qui est mensis Sabath, in anno secundo Darii, factum est verbum Domini ad Zachariam filium Barachiae filii Addo prophetam dicens:","ביום עשרים וארבעה לעשתי עשר חדש הוא חדש שבט בשנת שתים לדריוש היה דבר יהוה אל זכריה בן ברכיהו בן עדוא הנביא לאמר׃"],["45","1","8","내가 밤에 보니, 붉은 말을 탄 사람이 골짜기의 도금양나무 사이에 서 있었다. 그 사람 뒤에는 붉은 말들과 검붉은 말들과 흰말들이 서 있었다.","내가 밤에 환상을 보니, 낮은 곳에 소귀나무들이 있는데, 그 사이에 한 기사가 붉은 말을 타고 서 있었다. 그리고 그 기사 뒤에는 붉은 말, 잿빛 말, 흰 말을 탄 기마대가 늘어서 있었다.","내가 밤에 보니 한 사람이 붉은 말을 타고 골짜기 속 화석류나무 사이에 섰고 그 뒤에는 붉은 말과 자줏빛 말과 백마가 있기로","내가 밤에 보니 사람이 홍마를 타고 골짜기 속 화석류나무 사이에 섰고 그 뒤에는 홍마와 자마와 백마가 있기로","그 밤에 내가 환상으로 적갈색 말을 탄 사람을 보았다. 그는 깊은 계곡의 어린 소귀나무들 사이에 서 있었고, 그의 뒤로는 적갈색 말들을 탄 기마대와 붉은 말들을 탄 기마대와 흰말들을 탄 기마대가 보였다.","I looked out in the night, and there was a man mounted on a red horse standing in the shadows among myrtle trees; and behind him were red, sorrel, and white horses.","I saw by night, and behold a man riding upon a red horse, and he stood among the myrtle trees that were in the bottom; and behind him were there red horses, speckled, and white.","During the night I had a vision--and there before me was a man riding a red horse! He was standing among the myrtle trees in a ravine. Behind him were red, brown and white horses."," “Vidi per noctem, et ecce vir sedens super equum rufum et ipse stabat inter myrteta, quae erant in profundo; et post eum equi rufi, fulvi et albi.","ראיתי הלילה והנה איש רכב על סוס אדם והוא עמד בין ההדסים אשר במצלה ואחריו סוסים אדמים שרקים ולבנים׃"],["45","1","9","그래서 내가 “나리, 저것들은 무엇입니까?” 하고 물었더니, 나와 이야기하던 천사가, “저것들이 무엇인지 너에게 보여 주겠다.” 하고 대답하였다.","내가 \"나리, 이것이 웬 기마대입니까?\" 하고 묻자, 그 천사가 \"이것이 웬 기마대인지 알려주리라.\" 하며,","내가 말하되 내 주여 이들이 무엇이니이까 하니 내게 말하는 천사가 내게 이르되 이들이 무엇인지 내가 네게 보이리라 하니","내가 가로되 내 주여 이들이 무엇이니이까 내게 말하는 천사가 내게 이르되 이들이 무엇인지 내가 네게 보이리라 하매","내가 곁에 서 있는 천사에게 물었다. \"내 주여, 이들이 무슨 기마대들입니까?\" 내게 환상을 통역하며 설명해 주던 그 천사가 대답하였다. \"이들이 무슨 기마대들인가를 내가 곧 알려드리겠습니다.\"","I asked, “What are these, my lord?” Then the angel who spoke with me answered, “I will show you what these are.”","Then said I, O my lord, what are these? And the angel that talked with me said unto me, I will shew thee what these be.","I asked, \"What are these, my lord?\" The angel who was talking with me answered, \"I will show you what they are.\"","Et dixi: “Quid sunt isti, domine mi?”. Et dixit ad me angelus, qui loquebatur in me: “Ego ostendam tibi quid sint isti”.","ואמר מה אלה אדני ויאמר אלי המלאך הדבר בי אני אראך מה המה אלה׃"],["45","1","10","그러자 도금양나무 사이에 서 있던 그 사람이, “이것들은 주님께서 세상을 두루 다니도록 보내신 것이다.” 하고 대답하였다.","소귀나무들 사이에 서서 이렇게 대답하는 것이었다. \"이들은 야훼께서 세상을 순찰하라고 보내신 자들이다.\"","화석류나무 사이에 선 자가 대답하여 이르되 이는 여호와께서 땅에 두루 다니라고 보내신 자들이니라","화석류나무 사이에 선 자가 대답하여 가로되 이는 여호와께서 땅에 두루 다니라고 보내신 자들이니라","그러자 어린 소귀나무들 사이에 서 있던 사람이 이렇게 대답해 주었다. \"이들은 온 세상을 순시하도록 여호와께서 파견하신 기마대들이다.\"","Then the man who was standing among the myrtle trees spoke up and said, “These are the ones whom the LORD has sent to patrol the earth.”","And the man that stood among the myrtle trees answered and said, These are they whom the LORD hath sent to walk to and fro through the earth.","Then the man standing among the myrtle trees explained, \"They are the ones the LORD has sent to go throughout the earth.\"","Et respondit vir, qui stabat inter myrteta, et dixit: “Isti sunt quos misit Dominus, ut perambularent terram”.","ויען האיש העמד בין ההדסים ויאמר אלה אשר שלח יהוה להתהלך בארץ׃"],["45","1","11","말 탄 사람들이 도금양나무 사이에 서 있던 주님의 천사에게 말하였다. “저희가 세상을 두루 다녀 보니, 온 세상은 평온하게 지내고 있었습니다.”","그러자 말 탄 사람들이 소귀나무 사이에 서 있는 야훼의 천사에게 \"세상을 돌아보니, 사람들이 평안히 살고 있었습니다.\" 하고 보고하였다.","그들이 화석류나무 사이에 선 여호와의 천사에게 말하되 우리가 땅에 두루 다녀 보니 온 땅이 평안하고 조용하더이다 하더라","그들이 화석류나무 사이에 선 여호와의 사자에게 고하되 우리가 땅에 두루 다녀보니 온 땅이 평안하여 정온하더이다","이때에 그 기마대들이 어린 소귀나무들 사이에 서 있는 여호와의 천사에게 보고하였다. \"저희가 온 세상을 돌아다녀 보았습니다. 그런데 어느 곳이나 평화롭고 안정되어 있습니다!\"","And they answered the angel of the LORD, who was standing among the myrtle trees: “We have been patrolling the earth, and now the whole earth rests quietly.”","And they answered the angel of the LORD that stood among the myrtle trees, and said, We have walked to and fro through the earth, and, behold, all the earth sitteth still, and is at rest.","And they reported to the angel of the LORD, who was standing among the myrtle trees, \"We have gone throughout the earth and found the whole world at rest and in peace.\"","Et responderunt angelo Domini, qui stabat inter myrteta, et dixerunt: “Perambulavimus terram, et ecce omnis terra habitatur et quiescit”.","ויענו את מלאך יהוה העמד בין ההדסים ויאמרו התהלכנו בארץ והנה כל הארץ ישבת ושקטת׃"],["45","1","12","그러자 주님의 천사가 아뢰었다. “만군의 주님, 당신께서는 예루살렘과 유다의 성읍들을 가엾이 여기지 않으시고 언제까지 내버려 두시렵니까? 그들에게 진노하신 지 일흔 해나 되었습니다.”","이 말을 듣고 그 천사가 야훼께 아뢰었다. \"만군의 야훼여, 언제까지 예루살렘과 유다 성읍들을 불쌍히 여기시지 않으시고 내버려두시렵니까? 주께서 노하신 지 이미 칠십 년이 되었습니다.\"","여호와의 천사가 대답하여 이르되 만군의 여호와여 여호와께서 언제까지 예루살렘과 유다 성읍들을 불쌍히 여기지 아니하시려 하나이까 이를 노하신 지 칠십 년이 되었나이다 하매","여호와의 사자가 응하여 가로되 만군의 여호와여 여호와께서 언제까지 예루살렘과 유다 성읍들을 긍휼히 여기지 아니하시려나이까 이를 노하신지 칠십년이 되었나이다 하매","이 말을 듣고 여호와의 천사가 여호와께 아뢰었다. \"온 세상의 주님, 주께서 예루살렘과 유다의 모든 성읍에 분노를 쏟으신 지가 이미 70년이 되었습니다. 언제까지 기다려야 주께서 다시 그곳에 긍휼을 베푸시겠습니까?\"","Then the angel of the LORD replied, “LORD of hosts, how long will you be without mercy for Jerusalem and the cities of Judah that have felt your anger these seventy years?”","Then the angel of the LORD answered and said, O LORD of hosts, how long wilt thou not have mercy on Jerusalem and on the cities of Judah, against which thou hast had indignation these threescore and ten years?","Then the angel of the LORD said, \"LORD Almighty, how long will you withhold mercy from Jerusalem and from the towns of Judah, which you have been angry with these seventy years?\"","Et respondit angelus Domini et dixit: “Domine exercituum, usquequo tu non misereberis Ierusalem et urbium Iudae, quibus iratus es? Iste septuagesimus annus est!”.","ויען מלאך יהוה ויאמר יהוה צבאות עד מתי אתה לא תרחם את ירושלם ואת ערי יהודה אשר זעמתה זה שבעים שנה׃"],["45","1","13","주님께서는 나와 이야기하던 천사에게 다정하고도 위로가 되는 말씀으로 대답하셨다.","야훼께서 나와 말하던 그 천사를 좋은 말로 위로하시자,","여호와께서 내게 말하는 천사에게 선한 말씀, 위로하는 말씀으로 대답하시더라","여호와께서 내게 말하는 천사에게 선한 말씀, 위로하는 말씀으로 대답하시더라","이때에 주께서 통역해 주는 천사에게 위로하는 어조로 친절하게 대답해 주셨다.","To the angel who spoke with me, the LORD replied favorably, with comforting words.","And the LORD answered the angel that talked with me with good words and comfortable words.","So the LORD spoke kind and comforting words to the angel who talked with me.","Et respondit Dominus angelo, qui loquebatur in me verba bona, verba consolatoria.","ויען יהוה את המלאך הדבר בי דברים טובים דברים נחמים׃"],["45","1","14","나와 이야기하던 천사가 나에게 말하였다. “너는 외쳐라. 만군의 주님께서 이렇게 말씀하신다. ‘나는 예루살렘에, 시온에 커다란 열정을 지니고 있다.","나와 말하던 그 천사가 나에게 말하였다. \"만군의 야훼께서 말씀하신다면서 이렇게 외쳐라. '내가 예루살렘을 생각만 해도 속이 타는구나. 시온을 생각만 해도 가슴이 타는구나.","내게 말하는 천사가 내게 이르되 너는 외쳐 이르기를 만군의 여호와의 말씀에 내가 예루살렘을 위하며 시온을 위하여 크게 질투하며","내게 말하는 천사가 내게 이르되 너는 외쳐 이르기를 만군의 여호와의 말씀에 내가 예루살렘을 위하며 시온을 위하여 크게 질투하며","그러자 그 통역하는 천사가 내게 다음과 같이 말하였다. \"그대는 이렇게 선포하시오. \"온 세상의 주인이신 여호와께서 이같이 말씀하셨다. 나는 예루살렘을 생각만 해도 속이 탄다. 시온의 이름만 들어도 가슴이 탄다.","The angel who spoke with me then said to me, Proclaim: Thus says the LORD of hosts: I am jealous for Jerusalem and for Zion intensely jealous.","So the angel that communed with me said unto me, Cry thou, saying, Thus saith the LORD of hosts; I am jealous for Jerusalem and for Zion with a great jealousy.","Then the angel who was speaking to me said, \"Proclaim this word: This is what the LORD Almighty says: 'I am very jealous for Jerusalem and Zion,","Et dixit ad me angelus, qui loquebatur in me: “Clama dicens: Haec dixit Dominus exercituum: Zelatus sum Ierusalem et Sion zelo magno,","ויאמר אלי המלאך הדבר בי קרא לאמר כה אמר יהוה צבאות קנאתי לירושלם ולציון קנאה גדולה׃"],["45","1","15","그러나 태평스러운 민족들에게는 몹시 화가 나 있다. 내가 조금밖에 화를 내지 않았는데도 그자들이 그들을 더 불행하게 만들었기 때문이다.","거만하게 구는 뭇 민족에게 내가 진노를 내리리라. 내가 크게 화를 내지 않았는데도 그토록 지나치게 행패를 부렸기 때문이다.","안일한 여러 나라들 때문에 심히 진노하나니 나는 조금 노하였거늘 그들은 힘을 내어 고난을 더하였음이라","안일한 열국을 심히 진노하나니 나는 조금만 노하였거늘 그들은 힘을 내어 고난을 더하였음이라","이제 나는 잘난 척하는 저 이방민족들에게 나의 무서운 분노를 쏟아 붓겠다. 나는 그들에게 내 백성을 조금만 타이르도록 시켰으나, 그들은 내 민족을 완전히 멸망시켰기 때문이다.","I am consumed with anger toward the complacent nations; When I was only a little angry, they compounded the disaster.","And I am very sore displeased with the heathen that are at ease: for I was but a little displeased, and they helped forward the affliction.","but I am very angry with the nations that feel secure. I was only a little angry, but they added to the calamity.'","sed ira magna ego irascor super gentes opulentas, quia ego iratus sum parum, ipsi vero adiuverunt in malum.","וקצף גדול אני קצף על הגוים השאננים אשר אני קצפתי מעט והמה עזרו לרעה׃"],["45","1","16","─ 그러므로 주님께서 이렇게 말씀하신다. ─ 나는 동정심을 가지고 예루살렘에 돌아왔다. 그 안에 나의 집이 다시 지어지리라. 만군의 주님의 말씀이다. 측량줄이 예루살렘에 펼쳐지리라.’","그러므로 나 야훼가 선언한다. 내가 다시 예루살렘을 불쌍히 여기리라. 예루살렘에 측량줄을 늘이면서 내 집을 다시 세우게 하리라. 만군의 야훼의 말이다.'","그러므로 여호와가 이처럼 말하노라 내가 불쌍히 여기므로 예루살렘에 돌아왔은즉 내 집이 그 가운데에 건축되리니 예루살렘 위에 먹줄이 쳐지리라 만군의 여호와의 말이니라","그러므로 여호와가 이처럼 말하노라 내가 긍휼히 여기므로 예루살렘에 돌아왔은즉 내 집이 그 가운데 건축되리니 예루살렘 위에 먹줄이 치어지리라 나 만군의 여호와의 말이니라 하셨다 하라","그러므로 나 여호와가 말한다. 내가 넘치는 긍휼을 품고 예루살렘으로 돌아왔다. 그곳에 나의 성전이 다시 건축되고, 예루살렘 도성을 다시 건설하는 측량줄들이 띄워질 것이다. 온 세상의 주인이신 여호와께서 말씀하셨다.\"","Therefore, thus says the LORD: I return to Jerusalem in mercy; my house will be rebuilt there—oracle of the LORD of hosts— and a measuring line will be stretched over Jerusalem.","Therefore thus saith the LORD; I am returned to Jerusalem with mercies: my house shall be built in it, saith the LORD of hosts, and a line shall be stretched forth upon Jerusalem.","\"Therefore, this is what the LORD says: 'I will return to Jerusalem with mercy, and there my house will be rebuilt. And the measuring line wilh be stretched out over Jerusalem,' declares the LORD Almighty.","Propterea haec dicit Dominus: Revertar ad Ierusalem in misericordiis. Domus mea aedificabitur in ea, ait Dominus exercituum, et perpendiculum extendetur super Ierusalem.","לכן כה אמר יהוה שבתי לירושלם ברחמים ביתי יבנה בה נאם יהוה צבאות וקוה ינטה על ירושלם׃"],["45","1","17","너는 또 외쳐라. 만군의 주님께서 이렇게 말씀하신다. ‘내 성읍들은 다시 좋은 것으로 넘쳐흐르리라. 주님이 시온을 다시 위로하고 예루살렘을 다시 선택하리라.’”","너는 다시 만군의 야훼께서 말씀하신다면서 이렇게 외쳐라. '내 성읍들에 다시 재물이 풍성해지리라. 나 야훼가 시온을 불쌍히 여겨 예루살렘을 다시 자기 것으로 삼으리라.'\"","그가 다시 외쳐 이르기를 만군의 여호와의 말씀에 나의 성읍들이 넘치도록 다시 풍부할 것이라 여호와가 다시 시온을 위로하며 다시 예루살렘을 택하리라 하라 하니라","다시 외쳐 이르기를 만군의 여호와의 말씀에 나의 성읍들이 넘치도록 다시 풍부할 것이라 여호와가 다시 시온을 안위하며 다시 예루살렘을 택하리라 하셨다 하라","그대는 또 이렇게 선포하시오. \"온 세상의 주인이신 여호와께서 이같이 말씀하셨다. 내 백성의 모든 성읍에 다시 온갖 물질이 풍부해질 것이다. 주께서 다시 시온을 위로하시고, 예루살렘을 다시 선택하여 복을 내려 주시고, 그곳에 사실 것이다.\"","Proclaim further: Thus says the LORD of hosts: My cities will again overflow with prosperity; the LORD will again comfort Zion, and will again choose Jerusalem.","Cry yet, saying, Thus saith the LORD of hosts; My cities through prosperity shall yet be spread abroad; and the LORD shall yet comfort Zion, and shall yet choose Jerusalem.","\"Proclaim further: This is what the LORD Almighty says: 'My towns will again overflow with prosperity, and the LORD will again comfort Zion and choose Jerusalem.'\"","Adhuc clama dicens: Haec dicit Dominus exercituum: Adhuc affluent civitates meae bonis, et consolabitur adhuc Dominus Sion et eliget adhuc Ierusalem”.","עוד קרא לאמר כה אמר יהוה צבאות עוד תפוצינה ערי מטוב ונחם יהוה עוד את ציון ובחר עוד בירושלם׃"],["45","1","18",null,null,"내가 눈을 들어 본즉 네 개의 뿔이 보이기로","내가 눈을 들어 본즉 네 뿔이 보이기로","내가 다시 눈을 들어 살펴보니, 짐승의 뿔 넷이 나타났다.",null,"Then lifted I up mine eyes, and saw, and behold four horns.","Then I looked up--and there before me were four horns!",null,"ואשא את עיני וארא והנה ארבע קרנות׃"],["45","1","19",null,null,"이에 내게 말하는 천사에게 묻되 이들이 무엇이니이까 하니 내게 대답하되 이들은 유다와 이스라엘과 예루살렘을 흩뜨린 뿔이니라","이에 내게 말하는 천사에게 묻되 이들이 무엇이니이까 내게 대답하되 이들은 유다와 이스라엘과 예루살렘을 헤친 뿔이니라","내가 해석해 주는 천사에게 물었다. \"내 주여, 이 뿔들의 뜻이 무엇입니까?\" 천사가 이렇게 대답하였다. \"이것들은 유다와 이스라엘과 예루살렘을 정복하고, 그 주민들을 온 세상으로 흩어 놓은 이 세상의 4대 열강들을 가리킵니다.\"",null,"And I said unto the angel that talked with me, What be these? And he answered me, These are the horns which have scattered Judah, Israel, and Jerusalem.","I asked the angel who was speaking to me, \"What are these?\" He answered me, \"These are the horns that scattered Judah, Israel and Jerusalem.\"",null,"ואמר אל המלאך הדבר בי מה אלה ויאמר אלי אלה הקרנות אשר זרו את יהודה את ישראל וירושלם׃"],["45","1","20",null,null,"그 때에 여호와께서 대장장이 네 명을 내게 보이시기로","때에 여호와께서 공장 네 명을 내게 보이시기로","그 다음에 주께서 내게 대장간의 쇠메를 든 장정 넷을 보여주셨다.",null,"And the LORD shewed me four carpenters.","Then the LORD showed me four craftsmen.",null,"ויראני יהוה ארבעה חרשים׃"],["45","1","21",null,null,"내가 말하되 그들이 무엇하러 왔나이까 하니 대답하여 이르시되 그 뿔들이 유다를 흩뜨려서 사람들이 능히 머리를 들지 못하게 하니 이 대장장이들이 와서 그것들을 두렵게 하고 이전의 뿔들을 들어 유다 땅을 흩뜨린 여러 나라의 뿔들을 떨어뜨리려 하느니라 하시더라","내가 가로되 그들이 무엇하러 왔나이까 하매 대답하여 가라사대 그 뿔들이 유다를 헤쳐서 사람으로 능히 머리를 들지 못하게 하매 이 공장들이 와서 그것들을 두렵게 하고 이전에 뿔들을 들어 유다 땅을 헤친 열국의 뿔을 떨어치려 하느니라 하시더라","내가 또 물었다. \"이들은 무슨 일을 하려고 온 사람들입니까?\" 천사가 설명해 주었다. \"저 뿔들은 유다 백성을 짓밟아 어느 한 사람도 고개를 들 수 없도록 압박하였습니다. 이 대장장이들은 ㄱ) 이제 그 뿔을 모조리 뽑아 내려고 온 사람들입니다.\" (ㄱ. 또는 \"유다 백성을 흩어 놓기 위하여 유다 나라로 뿔을 곧두세우고 달려든 그 강대국들의 뿔을 모조리 부러뜨리려고 온 사람들입니다\"라고 번역할 수도 있다)",null,"Then said I, What come these to do? And he spake, saying, These are the horns which have scattered Judah, so that no man did lift up his head: but these are come to fray them, to cast out the horns of the Gentiles, which lifted up their horn over the land of Judah to scatter it.","I asked, \"What are these coming to do?\" He answered, \"These are the horns that scattered Judah so that no one could raise his head, but the craftsmen have come to terrify them and throw down these horns of the nations who lifted up their horns against the land of Judah to scatter its people.\"",null,"ואמר מה אלה באים לעשות ויאמר לאמר אלה הקרנות אשר זרו את יהודה כפי איש לא נשא ראשו ויבאו אלה להחריד אתם לידות את קרנות הגוים הנשאים קרן אל ארץ יהודה לזרותה׃"],["45","2","1","내가 눈을 들어 보니 뿔이 네 개 있었다.","내가 다시 고개를 들고 보니 뿔이 네 개 있었다.","내가 또 눈을 들어 본즉 한 사람이 측량줄을 그의 손에 잡았기로","내가 또 눈을 들어 본즉 한 사람이 척량 줄을 그 손에 잡았기로","내가 다시 눈을 들어 살펴보니, 손에 줄 자를 든 사람이 나타났다.","I raised my eyes and looked and there were four horns.","I lifted up mine eyes again, and looked, and behold a man with a measuring line in his hand.","Then I looked up--and there before me was a man with a measuring line in his hand!","Et levavi oculos meos et vidi, et ecce quattuor cornua;","ואשא עיני וארא והנה איש ובידו חבל מדה׃"],["45","2","2","나와 이야기하던 천사에게 내가 물었다. “이것들은 무엇입니까?” 그가 나에게 대답하였다. “이것들은 유다와 이스라엘과 예루살렘을 흩어 버린 뿔이다.”","나와 말하던 그 천사에게 \"이게 웬 뿔들입니까?\" 하고 물었더니, 유다와 이스라엘과 예루살렘을 흩뜨린 뿔들이라는 대답이었다.","네가 어디로 가느냐 물은즉 그가 내게 대답하되 예루살렘을 측량하여 그 너비와 길이를 보고자 하노라 하고 말할 때에","네가 어디로 가느냐 물은즉 내게 대답하되 예루살렘을 척량하여 그 장광을 보고자 하노라 할 때에","내가 그 사람에게 물었다. \"당신은 어디로 가십니까?\" 그가 대답하였다. \"예루살렘 도성의 폭과 길이가 얼마나 넓어야 하고 성벽은 어디에 쌓아야 좋을지 알아보려고, 예루살렘을 측량하러 가는 길입니다.\"","Then I asked the angel who spoke with me, “What are those?” He answered, “Those are the horns that scattered Judah, Israel, and Jerusalem.”","Then said I, Whither goest thou? And he said unto me, To measure Jerusalem, to see what is the breadth thereof, and what is the length thereof.","I asked, \"Where are you going?\" He answered me, \"To measure Jerusalem, to find out how wide and how long it is.\"","et dixi ad angelum, qui loquebatur in me: “Quid sunt haec?”. Et dixit ad me: “Haec sunt cornua, quae ventilaverunt Iudam et Israel et Ierusalem”.","ואמר אנה אתה הלך ויאמר אלי למד את ירושלם לראות כמה רחבה וכמה ארכה׃"],["45","2","3","그때에 주님께서 나에게 대장장이 네 명을 보여 주셨다.","그 때에 야훼께서 대장장이 네 사람을 보내주셨다.","내게 말하는 천사가 나가고 다른 천사가 나와서 그를 맞으며","내게 말하는 천사가 나가매 다른 천사가 나와서 그를 맞으며","이때에 내게 해석해 주던 천사가 앞으로 나아가자 또 다른 천사가 그에게로 다가왔다.","Then the LORD showed me four workmen.","And, behold, the angel that talked with me went forth, and another angel went out to meet him,","Then the angel who was speaking to me left, and another angel came to meet him","Et ostendit mihi Dominus quattuor fabros;","והנה המלאך הדבר בי יצא ומלאך אחר יצא לקראתו׃"],["45","2","4","“이 사람들은 무엇하러 옵니까?” 하고 내가 묻자, 그가 대답하였다. “이 뿔들은 유다를 흩어 버려, 아무도 머리를 들지 못하게 하였다. 그러나 이 대장장이들은 민족들을 떨게 하려고, 곧 유다 땅의 주민들을 흩어 버리기 위하여 치켜들었던 민족들의 그 뿔들을 던져 버리려고 온 이들이다.”","내가 \"이들은 무엇하러 온 사람들입니까?\" 하고 물었더니, 그가 대답하였다. \"바로 이 뿔들이 유다를 흩뜨리어 감히 머리를 쳐들지 못하게 했지만, 이 대장장이들은 일찍이 유다 땅을 흩뜨렸던 그 뿔이 돋은 나라들을 혼내주러 온 것이다.\"","이르되 너는 달려가서 그 소년에게 말하여 이르기를 예루살렘은 그 가운데 사람과 가축이 많으므로 성곽 없는 성읍이 될 것이라 하라","이르되 너는 달려가서 그 소년에게 고하여 이르기를 예루살렘에 사람이 거하리니 그 가운데 사람과 육축이 많으므로 그것이 성곽 없는 촌락과 같으리라","그 천사는 해석해 주는 천사에게 이같이 말하였다. \"저 젊은이에게로 달려가서 이렇게 전하시오. \"예루살렘에는 사람과 짐승이 많기 때문에 성벽을 둘러쳐서 비좁게 해서는 안 된다.","And I said, “What are these coming to do?” And the LORD said, “Those are the horns that scattered Judah, so that none could raise their heads any more; and these have come to terrify them—to cut down the horns of the nations that raised their horns to scatter the land of Judah.”","And said unto him, Run, speak to this young man, saying, Jerusalem shall be inhabited as towns without walls for the multitude of men and cattle therein:","and said to him: \"Run, tell that young man, 'Jerusalem will be a city without walls because of the great number of men and livestock in it.","et dixi: “Quid isti veniunt facere?”. Qui respondit dicens: “Haec sunt cornua, quae ventilaverunt Iudam per singulos viros, ut nemo eorum levaret caput suum; et venerunt isti deterrere ea, ut deiciant cornua gentium, quae levaverunt cornu super terram Iudae, ut dispergerent eam”.","ויאמר אלו רץ דבר אל הנער הלז לאמר פרזות תשב ירושלם מרב אדם ובהמה בתוכה׃"],["45","2","5","내가 눈을 들어 보니, 손에 측량줄을 쥔 사람이 하나 있었다.","1)내가 또 고개를 들고 보았더니, 누가 측량줄을 잡고 있었다. 라틴어 성서는 여기에서 2장이 시작된다.","여호와의 말씀에 내가 불로 둘러싼 성곽이 되며 그 가운데에서 영광이 되리라","여호와의 말씀에 내가 그 사면에서 불 성곽이 되며 그 가운데서 영광이 되리라","내가 몸소 화염 성벽이 되어 그 도성을 둘러싸고, 나 자신이 그 도성의 영광이 되겠다.\" 여호와의 말씀이시다\"","I raised my eyes and looked, and there was a man with a measuring cord in his hand.","For I, saith the LORD, will be unto her a wall of fire round about, and will be the glory in the midst of her.","And I myself will be a wall of fire around it,' declares the LORD, 'and I will be its glory within.'","Et levavi oculos meos et vidi; et ecce vir, et in manu eius funiculus mensorum.","ואני אהיה לה נאם יהוה חומת אש סביב ולכבוד אהיה בתוכה׃"],["45","2","6","내가 “어디로 가십니까?” 하고 묻자, 그가 나에게 “예루살렘을 측량하여, 그 너비와 길이가 얼마나 되는지 알아보러 간다.” 하고 대답하였다.","내가 그에게 어디로 가는 길이냐고 묻자, 그는 예루살렘을 측량하여 그 폭과 길이를 알아보러 가는 길이라고 대답하였다.","오호라 너희는 북방 땅에서 도피할지어다 여호와의 말씀이니라 이는 내가 너희를 하늘 사방에 바람 같이 흩어지게 하였음이니라 여호와의 말씀이니라","여호와의 말씀에 내가 너를 하늘의 사방 바람 같이 흩어지게 하였거니와 이제 너희는 북방 땅에서 도망할찌니라 나 여호와의 말이니라","\"오라, 오라! 그 북녘 땅 바벨론을 탈출해 오라\" 여호와께서 그곳에 있는 자기의 모든 유랑민들에게 선포하신다. \"내가 너희를 사방으로 흩어 놓았으나, 이제 내가 다시 너희를 온 천하에서 불러모을 작정이기 때문이다. 이제 탈출하여 시온으로 오라!\" 여호와의 말씀이시다.","I asked, “Where are you going?” And he said, “To measure Jerusalem—to see how great its width is and how great its length.”","Ho, ho, come forth, and flee from the land of the north, saith the LORD: for I have spread you abroad as the four winds of the heaven, saith the LORD.","\"Come! Come! Flee from the land of the north,\" declares the LORD, \"for I have scattered you to the four winds of heaven,\" declares the LORD.","Et dixi: “Quo tu vadis?”. Et dixit ad me: “Ut metiar Ierusalem et videam, quanta sit latitudo eius et quanta longitudo eius”.","הוי הוי ונסו מארץ צפון נאם יהוה כי כארבע רוחות השמים פרשתי אתכם נאם יהוה׃"],["45","2","7","그때에 나와 이야기하던 천사가 앞으로 나가자, 다른 천사가 그에게 마주 나와","나와 말하던 천사가 거기 서 있다가 다른 천사가 마주 오는 것을 보고","바벨론 성에 거주하는 시온아 이제 너는 피할지니라","바벨론 1)성에 거하는 시온아 이제 너는 피할찌니라 딸과 함께","(6절에 포함되어 있음)","Then the angel who spoke with me advanced as another angel came out to meet him","Deliver thyself, O Zion, that dwellest with the daughter of Babylon.","\"Come, O Zion! Escape, you who live in the Daughter of Babylon!\"","Et ecce angelus, qui loquebatur in me, egrediebatur, et angelus alius egrediebatur in occursum eius;","הוי ציון המלטי יושבת בת בבל׃"],["45","2","8","말하였다. “저 젊은이에게 달려가서 이렇게 일러 주어라. ‘사람들과 짐승들이 많아 예루살렘은 성벽 없이 넓게 자리 잡으리라.","그에게 일렀다. \"저 젊은이에게 달려가서 일러주어라. '예루살렘에 사람과 짐승이 불어나서 성을 둘러치지 않고 살게 되리라.","만군의 여호와께서 이같이 말씀하시되 영광을 위하여 나를 너희를 노략한 여러 나라로 보내셨나니 너희를 범하는 자는 그의 눈동자를 범하는 것이라","만군의 여호와께서 이같이 말씀하시되 너희를 노략한 열국으로 영광을 위하여 나를 보내셨나니 무릇 너희를 범하는 자는 그의 눈동자를 범하는 것이라","\"영광의 주께서 너희를 탄압하던 민족들에게로 나를 보내셨다. 너희를 해치는 자는 손가락으로 여호와의 눈을 찌른 자이기 때문이다!","and he said to the latter, “Run, speak to that official: Jerusalem will be unwalled, because of the abundance of people and beasts in its midst.","For thus saith the LORD of hosts; After the glory hath he sent me unto the nations which spoiled you: for he that toucheth you toucheth the apple of his eye.","For this is what the LORD Almighty says: \"After he has honored me and has sent me against the nations that have plundered you--for whoever touches you touches the apple of his eye--","et dixit ad eum: “Curre, loquere ad puerum istum dicens: Absque muris habitabitur Ierusalem prae multitudine hominum et iumentorum in medio eius.","כי כה אמר יהוה צבאות אחר כבוד שלחני אל הגוים השללים אתכם כי הנגע בכם נגע בבבת עינו׃"],["45","2","9","주님의 말씀이다. 내가 예루살렘을 둘러싼 불 벽이 되고 그 한가운데에 머무르는 영광이 되어 주리라.’","이는 야훼의 말이다. 내가 불이 되어 담처럼 예루살렘을 둘러쌀 터이고 그 안에서 나의 영광을 빛내리라.'\"","내가 손을 그들 위에 움직인즉 그들이 자기를 섬기던 자들에게 노략거리가 되리라 하셨나니 너희가 만군의 여호와께서 나를 보내신 줄 알리라","내가 손을 그들 위에 움직인즉 그들이 자기를 섬기던 자에게 노략거리가 되리라 하셨나니 너희가 만군의 여호와께서 나를 보내신줄 알리라","그러므로 보아라! 내가 이제 그들을 주먹으로 쳐서 멸망시키면, 이제까지 그들에게 종살이하던 자들이 그들을 약탈해갈 것이다.\" 그때에는 온 세상의 주인이신 여호와께서 나를 너희에게 보내셨다는 것을 너희가 깨달을 것이다.","I will be an encircling wall of fire for it—oracle of the LORD—and I will be the glory in its midst.”","For, behold, I will shake mine hand upon them, and they shall be a spoil to their servants: and ye shall know that the LORD of hosts hath sent me.","I will surely raise my hand against them so that their slaves will plunder them. Then you will know that the LORD Almighty has sent me.","Et ego ero ei, ait Dominus, murus ignis in circuitu et in gloria ero in medio eius.","כי הנני מניף את ידי עליהם והיו שלל לעבדיהם וידעתם כי יהוה צבאות שלחני׃"],["45","2","10","주님의 말씀이다. ‘내가 너희를 하늘 아래 사방으로 흩어 버렸지만 너희는 어서어서 그 북녘 땅에서 도망쳐 나와라. 주님의 말씀이다.","\"나는 너희를 온 천하 사방으로 흩뜨려 보냈었다.\" 야훼의 말씀이시다. \"너희는 어서 서둘러 그 북녘 땅에서 빠져 나오너라.\" 야훼의 말씀이시다.","여호와의 말씀에 시온의 딸아 노래하고 기뻐하라 이는 내가 와서 네 가운데에 머물 것임이라","여호와의 말씀에 시온의 딸아 노래하고 기뻐하라 이는 내가 임하여 네 가운데 거할 것임이니라","\"예루살렘 사람들아, 너희는 환호성을 올리며 기뻐하여라! 내가 이제 가서 너희들과 함께 살 작정이기 때문이다.\" 여호와의 말씀이시다.","Up! Up! Flee from the land of the north—oracle of the LORD;—For like the four winds of heaven I have dispersed you—oracle of the LORD.","Sing and rejoice, O daughter of Zion: for, lo, I come, and I will dwell in the midst of thee, saith the LORD.","\"Shout and be glad, O Daughter of Zion. For I am coming, and I will live among you,\" declares the LORD.","Heu, heu! Fugite de terra aquilonis, dicit Dominus, quoniam in quattuor ventos caeli dispersi vos, dicit Dominus.","רני ושמחי בת ציון כי הנני בא ושכנתי בתוכך נאם יהוה׃"],["45","2","11","딸 바빌론과 함께 살고 있는 백성아 어서 시온으로 빠져나와라.","바빌론에서 살고 있는 시온 백성들아, 어서 도망쳐 오너라.","그 날에 많은 나라가 여호와께 속하여 내 백성이 될 것이요 나는 네 가운데에 머물리라 네가 만군의 여호와께서 나를 네게 보내신 줄 알리라","그 날에 많은 나라가 여호와께 속하여 내 백성이 될 것이요 나는 네 가운데 거하리라 네가 만군의 여호와께서 나를 네게 보내신줄 알리라","그날이 오면, 많은 백성들이 주께로 돌아와서 주님의 백성이 될 것이다. 그러나 주님은 시온산에 사실 것이다. 그때에는 온 세상의 주인이신 여호와께서 나를 너희에게 보내셨다는 것을 너희가 깨달을 것이다.","Up, Zion! Escape, you who dwell in daughter Babylon!","And many nations shall be joined to the LORD in that day, and shall be my people: and I will dwell in the midst of thee, and thou shalt know that the LORD of hosts hath sent me unto thee.","\"Many nations will be joined with the LORD in that day and will become my people. I will live among you and you will know that the LORD Almighty has sent me to you.","Heu, Sion, fuge, quae habitas apud filiam Babylonis!","ונלוו גוים רבים אל יהוה ביום ההוא והיו לי לעם ושכנתי בתוכך וידעת כי יהוה צבאות שלחני אליך׃"],["45","2","12","─ 만군의 주님께서 나에게 권위를 주어 파견하신 그분께서 너희를 약탈한 민족들을 두고 말씀하신다. ─ 너희를 건드리는 자는 정녕 내 눈동자를 건드리는 자다.","너희를 건드리는 것은 하느님의 눈동자를 건드리는 것이다. 너희를 털어가던 뭇 민족에게 당신의 위엄을 떨치시려 나를 보내시며, 만군의 야훼께서 하신 말씀이시다.","여호와께서 장차 유다를 거룩한 땅에서 자기 소유를 삼으시고 다시 예루살렘을 택하시리니","여호와께서 장차 유다를 취하여 거룩한 땅에서 자기 소유를 삼으시고 다시 예루살렘을 택하시리니","주께서는 이 거룩한 땅에서 유다를 자기의 상속 재산으로 차지하시고, 예루살렘을 다시 자기의 도성으로 선택하실 것이다.","For thus says the LORD of hosts after the LORD’s glory had sent me, concerning the nations that have plundered you: Whoever strikes you strikes me directly in the eye.","And the LORD shall inherit Judah his portion in the holy land, and shall choose Jerusalem again.","The LORD will inherit Judah as his portion in the holy land and will again choose Jerusalem.","Quia haec dicit Dominus exercituum, cuius gloria misit me ad gentes, quae spoliaverunt vos: Qui tetigerit vos, tangit pupillam oculi mei.","ונחל יהוה את יהודה חלקו על אדמת הקדש ובחר עוד בירושלם׃"],["45","2","13","보라, 내가 그들 위로 손을 휘두르면 그들은 자기 종들의 약탈물이 되리라. ─ 그때에 너희는 만군의 주님께서 나를 보내셨음을 알게 되리라. ─","\"나 이제 팔을 뻗어 뭇 민족을 쳐서 저희가 부리던 종들에게 털리는 신세가 되게 하리라.\" 이 말이 이루어지면, 너희는 나를 보내신 이가 바로 만군의 야훼이심을 알리라.","모든 육체가 여호와 앞에서 잠잠할 것은 여호와께서 그의 거룩한 처소에서 일어나심이니라 하라 하더라","무릇 혈기 있는 자들이 여호와 앞에서 잠잠할 것은 여호와께서 그 성소에서 일어나심이니라 하라 하더라","주께서 이미 자기의 거룩한 집에서 출발하셨으니, 온 세상 사람들은 여호와 앞에서 잠잠하여라!","Now I wave my hand over them, and they become plunder for their own servants. Thus you shall know that the LORD of hosts has sent me.","Be silent, O all flesh, before the LORD: for he is raised up out of his holy habitation.","Be still before the LORD, all mankind, because he has roused himself from his holy dwelling.\"","Quia ecce ego levo manum meam super eos, et erunt praeda servorum suorum; et cognoscetis quia Dominus exercituum misit me.","הס כל בשר מפני יהוה כי נעור ממעון קדשו׃"],["45","2","14","딸 시온아 기뻐하며 즐거워하여라. 정녕 내가 이제 가서 네 한가운데에 머무르리라. 주님의 말씀이다.","\"수도 시온아, 기뻐하며 노래하여라. 이제 내가 네 안에 머물리라.\" 야훼의 말씀이시다.",null,null,null,"Sing and rejoice, daughter Zion! Now, I am coming to dwell in your midst—oracle of the LORD.",null,null,"Iubila et laetare, filia Sion, quia ecce ego venio et habitabo in medio tui, ait Dominus.",null],["45","2","15","그날에 많은 민족이 주님과 결합하여 그들은 내 백성이 되고 나는 그들 한가운데에 머무르리라.’ 그때에 너는 만군의 주님께서 나를 너에게 보내셨음을 알게 되리라.","그 날이 오면, 많은 민족이 야훼의 편이 되어 그의 백성이 되리라. 그가 너희와 함께 살리니, 너희는 그제야 나를 보내신 이가 만군의 야훼이심을 알리라.",null,null,null,"Many nations will bind themselves to the LORD on that day. They will be my people, and I will dwell in your midst. Then you shall know that the LORD of hosts has sent me to you.",null,null,"Et applicabuntur gentes multae ad Dominum in die illa et erunt ei in populum. Et habitabo in medio tui, et scies quia Dominus exercituum misit me ad te.",null],["45","2","16","주님께서는 이 거룩한 땅에서 유다를 당신 몫으로 삼으시고 예루살렘을 다시 선택하시리라.","야훼께서 다시 이 성지에서 유다를 당신의 백성으로 삼으시고, 예루살렘을 당신의 수도로 뽑으시리라.",null,null,null,"The LORD will inherit Judah as his portion of the holy land, and the LORD will again choose Jerusalem.",null,null,"Et possidebit Dominus Iudam partem suam super terram sanctam et eliget adhuc Ierusalem.",null],["45","2","17","모든 인간은 주님 앞에서 조용히 하여라. 그분께서 당신의 거룩한 처소에서 일어나셨다.”","야훼께서 그 거룩한 처소에서 일어나시리니, 모든 사람은 그의 앞에서 잠잠하여라.",null,null,null,"Silence, all people, in the presence of the LORD, who stirs forth from his holy dwelling.",null,null,"Sileat omnis caro a facie Domini, quia consurrexit de habitaculo sancto suo”.",null],["45","3","1","그가 주님의 천사 앞에 서 있는 예수아 대사제를 나에게 보여 주었다. 그의 오른쪽에는 사탄이 그를 고발하려고 서 있었다.","또 야훼께서 대사제 여호수아가 야훼의 천사 앞에 서 있고 1)사탄이 그 오른편에 서서 그를 고발하는 것을 나에게 보여주셨다. 히브리어 본문의 뜻은 \"검사\"를 말한다.","대제사장 여호수아는 여호와의 천사 앞에 섰고 사탄은 그의 오른쪽에 서서 그를 대적하는 것을 여호와께서 내게 보이시니라","대제사장 여호수아는 여호와의 사자 앞에 섰고 사단은 그의 우편에 서서 그를 대적하는 것을 여호와께서 내게 보이시니라","그 다음에 여호와께서 이런 환상을 내게 보여주셨다. 대제사장 여호수아는 여호와의 천사 앞에 서 있고, 사단은 천사의 오른쪽에 서서 여호수아에 대하여 온갖 비난을 하고 있었다.","Then he showed me Joshua the high priest standing before the angel of the LORD, while the adversary stood at his right side to accuse him.","And he shewed me Joshua the high priest standing before the angel of the LORD, and Satan standing at his right hand to resist him.","Then he showed me Joshua the high priest standing before the angel of the LORD, and Satan standing at his right side to accuse him.","Et ostendit mihi Iesua sacer dotem magnum stantem coram angelo Domini; et Satan stabat a dextris eius, ut adversaretur ei.","ויראני את יהושע הכהן הגדול עמד לפני מלאך יהוה והשטן עמד על ימינו לשטנו׃"],["45","3","2","주님의 천사가 사탄에게 말하였다. “사탄아, 주님께서 너를 꾸짖으신다. 예루살렘을 선택하신 주님께서 너를 꾸짖으신다. 이 사람은 불 속에서 꺼낸 나무토막이 아니냐?”","야훼의 천사가 사탄을 나무랐다. \"사탄아, 너 야훼께 책망받을 놈아! 예루살렘을 택하신 야훼께 책망받을 놈아! 이 사람은 불에서 꺼낸 나무토막이 아니냐.\"","여호와께서 사탄에게 이르시되 사탄아 여호와께서 너를 책망하노라 예루살렘을 택한 여호와께서 너를 책망하노라 이는 불에서 꺼낸 그슬린 나무가 아니냐 하실 때에","여호와께서 사단에게 이르시되 사단아 여호와가 너를 책망하노라 예루살렘을 택한 여호와가 너를 책망하노라 이는 불에서 꺼낸 그슬린 나무가 아니냐 하실 때에","여호와의 천사가 사단에게 이같이 말하였다. \"사단아, 여호와께서 너를 책망하시고, 예루살렘을 선택하신 주께서 너를 책망하시기 바란다. 이 사람은 불속에서 꺼낸 나무토막과 같지 아니하냐?\"","And the angel of the LORD said to the adversary, “May the LORD rebuke you, O adversary; may the LORD who has chosen Jerusalem rebuke you! Is this not a brand plucked from the fire?”","And the LORD said unto Satan, The LORD rebuke thee, O Satan; even the LORD that hath chosen Jerusalem rebuke thee: is not this a brand plucked out of the fire?","The LORD said to Satan, \"The LORD rebuke you, Satan! The LORD, who has chosen Jerusalem, rebuke you! Is not this man a burning stick snatched from the fire?\"","Et dixit angelus Domini ad Satan: “Increpet Dominus in te, Satan! Et increpet Dominus in te, qui elegit Ierusalem! Numquid non iste torris est erutus de igne?”.","ויאמר יהוה אל השטן יגער יהוה בך השטן ויגער יהוה בך הבחר בירושלם הלוא זה אוד מצל מאש׃"],["45","3","3","그때에 예수아는 더러운 옷을 입고 천사 앞에 서 있었다.","그 때 여호수아는 때묻은 더러운 옷을 입고 천사 앞에 서 있었다.","여호수아가 더러운 옷을 입고 천사 앞에 서 있는지라","여호수아가 더러운 옷을 입고 천사 앞에 섰는지라","그런데 여호수아는 더러운 옷을 입고 여호와의 천사 앞에 서 있었다.","Now Joshua was standing before the angel, clad in filthy garments.","Now Joshua was clothed with filthy garments, and stood before the angel.","Now Joshua was dressed in filthy clothes as he stood before the angel.","Et Iesua erat indutus vestibus sordidis et stabat ante faciem angeli.","ויהושע היה לבש בגדים צואים ועמד לפני המלאך׃"],["45","3","4","천사가 자기 앞에 서 있는 사람들에게, “저 사람에게서 더러운 옷을 벗겨라.” 하고서는, 예수아에게 말하였다. “보아라, 나는 너에게서 네 허물을 치워 버렸다. 나는 너에게 예복을 입혀 주겠다.”","\"보아라! 내가 너의 죄를 벗겨준다.\" 하고 선고하였다.","여호와께서 자기 앞에 선 자들에게 명령하사 그 더러운 옷을 벗기라 하시고 또 여호수아에게 이르시되 내가 네 죄악을 제거하여 버렸으니 네게 아름다운 옷을 입히리라 하시기로","여호와께서 자기 앞에 선 자들에게 명하사 그 더러운 옷을 벗기라 하시고 또 여호수아에게 이르시되 내가 네 죄과를 제하여 버렸으니 네게 아름다운 옷을 입히리라 하시기로","여호와의 천사는 자기에게 시중을 들며 서 있던 천사들에게 이같이 말하였다. \"그 사람의 더러운 옷을 벗겨라!\" 그가 여호수아에게 말하였다. \"보아라. 내가 네 허물을 벗겨 주고 네게 깨끗한 예복을 입혀 주겠다.\"","Then the angel said to those standing before him, “Remove his filthy garments.” And to him he said, “Look, I have taken your guilt from you, and I am clothing you in stately robes.”","And he answered and spake unto those that stood before him, saying, Take away the filthy garments from him. And unto him he said, Behold, I have caused thine iniquity to pass from thee, and I will clothe thee with change of raiment.","The angel said to those who were standing before him, \"Take off his filthy clothes.\" Then he said to Joshua, \"See, I have taken away your sin, and I will put rich garments on you.\"","Qui respondit et ait ad eos, qui stabant coram se, dicens: “Auferte vestimenta sordida ab eo”. Et dixit ad eum: “Ecce, abstuli a te iniquitatem tuam; induam te mutatoriis”.","ויען ויאמר אל העמדים לפניו לאמר הסירו הבגדים הצאים מעליו ויאמר אליו ראה העברתי מעליך עונך והלבש אתך מחלצות׃"],["45","3","5","그리고 “너희는 그의 머리에 깨끗한 터번을 씌워라.” 하고 말하였다. 그래서 그들은 그의 머리에 깨끗한 터번을 씌우고 그에게 예복을 입혔다. 그동안 주님의 천사가 곁에 서 있었다.","머리에는 깨끗한 관을 씌워주어라.\" 그들이 여호수아에게 좋은 옷을 입히고 머리에 깨끗한 관을 씌워주자, 야훼의 천사가 일어서서 여호수아에게,","내가 말하되 정결한 관을 그의 머리에 씌우소서 하매 곧 정결한 관을 그 머리에 씌우며 옷을 입히고 여호와의 천사는 곁에 섰더라","내가 말하되 정한 관을 그 머리에 씌우소서 하매 곧 정한 관을 그 머리에 씌우며 옷을 입히고 여호와의 사자는 곁에 섰더라","또 그가 시종들에게 지시하였다. \"그의 머리에는 깨끗한 관을 씌워라.\" 그러자 여호와의 천사가 지켜 보는 앞에서 시종들이 여호수아의 머리에 깨끗한 관을 씌우고, 그에게 새 예복을 입혀 주었다.","Then he said, “Let them put a clean turban on his head.” And they put a clean turban on his head and clothed him with the garments while the angel of the LORD was standing by.","And I said, Let them set a fair mitre upon his head. So they set a fair mitre upon his head, and clothed him with garments. And the angel of the LORD stood by.","Then I said, \"Put a clean turban on his head.\" So they put a clean turban on his head and clothed him, while the angel of the LORD stood by.","Et dixit: “Ponite cidarim mundam super caput eius”. Et posuerunt cidarim mundam super caput eius et induerunt eum vestibus; et angelus Domini stabat.","ואמר ישימו צניף טהור על ראשו וישימו הצניף הטהור על ראשו וילבשהו בגדים ומלאך יהוה עמד׃"],["45","3","6","주님의 천사가 예수아에게 선언하였다.","그리고, 그 천사는 여호수아에게 주의 말씀을 일러주었다.","여호와의 천사가 여호수아에게 증언하여 이르되","여호와의 사자가 여호수아에게 증거하여 가로되","그런 다음에 여호와의 천사가 여호수아에게 아주 장엄한 약속을 하였다.","Then the angel of the LORD charged Joshua:","And the angel of the LORD protested unto Joshua, saying,","The angel of the LORD gave this charge to Joshua:","Et contestabatur angelus Domini Iesua dicens:","ויעד מלאך יהוה ביהושע לאמר׃"],["45","3","7","“만군의 주님께서 이렇게 말씀하신다. ‘네가 내 길을 따라 걷고 내 명령을 지키면 너는 내 집을 다스리고 내 뜰을 지키리라. 나는 네가 여기에 서 있는 사람들 사이를 드나들게 하리라.","\"만군의 야훼께서 말씀하신다. '네가 만일 내가 일러준 길을 따르고 내가 맡긴 직책을 다한다면 너는 내 울 안을 지키고 내 집을 다스리며 여기 서 있는 자들과 어울려 지내게 되리라.","만군의 여호와의 말씀에 네가 만일 내 도를 행하며 내 규례를 지키면 네가 내 집을 다스릴 것이요 내 뜰을 지킬 것이며 내가 또 너로 여기 섰는 자들 가운데에 왕래하게 하리라","만군의 여호와의 말씀에 네가 만일 내 도를 준행하며 내 율례를 지키면 네가 내 집을 다스릴 것이요 내 뜰을 지킬 것이며 내가 또 너로 여기 섰는 자들 중에 왕래케 하리라","\"온 세상의 주인이신 여호와께서 이렇게 말씀하셨다. 내가 네게 보여주는 모든 길로 네가 따라서 가고 또 내가 네게 가르치는 모든 것을 네가 따르고 지키면, 네가 내 집을 관리하는 우두머리가 되고 나에게 합당한 제사장이 될 것이다. 또 이 천사들과 함께 나에게 출입할 수 있는 특권을 네게 주겠다.","“Thus says the LORD of hosts: If you walk in my ways and carry out my charge, you will administer my house and watch over my courts; and I will give you access to those standing here.”","Thus saith the LORD of hosts; If thou wilt walk in my ways, and if thou wilt keep my charge, then thou shalt also judge my house, and shalt also keep my courts, and I will give thee places to walk among these that stand by.","\"This is what the LORD Almighty says: 'If you will walk in my ways and keep my requirements, then you will govern my house and have charge of my courts, and I will give you a place among these standing here.","“Haec dicit Dominus exercituum: Si in viis meis ambulaveris et ministerium meum custodieris, tu quoque iudicabis domum meam et custodies atria mea; et dabo tibi accessum inter eos, qui nunc hic assistunt.","כה אמר יהוה צבאות אם בדרכי תלך ואם את משמרתי תשמר וגם אתה תדין את ביתי וגם תשמר את חצרי ונתתי לך מהלכים בין העמדים האלה׃"],["45","3","8","예수아 대사제야! 너와 네 앞에 앉아 있는 너의 동료들은 들어라. ─ 이들은 정녕 예표가 되는 사람들이다. ─ 보라, 내가 나의 종 ‘새싹’을 데려오려고 한다.","대사제 여호수아야, 똑똑히 들어라. 여호수아를 모시고 앉아 있는 동료들도 잘 들어라. 나 이제 내 종이 될 새싹을 돋아나게 하리라. 너희가 그 자리에 오른 것이 그가 올 징조이다.","대제사장 여호수아야 너와 네 앞에 앉은 네 동료들은 내 말을 들을 것이니라 이들은 예표의 사람들이라 내가 내 종 싹을 나게 하리라","대제사장 여호수아야 너와 네 앞에 앉은 네 동료들은 내 말을 들을 것이니라 이들은 예표의 사람이라 내가 내 종 순을 나게 하리라","여호와께서 말씀하셨다. \"대제사장 여호수아야, 똑똑히 들어라! 너와 네 앞에 앉아 있는 다른 제사장들은 이제 내가 순으로서 내 종을 보낸다는 것을 보증하는 산 증인들이다.","“Hear, O Joshua, high priest! You and your associates who sit before you! For they are signs of things to come!  I will surely bring my servant the Branch.","Hear now, O Joshua the high priest, thou, and thy fellows that sit before thee: for they are men wondered at: for, behold, I will bring forth my servant the BRANCH.","\"'Listen, O high priest Joshua and your associates seated before you, who are men symbolic of things to come: I am going to bring my servant, the Branch.","Audi, Iesua sacerdos magne, tu et amici tui, qui sedent coram te, quia viri portendentes sunt: Ecce enim ego adduco servum meum Germen.","שמע נא יהושע הכהן הגדול אתה ורעיך הישבים לפניך כי אנשי מופת המה כי הנני מביא את עבדי צמח׃"],["45","3","9","내가 예수아 앞에 놓은 돌을 보아라. 돌은 하나인데 눈은 일곱이다. 만군의 주님의 말씀이다. 거기에 내가 비문을 새기고 이 땅의 허물을 단 하루에 치워 버리리라.","2)나 이제 여호수아 앞에 돌을 하나 놓는다. 돌은 하나인데 눈은 일곱 개가 달려 있다. 나는 친히 이 돌에-내가 이 땅의 죄를 하루 아침에 쓸어버리겠다-고 새기리라. 만군의 야훼가 말한다. 9절은 7절 다음으로 옮길 수도 있다.","만군의 여호와가 말하노라 내가 너 여호수아 앞에 세운 돌을 보라 한 돌에 일곱 눈이 있느니라 내가 거기에 새길 것을 새기며 이 땅의 죄악을 하루에 제거하리라","만군의 여호와가 말하노라 내가 너 여호수아 앞에 세운 돌을 보라 한 돌에 일곱 눈이 있느니라 내가 새길 것을 새기며 이 땅의 죄악을 하루에 제하리라","그러므로 내가 여호수아 앞에 놓은 저들을 보아라. 돌 하나에 눈이 일곱이다. 보아라. 내가 직접 그 돌에 글씨를 새겨 놓겠다. 내가 이 땅의 죄악을 단 하루 동안에 치워 버리겠다!\" 온 세상의 주인이신 여호와께서 하신 말씀이다.","Look at the stone that I have placed before Joshua. On this one stone with seven facets  I will engrave its inscription—oracle of the LORD of hosts—and I will take away the guilt of that land in one day.","For behold the stone that I have laid before Joshua; upon one stone shall be seven eyes: behold, I will engrave the graving thereof, saith the LORD of hosts, and I will remove the iniquity of that land in one day.","See, the stone I have set in front of Joshua! There are seven eyes on that one stone, and I will engrave an inscription on it,' says the LORD Almighty, 'and I will remove the sin of this land in a single day.","Quia ecce lapis, quem dedi coram Iesua: super lapidem unum septem oculi sunt; ecce ego caelabo sculpturam eius, ait Dominus exercituum, et auferam iniquitatem terrae illius in die una.","כי הנה האבן אשר נתתי לפני יהושע על אבן אחת שבעה עינים הנני מפתח פתחה נאם יהוה צבאות ומשתי את עון הארץ ההיא ביום אחד׃"],["45","3","10","그날에 만군의 주님의 말씀이다. 너희는 서로 이웃들을 자기 포도나무와 무화과나무 아래로 초대하리라.’”","그 날이 오면, 너희는 포도나무와 무화과나무 아래에서 잔치를 베풀고 서로 오가며 살리라.' 만군의 야훼께서 하신 말씀이시다.\"","만군의 여호와가 말하노라 그 날에 너희가 각각 포도나무와 무화과나무 아래로 서로 초대하리라 하셨느니라","만군의 여호와가 말하노라 그 날에 너희가 각각 포도나무와 무화과나무 아래로 서로 초대하리라 하셨느니라","\"그날이 오면 너희가 서로 친구를 초대하여 포도나무와 무화과나무 아래에서 그 열매를 서로 즐기며 살 것이다.\" 온 세상의 주인이신 여호와께서 하신 말씀이다.","On that day—oracle of the LORD of hosts—you will invite one another under your vines and fig trees.”","In that day, saith the LORD of hosts, shall ye call every man his neighbour under the vine and under the fig tree.","\"'In that day each of you will invite his neighbor to sit under his vine and fig tree,' declares the LORD Almighty.\"","In die illa, oraculum Domini exercituum, vocabit vir amicum suum subter vitem et subter ficum”.","ביום ההוא נאם יהוה צבאות תקראו איש לרעהו אל תחת גפן ואל תחת תאנה׃"],["45","4","1","나와 이야기하던 천사가 돌아와, 사람을 잠에서 깨우듯이 나를 깨웠다.","나와 말을 하던 그 천사가 돌아와서 나를 흔들어 깨웠다. 잠이 덜 깬 사람처럼 얼떨떨해하는 나에게,","내게 말하던 천사가 다시 와서 나를 깨우니 마치 자는 사람이 잠에서 깨어난 것 같더라","내게 말하던 천사가 다시 와서 나를 깨우니 마치 자는 사람이 깨우임 같더라","내게 설명을 해주던 천사가 다시 돌아왔다. 그는 마치 잠든 사람을 깨우듯이 나를 흔들어서 깨웠다.","Then the angel who spoke with me returned and aroused me, like one awakened from sleep.","And the angel that talked with me came again, and waked me, as a man that is wakened out of his sleep.","Then the angel who talked with me returned and wakened me, as a man is wakened from his sleep.","Et reversus est angelus, qui loquebatur in me, et excitavit me quasi virum, qui excitatur de somno suo.","וישב המלאך הדבר בי ויעירני כאיש אשר יעור משנתו׃"],["45","4","2","그가 나에게 “무엇이 보이느냐?” 하고 물었다. 내가 대답하였다. “온통 금으로 된 등잔대가 보입니다. 등잔대 머리에는 기름 그릇이 있고, 그 그릇에는 등잔이 일곱 개 있습니다. 그 머리에 등잔 부리가 일곱 개 있는 것입니다.","그가 물었다. \"무엇이 보이느냐?\" 나는 금으로 만든 등잔대가 보인다고 대답하였다. 그 등잔대 꼭대기엔 그릇이 하나 있고, 그 가장자리로 돌아가며 심지 주둥이가 하나씩 뚫린 등잔 일곱 개가 붙어 있었다.","그가 내게 묻되 네가 무엇을 보느냐 내가 대답하되 내가 보니 순금 등잔대가 있는데 그 위에는 기름 그릇이 있고 또 그 기름 그릇 위에 일곱 등잔이 있으며 그 기름 그릇 위에 있는 등잔을 위해서 일곱 관이 있고","그가 내게 묻되 네가 무엇을 보느냐 내가 대답하되 내가 보니 순금 등대가 있는데 그 꼭대기에 주발 같은 것이 있고 또 그 등대에 일곱 등잔이 있으며 그 등대 꼭대기 등잔에는 일곱 관이 있고","\"이제는 무엇이 보입니까?\" 하고 그가 물었다. 나는 내 눈에 보이는 대로 대답하였다. \"금으로 만든 등잔대 하나가 보입니다. 그 꼭대기에는 등잔 받침대가 하나 있고 그 위에는 등잔 일곱이 있는데, 등잔마다 기름 구멍이 하나씩 뚫려 있습니다.","He said to me, “What do you see?” I replied, “I see a lampstand all of gold, with a bowl on top of it. There are seven lamps on it, with seven spouts on each of the lamps that are on top of it.","And said unto me, What seest thou? And I said, I have looked, and behold a candlestick all of gold, with a bowl upon the top of it, and his seven lamps thereon, and seven pipes to the seven lamps, which are upon the top thereof:","He asked me, \"What do you see?\" I answered, \"I see a solid gold lampstand with a bowl at the top and seven lights on it, with seven channels to the lights.","Et dixit ad me: “Quid tu vides?”. Et dixi: “Vidi: et ecce candelabrum aureum totum, et ampulla super caput ipsius, et septem lucernae eius super illud, et septena infusoria lucernis, quae erant super caput eius.","ויאמר אלי מה אתה ראה ויאמר ראיתי והנה מנורת זהב כלה וגלה על ראשה ושבעה נרתיה עליה שבעה ושבעה מוצקות לנרות אשר על ראשה׃"],["45","4","3","등잔대 곁에는 올리브 나무가 두 그루 있는데, 하나는 기름 그릇 오른쪽에 있고 다른 하나는 그 왼쪽에 있습니다.”","그리고 올리브 나무 두 그루가 등잔대 오른쪽과 왼쪽에 하나씩 서 있었다.","그 등잔대 곁에 두 감람나무가 있는데 하나는 그 기름 그릇 오른쪽에 있고 하나는 그 왼쪽에 있나이다 하고","그 등대 곁에 두 감람나무가 있는데 하나는 그 주발 우편에 있고 하나는 그 좌편에 있나이다 하고","또 올리브나무 두 그루가 하나는 등잔대의 오른쪽에, 하나는 왼쪽에 서 있습니다.\"","And beside it are two olive trees, one on the right of the bowl and one to its left.”","And two olive trees by it, one upon the right side of the bowl, and the other upon the left side thereof.","Also there are two olive trees by it, one on the right of the bowl and the other on its left.\"","Et duae olivae super illud, una a dextris ampullae et una a sinistris eius”.","ושנים זיתים עליה אחד מימין הגלה ואחד על שמאלה׃"],["45","4","4","나는 나와 이야기하던 그 천사에게 물었다. “나리, 이것들은 무엇입니까?”","나는 나와 말하던 그 천사에게 \"나리, 이것들이 무엇입니까?\" 하고 물었다.","내게 말하는 천사에게 물어 이르되 내 주여 이것들이 무엇이니이까 하니","내게 말하는 천사에게 물어 가로되 내 주여 이것들이 무엇이니이까","나는 해석해 주는 천사에게 물었다. \"내 주여, 이것들이 무엇을 의미합니까?\"","Then I said to the angel who spoke with me, “What are these things, my lord?”","So I answered and spake to the angel that talked with me, saying, What are these, my lord?","I asked the angel who talked with me, \"What are these, my lord?\"","Et respondi et aio ad angelum, qui loquebatur in me, dicens: “Quid sunt haec, domine mi?”.","ואען ואמר אל המלאך הדבר בי לאמר מה אלה אדני׃"],["45","4","5","나와 이야기하던 천사가 나에게, “너는 이것들이 무엇을 뜻하는지 모르느냐?” 하고 묻자, 나는 “나리, 모릅니다.” 하고 대답하였다.","나와 말하던 그 천사는 \"이것이 무엇을 뜻하는지 모르느냐?\" 하고 되물었다. 내가 모르겠다고 하자,","내게 말하는 천사가 대답하여 이르되 네가 이것들이 무엇인지 알지 못하느냐 하므로 내가 대답하되 내 주여 내가 알지 못하나이다 하니","내게 말하는 천사가 대답하여 가로되 네가 이것들이 무엇인지 알지 못하느냐 내가 대답하되 내 주여 내가 알지 못하나이다","내게 설명해 주는 천사가 입을 열어 말하였다. \"이것들이 무엇을 의미하는지 정말로 모르십니까?\" 내가 \"모릅니다. 내 주여!\" 하고 대답하자","And the angel who spoke with me replied, “Do you not know what these things are?” I said, “No, my lord.”","Then the angel that talked with me answered and said unto me, Knowest thou not what these be? And I said, No, my lord.","He answered, \"Do you not know what these are?\" \"No, my lord,\" I replied.","Et respondit angelus, qui loquebatur in me, et dixit ad me: “Numquid nescis quid sunt haec?”. Et dixi: “Non, domine mi”.","ויען המלאך הדבר בי ויאמר אלי הלוא ידעת מה המה אלה ואמר לא אדני׃"],["45","4","6","그가 나에게 말하였다. “이것은 즈루빠벨을 두고 하신 주님의 말씀이다. ‘권력으로도 힘으로도 되지 않고 나의 영으로만 될 수 있다. ─ 만군의 주님께서 말씀하신다. ─","그 천사가 나에게 일러주었다. 1)이것은 야훼께서 즈루빠벨이 할 일을 말씀하신 것이다. \"그것은 권세나 힘으로 될 일이 아니라 내 영을 받아야 될 일이다.\" 만군의 야훼께서 하신 말씀이시다. 여기에서부터 10절 전반까지는 14절 뒤로 옮길 수도 있다.","그가 내게 대답하여 이르되 여호와께서 스룹바벨에게 하신 말씀이 이러하니라 만군의 여호와께서 말씀하시되 이는 힘으로 되지 아니하며 능력으로 되지 아니하고 오직 나의 영으로 되느니라","그가 내게 일러 가로되 여호와께서 스룹바벨에게 하신 말씀이 이러하니라 만군의 여호와께서 말씀하시되 이는 힘으로 되지 아니하며 능으로 되지아니하고 오직 나의 신으로 되느니라","a 그가 다시 입을 열어 내게 일러주었다. b ㄱ) 이것은 여호와께서 스룹바벨에게 전할 말씀을 내게 주신 것이다. \"네가 하는 일은 인간적인 권력이나 군사적인 폭력으로써가 아니고, 오직 내 영으로써만 성공할 수 있다\" 온 세상의 주인이신 여호와께서 말씀하셨다. (ㄱ. 4:6 하반절-10 상반절을 문맥상 14절 다음으로 옮겼다)","Then he said to me: “This is the word of the LORD to Zerubbabel: Not by might, and not by power, but by my spirit,  says the LORD of hosts.","Then he answered and spake unto me, saying, This is the word of the LORD unto Zerubbabel, saying, Not by might, nor by power, but by my spirit, saith the LORD of hosts.","So he said to me, \"This is the word of the LORD to Zerubbabel: 'Not by might nor by power, but by my Spirit,' says the LORD Almighty.","Et respondit et ait ad me dicens: “Hoc est verbum Domini ad Zorobabel dicens: Non in exercitu nec in robore sed in spiritu meo, dicit Dominus exercituum.","ויען ויאמר אלי לאמר זה דבר יהוה אל זרבבל לאמר לא בחיל ולא בכח כי אם ברוחי אמר יהוה צבאות׃"],["45","4","7","큰 산아, 너는 무엇이냐? 즈루빠벨 앞에서는 평지일 따름이다. ′좋다, 좋다!′ 환호하는 가운데 그는 머릿돌을 빼내리라.’”","\"산아, 네 아무리 크다 하여도 즈루빠벨 앞에서는 평지에 지나지 않는다. 그가 산에서 머릿돌을 떼어올 때, 사람들은 '멋지다, 멋지다.' 하며 환성을 올리리라.\"","큰 산아 네가 무엇이냐 네가 스룹바벨 앞에서 평지가 되리라 그가 머릿돌을 내놓을 때에 무리가 외치기를 은총, 은총이 그에게 있을지어다 하리라 하셨고","큰 산아 네가 무엇이냐 네가 스룹바벨 앞에서 평지가 되리라 그가 머릿돌을 내어 놓을 때에 무리가 외치기를 은총, 은총이 그에게 있을찌어다 하리라 하셨고","\"그러므로 아무리 어려운 장애물이라고 하여도, 스룹바벨 앞을 가로막을 수 있는 것은 하나도 없다. 그 앞에서는 태산 준령도 납작해질 것이다. ㄴ) 스룹바벨이 마침내 이 성전 건축을 완성할 때에 사람들은 모두 하나님의 은혜에 감사를 드리며 ㄷ) \"모든 일이 은혜로만 성취되었다.\"고 우렁찬 환호성을 지를 것이다.\" (ㄴ. 원문에는 \"그가 머릿돌을 꺼내 올 것이다\"라는 뜻으로 되어 있다. ㄷ. \"참으로 아름답다\" 또는 \"주께서 축복하셨다\"라고 번역할 수도 있다)","Who are you, O great mountain? Before Zerubbabel you become a plain. He will bring forth the first stone amid shouts of ‘Favor, favor be upon it!’”","Who art thou, O great mountain? before Zerubbabel thou shalt become a plain: and he shall bring forth the headstone thereof with shoutings, crying, Grace, grace unto it.","\"What are you, O mighty mountain? Before Zerubbabel you will become level ground. Then he will bring out the capstone to shouts of 'God bless it! God bless it!'\"","Quis tu, mons magne, coram Zorobabel? Eris in planum. Et educet lapidem primarium inter clamores: Quam venustus!","מי אתה הר הגדול לפני זרבבל למישר והוציא את האבן הראשה תשאות חן חן לה׃"],["45","4","8","주님의 말씀이 나에게 내렸다.","야훼의 말씀이 나에게 내렸다.","여호와의 말씀이 또 내게 임하여 이르시되","여호와의 말씀이 또 내게 임하여 가라사대","여호와의 말씀이 또 한 번 내게로 들려왔다.","Then the word of the LORD came to me:","Moreover the word of the LORD came unto me, saying,","Then the word of the LORD came to me:","Et factum est verbum Domini ad me dicens:","ויהי דבר יהוה אלי לאמר׃"],["45","4","9","“즈루빠벨의 손이 이 집의 기초를 놓았다. 그리고 그의 손이 이 일을 마치리라.” 그러면 너희는 만군의 주님께서 나를 너희에게 보내셨음을 알게 될 것이다.","\"즈루빠벨이 제 손으로 이 집에 주춧돌을 놓았으니, 그가 손수 그 일을 이루리라. 그제야 나를 너희에게 보내신 이가 만군의 야훼이심을 너희가 알리라.","스룹바벨의 손이 이 성전의 기초를 놓았은즉 그의 손이 또한 그 일을 마치리라 하셨나니 만군의 여호와께서 나를 너희에게 보내신 줄을 네가 알리라 하셨느니라","스룹바벨의 손이 이 전의 지대를 놓았은즉 그 손이 또한 그것을 마치리라 하셨나니 만군의 여호와께서 나를 너희에게 보내신 줄을 네가 알리라 하셨느니라","\"이 성전의 주춧돌을 놓은 스룹바벨이 그 손으로 이 공사를 완성할 것이다. 그때에는 온 세상의 주인이신 여호와께서 나를 너희에게 보내셨다는 것을 너희가 깨달을 것이다.","The hands of Zerubbabel have laid the foundations of this house, and his hands will finish it. Thus you shall know that the LORD of hosts has sent me to you.","The hands of Zerubbabel have laid the foundation of this house; his hands shall also finish it; and thou shalt know that the LORD of hosts hath sent me unto you.","\"The hands of Zerubbabel have laid the foundation of this temple; his hands will also complete it. Then you will know that the LORD Almighty has sent me to you.","Manus Zorobabel fundaverunt domum istam et manus eius perficient eam, et scietis quia Dominus exercituum misit me ad vos.","ידי זרבבל יסדו הבית הזה וידיו תבצענה וידעת כי יהוה צבאות שלחני אלכם׃"],["45","4","10","누가 감히 미약하게 시작한 날을 비웃느냐? 사람들은 즈루빠벨이 손에 든 측량 추를 보고 기뻐하리라. “이 일곱 눈은 바로 온 세상을 두루 살피시는 주님의 눈이시다.”","일이 자잘하게 시작되어 사람들이 빈정거렸지만, 즈루빠벨이 골라놓은 돌을 보고는 그 사람들도 기뻐할 것이다. 이 일곱 등잔은 천하를 살피는 야훼의 눈이다.\"","작은 일의 날이라고 멸시하는 자가 누구냐 사람들이 스룹바벨의 손에 다림줄이 있음을 보고 기뻐하리라 이 일곱은 온 세상에 두루 다니는 여호와의 눈이라 하니라","작은 일의 날이라고 멸시하는 자가 누구냐 이 일곱은 온 세상에 두루 행하는 여호와의 눈이라 다림줄이 스룹바벨의 손에 있음을 보고 기뻐하리라","보아라, 공사가 시시하게 시작되는 것을 보고 깔보던 사람들도 스룹바벨이 공사를 끝마치려고 머릿돌을 놓을 때에는 함께 보고 기뻐할 것이다.\"","For whoever has scorned such a day of small things will rejoice to see the capstone in the hand of Zerubbabel. “These seven are the eyes of the LORD that range over the whole earth.”","For who hath despised the day of small things? for they shall rejoice, and shall see the plummet in the hand of Zerubbabel with those seven; they are the eyes of the LORD, which run to and fro through the whole earth.","\"Who despises the day of small things? Men will rejoice when they see the plumb line in the hand of Zerubbabel. \" (These seven are the eyes of the LORD, which range throughout the earth.)\"","Quis enim despexit diem initiorum parvorum? Et laetabuntur et videbunt lapidem stanneum in manu Zorobabel. Septem illae oculi sunt Domini, qui discurrunt in universa terra”.","כי מי בז ליום קטנות ושמחו וראו את האבן הבדיל ביד זרבבל שבעה אלה עיני יהוה המה משוטטים בכל הארץ׃"],["45","4","11","나는 그 천사에게 물었다. “등잔대 오른쪽과 왼쪽에 있는 올리브 나무 두 그루는 무엇입니까?”","나는 그 천사에게 \"그러면 등잔대 오른쪽과 왼쪽에 있는 올리브 나무 두 그루는 무엇입니까?","내가 그에게 물어 이르되 등잔대 좌우의 두 감람나무는 무슨 뜻이니이까 하고","내가 그에게 물어 가로되 등대 좌우의 두 감람나무는 무슨 뜻이니이까 하고","\"저 등잔 일곱 개는 온 세상을 휘둘러 보시는 여호와의 눈을 가리킵니다.\" 여기서 내가 말을 꺼내어 그에게 물었다. \"저 등잔대 오른쪽과 왼쪽에 있는 두 올리브나무는 무엇을 의미합니까?\"","I then asked him, “What are these two olive trees, on the right of the lampstand and on its left?”","Then answered I, and said unto him, What are these two olive trees upon the right side of the candlestick and upon the left side thereof?","Then I asked the angel, \"What are these two olive trees on the right and the left of the lampstand?\"","Et respondi et dixi ad eum: “Quid sunt duae olivae istae ad dexteram candelabri et ad sinistram eius?”.","ואען ואמר אליו מה שני הזיתים האלה על ימין המנורה ועל שמאולה׃"],["45","4","12","나는 다시 그에게 물었다. “두 금 대롱으로 금빛 기름을 흘려보내는 저 올리브 나무 가지 두 개는 무엇입니까?”","또 금대롱으로 기름을 대어주는 올리브 나무 가지가 둘 있는데, 그것은 무엇입니까?\" 하고 물었다.","다시 그에게 물어 이르되 금 기름을 흘리는 두 금관 옆에 있는 이 감람나무 두 가지는 무슨 뜻이니이까 하니","다시 그에게 물어 가로되 금 기름을 흘려내는 두 금관 옆에 있는 이 감람나무 두 가지는 무슨 뜻이니이까","\"내가 그에게 또다시 물었다. \"등잔 속으로 기름을 대어 주는 저 두 개의 금대롱 곁에 있는 올리브나무 두 가지는 무엇을 의미합니까?\"","A second time I asked, “What are the two streams from the olive trees that pour out golden oil through two taps of gold?”","And I answered again, and said unto him, What be these two olive branches which through the two golden pipes empty the golden oil out of themselves?","Again I asked him, \"What are these two olive branches beside the two gold pipes that pour out golden oil?\"","Et respondi secundo et dixi ad eum: “Quid sunt duo rami olivarum, qui duabus fistulis aureis effundunt ex se aurum?”.","ואען שנית ואמר אליו מה שתי שבלי הזיתים אשר ביד שני צנתרות הזהב המריקים מעליהם הזהב׃"],["45","4","13","그 천사가 나에게 “너는 이것들이 무엇을 뜻하는지 모르느냐?” 하고 물었다. 내가 “나리, 모릅니다.” 하고 대답하자,","그 천사가, 그것이 무엇인지 모르겠느냐고 하기에 내가 모르겠다고 대답하자,","그가 내게 대답하여 이르되 네가 이것이 무엇인지 알지 못하느냐 하는지라 내가 대답하되 내 주여 알지 못하나이다 하니","그가 내게 대답하여 가로되 네가 이것이 무엇인지 알지 못하느냐 대답하되 내 주여 알지 못하나이다","그가 입을 열어 내게 말하였다. \"이것들이 무엇을 의미하는지 정말로 모르십니까?\" \"모릅니다. 내 주여!\"","He said to me, “Do you not know what these are?” I answered, “No, my lord.”","And he answered me and said, Knowest thou not what these be? And I said, No, my lord.","He replied, \"Do you not know what these are?\" \"No, my lord,\" I said.","Et ait ad me dicens: “Numquid nescis quid sunt haec?”. Et dixi: “Non, domine mi”.","ויאמר אלי לאמר הלוא ידעת מה אלה ואמר לא אדני׃"],["45","4","14","천사가 “이것들은 온 세상의 주님 곁에 서 있는 성별된 두 사람을 뜻한다.” 하고 말하였다.","그는 이렇게 일러주었다. \"올리브 나무 두 그루는 온 세상의 주를 모시도록 기름 부어 성별한 두 사람을 뜻한다.\"","이르되 이는 기름 부음 받은 자 둘이니 온 세상의 주 앞에 서 있는 자니라 하더라","가로되 이는 기름 발리운 자 둘이니 온 세상의 주 앞에 모셔 섰는 자니라 하더라","그가 설명하였다. \"그것들은 기름부음을 받은 두 사람으로서, 온 세상의 주인이신 여호와 앞에 서서 섬기는 사람들을 가리킵니다\"","Then he said, “These are the two anointed ones who stand by the Lord of the whole earth.”","Then said he, These are the two anointed ones, that stand by the LORD of the whole earth.","So he said, \"These are the two who are anointed to serve the LORD of all the earth.\"","Et dixit: “Isti sunt duo filii olei, qui assistunt Dominatori universae terrae”.","ויאמר אלה שני בני היצהר העמדים על אדון כל הארץ׃"],["45","5","1","내가 다시 눈을 들어 보니 날아다니는 두루마리가 하나 있었다.","또 내가 고개를 들고 쳐다보니, 두루마리 책 한 권이 날고 있었다.","내가 다시 눈을 들어 본즉 날아가는 두루마리가 있더라","내가 다시 눈을 든즉 날아가는 두루마리가 보이더라","내가 다시 눈을 들어 살펴보니, 돗자리처럼 펼쳐져 날아가는 두루마리 책 하나가 나타났다.","Then I raised my eyes again and saw a flying scroll.","Then I turned, and lifted up mine eyes, and looked, and behold a flying roll.","I looked again--and there before me was a flying scroll!","Et conversus sum et levavi ocu los meos et vidi: et ecce volu men volans.","ואשוב ואשא עיני ואראה והנה מגלה עפה׃"],["45","5","2","그 천사가 나에게 “무엇이 보이느냐?” 하고 물었다. “날아다니는 두루마리 하나가 보입니다. 그 길이는 스무 암마이고 너비는 열 암마입니다.” 하고 대답하였다.","그가 나에게 무엇이 보이느냐고 묻기에 나는 \"스무 자 길이에 나비가 열 자 되는 두루마리 책 한 권이 날고 있는 것이 보입니다.\" 하고 대답하였다.","그가 내게 묻되 네가 무엇을 보느냐 하기로 내가 대답하되 날아가는 두루마리를 보나이다 그 길이가 이십 규빗이요 너비가 십 규빗이니이다","그가 내게 묻되 네가 무엇을 보느냐 하기로 내가 대답하되 날아가는 두루마리를 보나이다 그 장이 이십 규빗이요 광이 십 규빗이니이다","내게 해석해 주는 천사가 물었다. \"무엇이 보입니까?\" 내가 대답하였다. \"길이는 10미터, 나비는 5미터쯤 되어 보이는 두루마리 책 한 권이 돗자리처럼 펼쳐진 채로 공중에 날아가는 것이 보입니다!\"","He asked me, “What do you see?” I answered, “I see a flying scroll, twenty cubits long and ten cubits wide.”","And he said unto me, What seest thou? And I answered, I see a flying roll; the length thereof is twenty cubits, and the breadth thereof ten cubits.","He asked me, \"What do you see?\" I answered, \"I see a flying scroll, thirty feet long and fifteen feet wide.\"","Et dixit ad me: “Quid tu vides?”. Et dixi: “Ego video volumen volans; longitudo eius viginti cubitorum et latitudo eius decem cubitorum”.","ויאמר אלי מה אתה ראה ואמר אני ראה מגלה עפה ארכה עשרים באמה ורחבה עשר באמה׃"],["45","5","3","그러자 그 천사가 나에게 말하였다. “이것은 온 세상에 내릴 저주이다. 도둑질하는 자는 이 두루마리의 한쪽 내용에 따라 모두 제거되고, 거짓으로 맹세하는 자는 이 두루마리의 다른 쪽 내용에 따라 모두 제거될 것이다.","그러자 그는 나에게 이렇게 일러주었다. \"이것은 온 나라를 휩쓸 저주이다. 이 두루마리 한 쪽에는 '도둑질하는 자들은 다 사라지리라.'고 적혀 있고, 다른 쪽에는 '맹세하면서 사기 치는 자도 다 여기에서 사라지리라.' 라고 적혀 있다.","그가 내게 이르되 이는 온 땅 위에 내리는 저주라 도둑질하는 자는 그 이쪽 글대로 끊어지고 맹세하는 자는 그 저쪽 글대로 끊어지리라 하니","그가 내게 이르되 이는 온 지면에 두루 행하는 저주라 무릇 도적질하는 자는 그 이편 글대로 끊쳐지고 무릇 맹세하는 자는 그 저편 글대로 끊쳐지리라","그가 나에게 설명해 주었다. \"이것은 온 세상에 선포되는 저주의 말씀입니다. 한편에는 도둑질하는 자는 모두 이 세상에서 제거될 것이고, 또 한편에는 하나님의 이름을 팔면서 거짓으로 맹세하는 자는 이 세상에서 제거될 것이라고 기록되어 있습니다.\"","Then he said to me: “This is the curse which is to go forth over the whole land. According to it, every thief and every perjurer will be expelled.","Then said he unto me, This is the curse that goeth forth over the face of the whole earth: for every one that stealeth shall be cut off as on this side according to it; and every one that sweareth shall be cut off as on that side according to it.","And he said to me, \"This is the curse that is going out over the whole land; for according to what it says on one side, every thief will be banished, and according to what it says on the other, everyone who swears falsely will be banished.","Et dixit ad me: “Haec est maledictio, quae egreditur super faciem omnis terrae; quia omnis fur hinc iuxta illud expurgatur, et omnis periurus illinc iuxta illud expurgatur.","ויאמר אלי זאת האלה היוצאת על פני כל הארץ כי כל הגנב מזה כמוה נקה וכל הנשבע מזה כמוה נקה׃"],["45","5","4","‘나는 저주를 내린다. 만군의 주님의 말씀이다. 이 저주는 도둑질하는 자의 집과 내 이름으로 거짓 맹세하는 자의 집에 들어가 그 집 안에 머무르며 들보와 돌을 없애 버리리라.’”","이것은 내가 보낸 것이다. 만군의 야훼가 말한다. 남의 것을 훔쳐 먹은 자의 집에도, 내 이름을 팔아 거짓을 옳다고 맹세하며 사기 치는 자의 집에도 들어가 그 집 안에 머물면서 대들보와 돌담까지 다 허물어뜨릴 것이다.\"","만군의 여호와께서 이르시되 내가 이것을 보냈나니 도둑의 집에도 들어가며 내 이름을 가리켜 망령되이 맹세하는 자의 집에도 들어가서 그의 집에 머무르며 그 집을 나무와 돌과 아울러 사르리라 하셨느니라 하니라","만군의 여호와께서 가라사대 내가 이것을 발하였나니 도적의 집에도 들어가며 내 이름을 가리켜 망령되이 맹세하는 자의 집에도 들어가서 그 집에 머무르며 그 집을 그 나무와 그 돌을 아울러 사르리라 하셨느니라","온 세상의 주인이신 여호와께서 말씀하셨다. \"이 저주의 두루마리는 내가 보낸 것이다. 나는 그 저주가 도둑질한 사람의 집에도 들어가고 내 이름을 팔면서 거짓을 참이라고 맹세한 사람의 집에도 들어가서 묵으면서, 각 집을 모조리 파괴하여 기둥 하나, 돌덩이 하나도 그대로 두지 않도록 하였다.\"","I will send it forth—oracle of the LORD of hosts—so that it will come to the house of the thief, and into the house of the one who swears falsely by my name. It shall lodge within each house, consuming it, timber and stones.”","I will bring it forth, saith the LORD of hosts, and it shall enter into the house of the thief, and into the house of him that sweareth falsely by my name: and it shall remain in the midst of his house, and shall consume it with the timber thereof and the stones thereof.","The LORD Almighty declares, 'I will send it out, and it will enter the house of the thief and the house of him who swears falsely by my name. It will remain in his house and destroy it, both its timbers and its stones.'\"","Educo illud, dicit Dominus exercituum, et veniet ad domum furis et ad domum iurantis in nomine meo mendaciter; et commorabitur in medio domus eius, et consumet eam et ligna eius et lapides eius”.","הוצאתיה נאם יהוה צבאות ובאה אל בית הגנב ואל בית הנשבע בשמי לשקר ולנה בתוך ביתו וכלתו ואת עציו ואת אבניו׃"],["45","5","5","나와 이야기하던 천사가 앞으로 나와서 나에게 말하였다. “눈을 들어 가까이 오는 것이 무엇인지 보아라.”","나와 말하던 그 천사가 나서서 말하였다. \"저기 나타나는 것이 무엇인지 눈을 똑바로 뜨고 보아라.\"","내게 말하던 천사가 나아와서 내게 이르되 너는 눈을 들어 나오는 이것이 무엇인가 보라 하기로","내게 말하던 천사가 나아와서 내게 이르되 너는 눈을 들어 나오는 이것이 무엇인가 보라 하기로","설명해 주는 천사가 앞으로 와서 내게 말하였다. \"어서 눈을 들어 저기 나타나는 것이 무엇인지 보시오!\"","Then the angel who spoke with me came forward and said to me, “Raise your eyes and look. What is this that comes forth?”","Then the angel that talked with me went forth, and said unto me, Lift up now thine eyes, and see what is this that goeth forth.","Then the angel who was speaking to me came forward and said to me, \"Look up and see what this is that is appearing.\"","Et egressus est angelus, qui loquebatur in me, et dixit ad me: “Leva, quaeso, oculos tuos et vide. Quid est hoc, quod egreditur?”.","ויצא המלאך הדבר בי ויאמר אלי שא נא עיניך וראה מה היוצאת הזאת׃"],["45","5","6","“저것이 무엇입니까?” 하고 내가 물었다. 그가 나에게 “가까이 오는 것은 뒤주이다.” 하고 대답하였다. 이어서 “이것은 온 땅에 퍼져 있는 그들의 죄악이다.” 하고 말하였다.","내가 \"저것이 무엇입니까?\" 하고 묻자 그가 대답하였다. \"저기 나타나는 것은 말이다. 저 말 속에는 온 땅에 가득한 죄악이 담겨 있다.\"","내가 묻되 이것이 무엇이니이까 하니 그가 이르되 나오는 이것이 에바이니라 하시고 또 이르되 온 땅에서 그들의 모양이 이러하니라","내가 묻되 이것이 무엇이니이까 그가 가로되 나오는 이것이 에바니라 또 가로되 온 땅에서 그들의 모양이 이러하니라","내가 물었다. \"도대체 저것이 무엇입니까?\" \"저기 나타나는 것은 큰 통입니다. 그 속에는 이 땅에 만연된 죄악이 가득 차 있습니다.\"","I said, “What is it?” And he answered, “This is the basket that is coming.” And he said, “This is their guilt in all the land.”","And I said, What is it? And he said, This is an ephah that goeth forth. He said moreover, This is their resemblance through all the earth.","I asked, \"What is it?\" He replied, \"It is a measuring basket*\" And he added, \"This is the iniquity of the people throughout the land.\"","Et dixi: “Quidnam est?”. Et ait: “Haec est epha egrediens”. Et dixit: “Hoc est peccatum eorum in universa terra”.","ואמר מה היא ויאמר זאת האיפה היוצאת ויאמר זאת עינם בכל הארץ׃"],["45","5","7","그러자 납 덮개가 들어 올려지면서, 뒤주 한가운데에 앉아 있는 여자가 보였다.","그러자 납으로 된 뚜껑이 열리면서, 그 큰 말 속에 한 여인이 앉아 있는 모습이 보였다.","이 에바 가운데에는 한 여인이 앉았느니라 하니 그 때에 둥근 납 한 조각이 들리더라","이 에바 가운데에는 한 여인이 앉았느니라 하는 동시에 둥근 납 한 조각이 들리더라","그런데 그 통의 둥근 납 뚜껑이 갑자기 벗겨져서, 나는 그 속에 한 여인이 앉아 있는 것을 볼 수가 있었다.","Then a leaden cover was lifted, and there was a woman sitting inside the basket.","And, behold, there was lifted up a talent of lead: and this is a woman that sitteth in the midst of the ephah.","Then the cover of lead was raised, and there in the basket sat a woman!","Et ecce operculum plumbi elevatum est, et ecce mulier una sedens in medio ephae.","והנה ככר עפרת נשאת וזאת אשה אחת יושבת בתוך האיפה׃"],["45","5","8","“이 여자가 악이다.” 하고 천사가 말하였다. 그러고 나서 그 여자를 뒤주 속으로 밀어 넣고는 그 아가리를 납 덩어리로 덮었다.","그는 \"몹쓸 것\"이라고 하면서 그 여인을 말 속에 틀어넣고 납뚜껑을 도로 덮었다.","그가 이르되 이는 악이라 하고 그 여인을 에바 속으로 던져 넣고 납 조각을 에바 아귀 위에 던져 덮더라","그가 가로되 이는 악이라 하고 그 여인을 에바 속으로 던져 넣고 납 조각을 에바 아구리 위에 던져 덮더라","천사가 설명해 주었다. \"저 여인은 이 땅의 죄악을 나타냅니다.\" 이 말을 마침과 동시에 그는 그 여인을 통 속으로 밀어 넣고, 납으로 된 그 무거운 뚜껑을 본래대로 다시 닫았다.","He said, “This is Wickedness,” and he thrust her inside the basket, pushing the leaden weight into the opening.","And he said, This is wickedness. And he cast it into the midst of the ephah; and he cast the weight of lead upon the mouth thereof.","He said, \"This is wickedness,\" and he pushed her back into the basket and pushed the lead cover down over its mouth.","Et dixit: “Haec est impietas”. Et proiecit eam in epham et misit massam plumbeam in os eius.","ויאמר זאת הרשעה וישלך אתה אל תוך האיפה וישלך את אבן העפרת אל פיה׃"],["45","5","9","내가 또 눈을 들어 보니 여자 둘이 앞으로 나오고 있었다. 그들은 황새 날개처럼 생긴 날개를 달고 있었는데, 그것으로 바람을 일으키고 있었다. 그들은 뒤주를 땅과 하늘 사이로 들어 올렸다.","다시 고개를 들어보니, 두 여인이 나타나서 황새 날개 같은 날개로 바람을 일으키며 그 말을 공중으로 들어올려 날아가고 있었다.","내가 또 눈을 들어 본즉 두 여인이 나오는데 학의 날개 같은 날개가 있고 그 날개에 바람이 있더라 그들이 그 에바를 천지 사이에 들었기로","내가 또 눈을 들어 본즉 두 여인이 나왔는데 학의 날개 같은 날개가 있고 그 날개에 바람이 있더라 그들이 그 에바를 천지 사이에 들었기로","그런 다음에 내가 다시 눈을 들어 살펴보니 두 여인이 황새 날개와 비슷한 두 날개를 바람이 부는 힘에 따라 활짝 펴고 날아와서, 그 통을 양쪽에서 붙잡아 들고 공중으로 멀리멀리 날아갔다.","Then I raised my eyes and saw two women coming forth with wind under their wings—they had wings like the wings of a stork—and they lifted the basket into the air.","Then lifted I up mine eyes, and looked, and, behold, there came out two women, and the wind was in their wings; for they had wings like the wings of a stork: and they lifted up the ephah between the earth and the heaven.","Then I looked up--and there before me were two women, with the wind in their wings! They had wings like those of a stork, and they lifted up the basket between heaven and earth.","Et levavi oculos meos et vidi: et ecce duae mulieres egredientes, et ventus in alis earum, et habebant alas quasi alas milvi; et levaverunt epham inter terram et caelum.","ואשא עיני וארא והנה שתים נשים יוצאות ורוח בכנפיהם ולהנה כנפים ככנפי החסידה ותשאנה את האיפה בין הארץ ובין השמים׃"],["45","5","10","나는 나와 이야기하던 천사에게, “저들이 뒤주를 어디로 가져 가는 것입니까?” 하고 물었다.","내가 나와 말하던 그 천사에게 \"저 여인들은 그 말을 어디로 가지고 갑니까?\" 하고 묻자","내가 내게 말하는 천사에게 묻되 그들이 에바를 어디로 옮겨 가나이까 하니","내가 내게 말하는 천사에게 묻되 그들이 에바를 어디로 옮겨 가나이까 하매","나는 또 천사에게 물었다. \"저 여인들이 그 통을 어디로 가지고 갑니까?\"","I said to the angel who spoke with me, “Where are they taking the basket?”","Then said I to the angel that talked with me, Whither do these bear the ephah?","\"Where are they taking the basket?\" I asked the angel who was speaking to me.","Et dixi ad angelum, qui loquebatur in me: “Quo istae deferunt epham?”.","ואמר אל המלאך הדבר בי אנה המה מולכות את האיפה׃"],["45","5","11","그가 나에게 “뒤주를 둘 집을 지으려고 신아르 땅으로 간다. 그 집이 세워지면 뒤주는 받침대 위에 놓일 것이다.” 하고 대답하였다.","그는 나에게 이렇게 일러주었다. \"그가 있을 신전을 시날 땅에 짓고 받침대를 마련하여 그 위에 모시려고 갔다.\"","그가 내게 이르되 그들이 시날 땅으로 가서 그것을 위하여 집을 지으려 함이니라 준공되면 그것이 제 처소에 머물게 되리라 하더라","내게 이르되 그들이 시날 땅으로 가서 그를 위하여 집을 지으려함이니라 준공되면 그가 제 처소에 머물게 되리라 하더라","그가 대답하였다. \"그 여인들은 ㄱ) 시날 땅으로 가서 통 속의 여자를 위하여 신전을 지어 주려고 합니다. 신전이 완성되면, 그들은 그 통 속의 여자를 그곳에 모실 것입니다. 그곳이 본래 그 여인이 살던 고향입니다.\" (ㄱ. 바벨론. 바벨탑이 세워졌던 곳이며, 온 세계의 우상숭배와 죄악의 중심지를 상징한다)","He replied, “To build a temple for it in the land of Shinar. When the temple is constructed, they will set it there on its base.”","And he said unto me, To build it an house in the land of Shinar: and it shall be established, and set there upon her own base.","He replied, \"To the country of Babylonia to build a house for it. When it is ready, the basket will be set there in its place.\"","Et dixit ad me: “Ut aedificetur ei domus in terra Sennaar; et, postquam constructa fuerit, ponetur ibi super basem suam”.","ויאמר אלי לבנות לה בית בארץ שנער והוכן והניחה שם על מכנתה׃"],["45","6","1","내가 다시 눈을 들어 보니, 두 산 사이에서 병거 넉 대가 나오고 있었다. 그 산들은 청동 산이었다.","또다시 고개를 들고 보니, 놋쇠로 된 두 산 사이에서 병거 네 대가 나오는데","내가 또 눈을 들어 본즉 네 병거가 두 산 사이에서 나오는데 그 산은 구리 산이더라","내가 또 눈을 들어본즉 네 병거가 두 산 사이에서 나왔는데 그 산은 놋산이더라","내가 다시 눈을 들어 살펴보니, 하늘의 입구에 있는 놋쇠로 된 두 산 사이에서 마차 네 대가 나타나 세상으로 나왔다.","Again I raised my eyes and saw four chariots coming out from between two mountains; and the mountains were of bronze.","And I turned, and lifted up mine eyes, and looked, and, behold, there came four chariots out from between two mountains; and the mountains were mountains of brass.","I looked up again--and there before me were four chariots coming out from between two mountains--mountains of bronze!","Et rursus levavi oculos meos et vidi: et ecce quattuor quadrigae egredientes de medio duorum montium; et montes, montes aerei.","ואשב ואשא עיני ואראה והנה ארבע מרכבות יצאות מבין שני ההרים וההרים הרי נחשת׃"],["45","6","2","첫째 병거는 붉은 말들이, 둘째 병거는 검은 말들이 끌고,","첫째 병거는 붉은 말들이, 둘째 병거는 검은 말들이,","첫째 병거는 붉은 말들이, 둘째 병거는 검은 말들이,","첫째 병거는 홍마들이, 둘째 병거는 흑마들이,","첫째 마차는 적갈색 말들이, 둘째 마차는 검은 말들이,","The first chariot had red horses, the second chariot black horses,","In the first chariot were red horses; and in the second chariot black horses;","The first chariot had red horses, the second black,","In quadriga prima equi rufi, et in quadriga secunda equi nigri,","במרכבה הראשנה סוסים אדמים ובמרכבה השנית סוסים שחרים׃"],["45","6","3","셋째 병거는 흰말들이, 넷째 병거는 점박이 말들이 끌고 있었다. 모두 건장한 말들이었다.","셋째 병거는 흰 말들이, 넷째 병거는 짙은 점박이 말들이 끌고 있었다.","셋째 병거는 흰 말들이, 넷째 병거는 어룽지고 건장한 말들이 메었는지라","세째 병거는 백마들이, 네째 병거는 어룽지고 건장한 말들이 메었는지라","셋째 마차는 흰말들이, 넷째 마차는 얼룩진 말들이 끄는데 모두 건장한 말들이었다.","the third chariot white horses, and the fourth chariot dappled horses—all of them strong horses.","And in the third chariot white horses; and in the fourth chariot grisled and bay horses.","the third white, and the fourth dappled--all of them powerful.","et in quadriga tertia equi albi, et in quadriga quarta equi varii.","ובמרכבה השלשית סוסים לבנים ובמרכבה הרבעית סוסים ברדים אמצים׃"],["45","6","4","내가 나와 이야기하던 천사에게, “나리, 저것들은 무엇입니까?” 하고 물었다.","내가 나와 말하던 그 천사에게, \"나리, 이것이 무엇입니까?\" 하고 묻자 그 천사는 이렇게 말하였다.","내가 내게 말하는 천사에게 물어 이르되 내 주여 이것들이 무엇이니이까 하니","내가 내게 말하는 천사에게 물어 가로되 내 주여 이것들이 무엇이니이까","나는 또 입을 열어 내게 설명해 주는 천사에게 물었다. \"내 주여, 저것이 무엇을 의미합니까?\"","I asked the angel who spoke with me, “What are these, my lord?”","Then I answered and said unto the angel that talked with me, What are these, my lord?","I asked the angel who was speaking to me, \"What are these, my lord?\"","Et respondi et dixi ad angelum, qui loquebatur in me: “Quid sunt haec, domine mi?”.","ואען ואמר אל המלאך הדבר בי מה אלה אדני׃"],["45","6","5","그러자 천사가 나에게 대답하였다. “이것들은 온 세상의 주님을 뵙고 나서 이제 길을 나서는 하늘의 네 바람이다.","\"이 네 병거는 하늘의 영들이다. 이 영들은 온 천하의 주님을 들어가 뵈옵고 이제 막 나와 사방으로 떠나는 길이다.","천사가 대답하여 이르되 이는 하늘의 네 바람인데 온 세상의 주 앞에 서 있다가 나가는 것이라 하더라","천사가 대답하여 가로되 이는 하늘의 네 바람인데 온 세상의 주 앞에 모셨다가 나가는 것이라 하더라","천사가 내게 설명해 주었다. \"그들은 온 세상의 주인이신 여호와 앞에 서서 지시를 받고 지금 세상의 사방으로 임무를 수행하러 나가고 있습니다.","The angel answered me, “These are the four winds of the heavens, which are coming forth after presenting themselves before the LORD of all the earth.","And the angel answered and said unto me, These are the four spirits of the heavens, which go forth from standing before the LORD of all the earth.","The angel answered me, \"These are the four spirits of heaven, going out from standing in the presence of the Lord of the whole world.","Et respondit angelus et ait ad me: “Isti sunt quattuor venti caeli, qui egrediuntur, postquam steterunt coram Dominatore omnis terrae”.","ויען המלאך ויאמר אלי אלה ארבע רחות השמים יוצאות מהתיצב על אדון כל הארץ׃"],["45","6","6","검은 말들이 끄는 병거는 북쪽 땅으로 떠나고, 흰말들이 끄는 병거는 서쪽 땅으로 떠나고, 점박이 말들이 끄는 병거는 남쪽으로 떠날 것이다.”","붉은 말들은 동녘 땅으로, 검은 말들은 북녘 땅으로, 흰 말들은 서녘 땅으로, 점박이 말들은 남녘 땅으로 나갈 말이다.\"","검은 말은 북쪽 땅으로 나가고 흰 말은 그 뒤를 따르고 어룽진 말은 남쪽 땅으로 나가고","흑마는 북편 땅으로 나가매 백마가 그 뒤를 따르고 어룽진 말은 남편 땅으로 나가고","저 적갈색의 말들은 동쪽으로 가고, 저 검은 말들은 북쪽으로 가고, 저 흰말들은 서쪽으로 가고, 저 얼룩진 말들은 남쪽으로 갑니다.\"","The one with the black horses is going toward the land of the north, and the white horses go toward the west, and the dappled ones go toward the land of the south.”","The black horses which are therein go forth into the north country; and the white go forth after them; and the grisled go forth toward the south country.","The one with the black horses is going toward the north country, the one with the white horses toward the west, and the one with the dappled horses toward the south.\"","In qua erant equi nigri, egrediebantur in terram aquilonis, et albi egressi sunt post eos, et varii egressi sunt ad terram austri.","אשר בה הסוסים השחרים יצאים אל ארץ צפון והלבנים יצאו אל אחריהם והברדים יצאו אל ארץ התימן׃"],["45","6","7","건장한 말들이 그곳을 떠나 세상을 두루 돌아다니고 싶어 하자, 그 천사가 말하였다. “가서 세상을 두루 돌아다녀라.” 그리하여 병거들은 세상을 두루 돌아다녔다.","그 씩씩한 말들은 나가서 온 세상을 순찰하라는 명령을 초조하게 기다리고 있었다.","건장한 말은 나가서 땅에 두루 다니고자 하니 그가 이르되 너희는 여기서 나가서 땅에 두루 다니라 하매 곧 땅에 두루 다니더라","건장한 말은 나가서 땅에 두루 다니고자 하니 그가 이르되 너희는 여기서 나가서 땅에 두루 다니라 하매 곧 땅에 두루 다니더라","그 건장한 말들은 집합 장소로 나온 다음, 온 세상을 순찰하러 어서 빨리 나가려고 콧숨을 내뿜으며 기다렸다. 이때에 주께서 허락하셨다. \"자 온 세상을 다니며 순찰하여라!\" 그러자 마차들은 땅의 네 방향으로 달려갔다.","These strong horses went out, eager to set about patrolling the earth, for he said, “Go, patrol the earth!” So they patrolled the earth.","And the bay went forth, and sought to go that they might walk to and fro through the earth: and he said, Get you hence, walk to and fro through the earth. So they walked to and fro through the earth.","When the powerful horses went out, they were straining to go throughout the earth. And he said, \"Go throughout the earth!\" So they went throughout the earth.","Et equi fortes exierunt et quaerebant ire et discurrere per terram. Et dixit: “Ite, perambulate terram”. Et perambulaverunt terram.","והאמצים יצאו ויבקשו ללכת להתהלך בארץ ויאמר לכו התהלכו בארץ ותתהלכנה בארץ׃"],["45","6","8","천사가 나에게 소리쳐 말하였다. “보아라, 북쪽 땅으로 떠난 말들이 나의 영을 북쪽 땅에 편안히 자리 잡게 하였다.”","그 천사가 나를 부르며 일러주었다. \"자, 보아라. 북녘 땅으로 나갈 말들이 주의 영을 모시고 북녘 땅으로 떠난다.\"","그가 내게 외쳐 말하여 이르되 북쪽으로 나간 자들이 북쪽에서 내 영을 쉬게 하였느니라 하더라","그가 외쳐 내게 일러 가로되 북방으로 나간 자들이 북방에서 내 마음을 시원케 하였느니라 하더라","그 다음에 천사가 나를 불러 이렇게 설명하였다. \"북쪽 땅으로 나아간 말들을 주목해 보십시오. 그들은 주님의 영을 바벨론으로 모셔다가 그곳에 남은 유다 사람들의 마음을 변화시킬 것입니다.","Then he cried out to me and said, “See, those who go forth to the land of the north provide rest for my spirit in the land of the north.”","Then cried he upon me, and spake unto me, saying, Behold, these that go toward the north country have quieted my spirit in the north country.","Then he called to me, \"Look, those going toward the north country have given my Spirit rest in the land of the north.\"","Et vocavit me et locutus est ad me dicens: “Ecce, qui egrediuntur in terram aquilonis requiescere fecerunt spiritum meum in terra aquilonis”.","ויזעק אתי וידבר אלי לאמר ראה היוצאים אל ארץ צפון הניחו את רוחי בארץ צפון׃"],["45","6","9","주님의 말씀이 나에게 내렸다.","주의 말씀이 나에게 내렸다.","여호와의 말씀이 내게 임하여 이르시되","여호와의 말씀이 내게 임하여 이르시되","그 다음에 여호와께서 내게 이같이 말씀하셨다.","Then the word of the LORD came to me:","And the word of the LORD came unto me, saying,","The word of the LORD came to me:","Et factum est verbum Domini ad me dicens:","ויהי דבר יהוה אלי לאמר׃"],["45","6","10","“너는 유배자들, 곧 헬다이와 토비야와 여다야에게서 예물을 받아라. 그들이 바빌론에서 돌아와 스바니야의 아들 요시야의 집에 있으니, 오늘로 그곳에 가거라.","\"헬대, 토비아, 여다야, 스바니야의 아들 요시야가 포로민이 바친 예물을 가지고 바빌론에서 돌아왔는데, 너는 오늘 그것을 받으러 가거라.","사로잡힌 자 가운데 바벨론에서부터 돌아온 헬대와 도비야와 여다야가 스바냐의 아들 요시아의 집에 들어갔나니 너는 이 날에 그 집에 들어가서 그들에게서 받되","사로잡힌 자 중 바벨론에서부터 돌아온 헬대와 도비야와 여다야가 스바냐의 아들 요시아의 집에 들었나니 너는 이 날에 그집에 들어가서 그들에게서 취하되","너는 스바냐의 아들 요시아의 집에 가 보아라! 거기에는 방금 바벨론에서 도착한 헬대, 도비야, 여다야가 묵고 있다. 그들은 네게 줄 선물을 가지고 온 사람들이다.","Take from the exiles—Heldai, Tobijah, Jedaiah—and go the same day to the house of Josiah, son of Zephaniah. (These had come from Babylon.)","Take of them of the captivity, even of Heldai, of Tobijah, and of Jedaiah, which are come from Babylon, and come thou the same day, and go into the house of Josiah the son of Zephaniah;","\"Take silver and gold from the exiles Heldai, Tobijah and Jedaiah, who have arrived from Babylon. Go the same day to the house of Josiah son of Zephaniah.","“Sume ab his, qui de captivitate sunt, ab Holdai et a Thobia et ab Iedaia, et venies tu in die illa et intrabis domum Iosiae filii Sophoniae, qui venerunt de Babylone.","לקוח מאת הגולה מחלדי ומאת טוביה ומאת ידעיה ובאת אתה ביום ההוא ובאת בית יאשיה בן צפניה אשר באו מבבל׃"],["45","6","11","너는 은과 금을 받아 왕관을 만들어, 여호차닥의 아들 예수아 대사제의 머리에 씌우고,","그 금과 은을 받아다가 면류관을 만들어 1)스알디엘의 아들 즈루빠벨 머리에 씌우고는, 히브리어 본문은 여호사닥의 아들 대사제 여호수아로 되어 있지만 12-13절을 참조하여 이렇게 고쳐 읽었다.","은과 금을 받아 면류관을 만들어 여호사닥의 아들 대제사장 여호수아의 머리에 씌우고","은과 금을 취하여 면류관을 만들어 여호사닥의 아들 대제사장 여호수아의 머리에 씌우고","너는 그들이 바치는 은과 금을 가지고 왕관을 만들어, ㄷ) 여호사닥의 아들 대제사장 여호수아의 머리에 씌워라. (ㄷ. 본래는 \"스알디엘의 아들 스룹바벨\"이었음이 틀림없다)","You will take silver and gold, and make crowns; place one on the head of Joshua, son of Jehozadak, the high priest.","Then take silver and gold, and make crowns, and set them upon the head of Joshua the son of Josedech, the high priest;","Take the silver and gold and make a crown, and set it on the head of the high priest, Joshua son of Jehozadak.","Et sumes argentum et aurum et facies coronam et pones in capite Iesua filii Iosedec, sacerdotis magni,","ולקחת כסף וזהב ועשית עטרות ושמת בראש יהושע בן יהוצדק הכהן הגדול׃"],["45","6","12","그에게 말하여라. ‘만군의 주님이 이렇게 말한다. 이 사람을 보아라. 그의 이름은 ′새싹′이니 그가 제자리에서 돋아 나와 주님의 성전을 지으리라.","이렇게 일러주어라. '나 만군의 야훼가 말한다. 이 사람을 보아라. 그 이름은 새싹이니, 이 사람이 앉은 자리에서 싹이 돋으리라. 그는 야훼의 성전을 지을 사람이다.","말하여 이르기를 만군의 여호와께서 이같이 말씀하시되 보라 싹이라 이름하는 사람이 자기 곳에서 돋아나서 여호와의 전을 건축하리라","고하여 이르기를 만군의 여호와께서 말씀하시되 보라 순이라 이름하는 사람이 자기 곳에서 돋아나서 여호와의 전을 건축하리라","그 대관식에서 너는 이같이 그에게 선포하여라. \"온 세상의 주이신 여호와께서 이렇게 말씀하셨다. 이 사람을 보아라! 그는 순으로 오실 분을 보증해 준다. 이 사람이 앉은 왕좌에서 그 순이 나올 것이다. 그 순이 여호와의 성전을 지을 것이다.","And say to him: Thus says the LORD of hosts: There is a man whose name is Branch —and from his place he will branch out and he will build the temple of the LORD.","And speak unto him, saying, Thus speaketh the LORD of hosts, saying, Behold the man whose name is The BRANCH; and he shall grow up out of his place, and he shall build the temple of the LORD:","Tell him this is what the LORD Almighty says: 'Here is the man whose name is the Branch, and he will branch out from his place and build the temple of the LORD.","et loqueris ad eum dicens: Haec ait Dominus exercituum dicens: Ecce vir, Germen nomen eius; et in loco suo aliquid germinabit et aedificabit templum Domini.","ואמרת אליו לאמר כה אמר יהוה צבאות לאמר הנה איש צמח שמו ומתחתיו יצמח ובנה את היכל יהוה׃"],["45","6","13","그가 주님의 성전을 지을 것이며 바로 그가 엄위를 갖추고 자기 왕좌에 앉아 다스리리라. 그의 왕좌 곁에는 한 사제가 있을 터인데 그 두 사람은 평화롭게 조화를 이루리라.’","이 사람이 바로 야훼의 성전을 짓고, 영광스런 옥좌에 앉아 나라를 다스릴 사람이다. 그의 오른편에 2)사제가 앉으리니, 두 사람은 뜻이 잘 맞을 것이다. 칠십인역을 따랐다.","그가 여호와의 전을 건축하고 영광도 얻고 그 자리에 앉아서 다스릴 것이요 또 제사장이 자기 자리에 있으리니 이 둘 사이에 평화의 의논이 있으리라 하셨다 하고","그가 여호와의 전을 건축하고 영광도 얻고 그 위에 앉아서 다스릴 것이요 또 제사장이 자기 위에 있으리니 이 두 사이에 평화의 의논이 있으리라 하셨다 하고","참으로 이 사람이 여호와의 성전을 다시 짓고, 왕의 예복을 입고 왕위에 앉아 다스릴 것이다. 그때에는 제사장이 왕의 곁에 있을 것이며, 두 사람이 사이좋게 의논하여 일을 처리할 것이다.\"","He will build the temple of the LORD, and taking up the royal insignia, he will sit as ruler upon his throne. The priest will be at his right hand, and between the two of them there will be peaceful understanding.","Even he shall build the temple of the LORD; and he shall bear the glory, and shall sit and rule upon his throne; and he shall be a priest upon his throne: and the counsel of peace shall be between them both.","It is he who will build the temple of the LORD, and he will be clothed with majesty and will sit and rule on his throne. And he will be a priest on his throne. And there will be harmony between the two.'","Et ipse exstruet templum Domini; et ipse portabit gloriam et sedebit et dominabitur super solio suo; et erit sacerdos ad dexteram eius, et consilium pacis erit inter illos duos.","והוא יבנה את היכל יהוה והוא ישא הוד וישב ומשל על כסאו והיה כהן על כסאו ועצת שלום תהיה בין שניהם׃"],["45","6","14","그 왕관은 헬다이, 토비야, 여다야, 스바니야의 아들 요시야를 기념하여 주님의 성전에 두어라.”","그 면류관은 야훼의 성전에 보관해 두어 헬대, 토비아, 여다야, 스바니야의 아들 여호수아의 갸륵한 뜻을 기념하도록 하여라.'\"","그 면류관은 헬렘과 도비야와 여다야와 스바냐의 아들 헨을 기념하기 위하여 여호와의 전 안에 두라 하시니라","그 면류관은 헬렘과 도비야와 여다야와 스바냐의 아들 헨을 기념하기 위하여 여호와의 전 안에 두라 하시니라","왕관은 헬렘과 도비야와 여다야를 기념하고 손님을 후대하는 스바냐의 아들 ㄹ) 요시아의 친절을 기리도록 여호와의 성전에 보관해 두어라.\" (ㄹ. 원문은 \"헨\")","The other crown will be in the temple of the LORD as a gracious reminder to Heldai, Tobijah, Jedaiah, and the son of Zephaniah.","And the crowns shall be to Helem, and to Tobijah, and to Jedaiah, and to Hen the son of Zephaniah, for a memorial in the temple of the LORD.","The crown will be given to Heldai, Tobijah, Jedaiah and Hen son of Zephaniah as a memorial in the temple of the LORD.","Et corona erit Helem et Thobiae et Iedaiae et Hen filio Sophoniae memoriale in templo Domini.","והעטרת תהיה לחלם ולטוביה ולידעיה ולחן בן צפניה לזכרון בהיכל יהוה׃"],["45","6","15","또한 먼 곳에 사는 사람들이 와서, 주님의 성전을 함께 지을 것이다. 그러면 너희는 만군의 주님께서 나를 너희에게 보내셨음을 알게 될 것이다. 너희가 주 너희 하느님의 말씀을 잘 들으면 이 일이 이루어질 것이다.","먼 데서 온 사람들이 야훼의 성전을 세울 것이다. 그제야 너희는 나를 보내신 이가 만군의 야훼이심을 알리라. 그러나 야훼의 말씀을 잘 듣지 않으면 일은 이루어지지 않을 것이다.","먼 데 사람들이 와서 여호와의 전을 건축하리니 만군의 여호와께서 나를 너희에게 보내신 줄을 너희가 알리라 너희가 만일 너희의 하나님 여호와의 말씀을 들을진대 이같이 되리라","먼데 사람이 와서 여호와의 전을 건축하리니 만군의 여호와께서 나를 너희에게 보내신줄을 너희가 알리라 너희가 만일 너희 하나님 여호와의 말씀을 청종할진대 이같이 되리라","ㄱ) 그래서 저 먼 곳에 사는 사람들이 와서 여호와의 성전 건축에 가담할 것입니다.\" 그때에는 온 세상의 주인이신 여호와께서 나를 너희에게 보내셨다는 것을 너희가 깨달을 것이다. 그러나 너희가 실제로 너희의 하나님이신 여호와의 음성을 듣고 실행할 때에는 내게 보여주신 그런 일이 이루어질 것이다. (ㄱ. 문맥상 8절 뒤로 옮겼다)","And they who are from afar will come and build the temple of the LORD, and you will know that the LORD of hosts has sent me to you. This will happen if you truly obey the LORD your God.","And they that are far off shall come and build in the temple of the LORD, and ye shall know that the LORD of hosts hath sent me unto you. And this shall come to pass, if ye will diligently obey the voice of the LORD your God.","Those who are far away will come and help to build the temple of the LORD, and you will know that the LORD Almighty has sent me to you. This will happen if you diligently obey the LORD your God.\"","Et qui procul sunt, venient et aedificabunt in templo Domini; et scietis quia Dominus exercituum misit me ad vos. Erit autem hoc, si oboedieritis voci Domini Dei vestri” “.","ורחוקים יבאו ובנו בהיכל יהוה וידעתם כי יהוה צבאות שלחני אליכם והיה אם שמוע תשמעון בקול יהוה אלהיכם׃"],["45","7","1","다리우스 임금 제사년 아홉째 달 곧 키슬레우 달 초나흗날, 주님의 말씀이 즈카르야에게 내렸다.","다리우스 왕 제사년, 기슬레우월, 곧 구월 사일, 야훼의 말씀이 즈가리야에게 내렸다.","다리오 왕 제사년 아홉째 달 곧 기슬래월 사일에 여호와의 말씀이 스가랴에게 임하니라","다리오왕 사년 구월 곧 기슬래월 사일에 여호와의 말씀이 스가랴에게 임하니라","ㅁ) 다리오왕 4년, \"기슬래\"라고 부르는 달 9월 4일에 주께서 다시 스가랴에게 말씀하셨다. (ㅁ. BC 518년 12월 7일)","In the fourth year of Darius the king, the word of the LORD came to Zechariah, on the fourth day of the ninth month, Kislev.","And it came to pass in the fourth year of king Darius, that the word of the LORD came unto Zechariah in the fourth day of the ninth month, even in Chisleu;","In the fourth year of King Darius, the word of the LORD came to Zechariah on the fourth day of the ninth month, the month of Kislev.","Et factum est in anno quarto Darii regis, factum est verbum Domini ad Zachariam in quarta mensis noni, qui est Casleu.","ויהי בשנת ארבע לדריוש המלך היה דבר יהוה אל זכריה בארבעה לחדש התשעי בכסלו׃"],["45","7","2","베텔 사르에체르가 레겜 멜렉과 그의 부하들과 함께 주님께 은총을 간청하려고 사람들을 보내어,","베델사레셀이라는 사람이 레겜멜렉에게 부하를 딸려 야훼께 보내어 자비를 빌며,","그 때에 벧엘 사람이 사레셀과 레겜멜렉과 그의 부하들을 보내어 여호와께 은혜를 구하고","때에 벧엘 사람이 사레셀과 레겜멜렉과 그 종자를 보내어 여호와께 은혜를 구하고","이때에 벧엘 주민들은 사레셀, 곧 왕의 최고 행정관 역할을 하는 사람에게 수행원들을 딸려서 예루살렘으로 보냈다. 그들은 여호와의 호감을 사도록 선물을 준비해 주면서","Bethelsarezer sent Regem-melech and his men to implore the favor of the LORD","When they had sent unto the house of God Sherezer and Regemmelech, and their men, to pray before the LORD,","The people of Bethel had sent Sharezer and Regem-Melech, together with their men, to entreat the LORD","Et Bethel miserat Sarasar et Regemmelech et viros, qui erant cum eo, ad deprecandam faciem Domini,","וישלח בית אל שר אצר ורגם מלך ואנשיו לחלות את פני יהוה׃"],["45","7","3","만군의 주님의 집에 있는 사제들과 예언자들에게 물어 왔다. “내가 지금까지 여러 해 동안 해 온 대로, 다섯째 달에 애도하며 단식해야 합니까?”","만군의 야훼의 성전에 있는 사제들과 예언자들에게 문의하였다. \"이제까지 여러 해 동안 오월이 되면 나는 단식하며 곡했는데, 앞으로도 그대로 해야 하겠습니까?\"","만군의 여호와의 전에 있는 제사장들과 선지자들에게 물어 이르되 내가 여러 해 동안 행한 대로 오월 중에 울며 근신하리이까 하매","만군의 여호와의 전에 있는 제사장들과 선지자들에게 물어 가로되 우리가 여러 해 동안에 행한대로 오월간에 울며 재계하리이까 하매","온 세상의 주인이신 여호와의 성전에 있는 제사장들과 예루살렘에서 만날 수 있는 예언자들에게 다음과 같은 것을 묻도록 하였다. \"우리가 이미 그토록 여러 해 동안 금식하며 슬퍼하는 절기를 지켰던 것처럼 앞으로도 5월이 오면 그 행사를 계속해야 옳겠습니까?\"","and to ask the priests of the house of the LORD of hosts, and the prophets, “Must I weep and abstain in the fifth month as I have been doing these many years?”","And to speak unto the priests which were in the house of the LORD of hosts, and to the prophets, saying, Should I weep in the fifth month, separating myself, as I have done these so many years?","by asking the priests of the house of the LORD Almighty and the prophets, \"Should I mourn and fast in the fifth month, as I have done for so many years?\"","ut dicerent sacerdotibus domus Domini exercituum et prophetis loquentes:  “Numquid flendum est mihi in quinto mense vel ieiunandum, sicut iam feci multis annis? “.","לאמר אל הכהנים אשר לבית יהוה צבאות ואל הנביאים לאמר האבכה בחדש החמשי הנזר כאשר עשיתי זה כמה שנים׃"],["45","7","4","그때에 만군의 주님의 말씀이 나에게 내렸다.","그 때 만군의 야훼께서 나에게 말씀을 내리셨다.","만군의 여호와의 말씀이 내게 임하여 이르시되","만군의 여호와의 말씀이 내게 임하여 이르시되","이때에 온 세상의 주인이신 여호와께서 내게 이같이 말씀하셨다.","Then the word of the LORD of hosts came to me:","Then came the word of the LORD of hosts unto me, saying,","Then the word of the LORD Almighty came to me:","Et factum est verbum Domini exercituum ad me dicens:","ויהי דבר יהוה צבאות אלי לאמר׃"],["45","7","5","“너는 이 땅의 온 백성과 사제들에게 이렇게 말하여라. ‘너희가 지난 일흔 해 동안 다섯째 달과 일곱째 달에 단식하며 슬퍼할 때 참으로 나를 위하여 단식하였단 말이냐?","\"이 나라 온 백성과 사제들에게 일러라. '너희가 과거 칠십 년간이나 오월과 칠월이면 단식하고 곡해 왔다만, 언제 나를 생각하고 단식했더냐?","온 땅의 백성과 제사장들에게 이르라 너희가 칠십 년 동안 다섯째 달과 일곱째 달에 금식하고 애통하였거니와 그 금식이 나를 위하여, 나를 위하여 한 것이냐","온 땅의 백성과 제사장들에게 이르라 너희가 칠십년 동안 오월과 칠월에 금식하고 애통하였거니와 그 금식이 나를 위하여, 나를 위하여 한 것이냐","\"이 땅의 모든 백성과 제사장들에게 이같이 전하여라. 너희가 이미 70년 동안 ㄱ) 5월과 7월에 금식하며 슬퍼하는 절기를 지켜 왔는데, 너희는 그것이 바로 나를 위한 금식이었다고 생각하느냐? (ㄱ. BC 587년 예루살렘이 멸망하던 해의 5월 9일 성전 파괴일과, 7월 3일 그달랴 총독 암살일을 슬퍼한 날이다)","Say to all the people of the land and to the priests: When you fasted and lamented in the fifth and in the seventh month these seventy years, was it really for me that you fasted?","Speak unto all the people of the land, and to the priests, saying, When ye fasted and mourned in the fifth and seventh month, even those seventy years, did ye at all fast unto me, even to me?","\"Ask all the people of the land and the priests, 'When you fasted and mourned in the fifth and seventh months for the past seventy years, was it really for me that you fasted?"," “Loquere ad omnem populum terrae et ad sacerdotes dicens: Cum ieiunaretis et plangeretis in quinto et septimo mense per hos septuaginta annos, numquid revera ieiunastis mihi?","אמר אל כל עם הארץ ואל הכהנים לאמר כי צמתם וספוד בחמישי ובשביעי וזה שבעים שנה הצום צמתני אני׃"],["45","7","6","너희가 먹고 마실 때에도 자신을 위하여 먹고 마신 것이 아니냐?’","내 앞에서 먹고 마실 적에도 너희끼리만 먹고 마시지 아니하였느냐?","너희가 먹고 마실 때에 그것은 너희를 위하여 먹고 너희를 위하여 마시는 것이 아니냐","너희의 먹으며 마심이 전혀 자기를 위하여 먹으며 자기를 위하여 마심이 아니냐","너희들이 떡을 먹고 물을 마시는 것도, 바로 너희 자신을 위한 것이 아니냐?","When you were eating and drinking, was it not for yourselves that you ate and for yourselves that you drank?","And when ye did eat, and when ye did drink, did not ye eat for yourselves, and drink for yourselves?","And when you were eating and drinking, were you not just feasting for yourselves?","Et cum comedistis et bibistis, numquid non vobis comedistis et vobismetipsis bibistis?","וכי תאכלו וכי תשתו הלוא אתם האכלים ואתם השתים׃"],["45","7","7","이는 예루살렘과 그 주변 성읍들에서 사람들이 편안히 살고 있을 때, 그리고 네겝과 평원 지대에도 사람들이 살고 있을 때, 주님이 이전의 예언자들을 통하여 선언한 말씀이 아니냐?”","나 야훼가 일찍이 예언자를 시켜 이런 말을 하지 않았느냐? 그 때에는 예루살렘에서 사람들이 마음놓고 살았고, 주위 성읍들과 남쪽 지방, 야산 지대에도 사람이 살고 있었다.'\"","예루살렘과 사면 성읍에 백성이 평온히 거주하며 남방과 평원에 사람이 거주할 때에 여호와가 옛 선지자들을 통하여 외친 말씀이 있지 않으냐 하시니라","여호와가 이전 선지자로 외친 말을 너희가 청종할 것이 아니냐 그 때에는 예루살렘과 1)사면 읍에 백성이 거하여 형통하였고 남방과 평원에도 사람이 거하였었느니라스펠라","오래전, 예루살렘이 아직 파괴되기 전, 유다 나라의 모든 성읍들과 남쪽의 초원지대와 서쪽의 야산 지대에 사람들이 살고 있던 때에, 내가 그 당시의 예언자들을 시켜서 이같은 말씀을 선포한 것을 너희가 알지 못하느냐?\"","Are these not the words which the LORD proclaimed through the earlier prophets, when Jerusalem and its surrounding cities were inhabited and secure, when the Negeb and the Shephelah were inhabited?","Should ye not hear the words which the LORD hath cried by the former prophets, when Jerusalem was inhabited and in prosperity, and the cities thereof round about her, when men inhabited the south and the plain?","Are these not the words the LORD proclaimed through the earlier prophets when Jerusalem and its surrounding towns were at rest and prosperous, and the Negev and the western foothills were settled?'\"","Numquid non sunt verba, quae locutus est Dominus in manu prophetarum priorum, cum adhuc Ierusalem habitaretur et esset opulenta, ipsa et urbes in circuitu eius, et Nageb habitaretur simul cum Sephela? “.","הלוא את הדברים אשר קרא יהוה ביד הנביאים הראשנים בהיות ירושלם ישבת ושלוה ועריה סביבתיה והנגב והשפלה ישב׃"],["45","7","8","주님의 말씀이 즈카르야에게 내렸다.","1)야훼의 말씀이 즈가리야에게 내렸다. 7)……8) 부분은 권위 있는 칠십인역 사본에 빠져 있다.","여호와의 말씀이 스가랴에게 임하여 이르시되","여호와의 말씀이 스가랴에게 임하여 이르시되","이때에 주께서 스가랴에게 이같이 말씀하셨다. \"공정한 재판을 하여라! 동족을 서로 아끼고 키워 주어라!","The word of the LORD came to Zechariah:","And the word of the LORD came unto Zechariah, saying,","And the word of the LORD came again to Zechariah:","Et factum est verbum Domini ad Zachariam dicens:","ויהי דבר יהוה אל זכריה לאמר׃"],["45","7","9","“만군의 주님이 이렇게 말한다. ‘너희는 진실한 재판을 하여라. 서로 자애와 동정을 베풀어라.","\"나 만군의 야훼가 말한다. 2)너희는 사실대로 공정한 재판을 하여라. 동족끼리 서로 신의를 지키며 열렬히 사랑하여라. 7)……8) 부분은 권위 있는 칠십인역 사본에 빠져 있다.","만군의 여호와가 이같이 말하여 이르시기를 너희는 진실한 재판을 행하며 서로 인애와 긍휼을 베풀며","만군의 여호와가 이미 말하여 이르기를 너희는 진실한 재판을 행하며 피차에 인애와 긍휼을 베풀며","(8절에 포함되어 있음)","Thus says the LORD of hosts: Judge with true justice, and show kindness and compassion toward each other.","Thus speaketh the LORD of hosts, saying, Execute true judgment, and shew mercy and compassions every man to his brother:","\"This is what the LORD Almighty says: 'Administer true justice; show mercy and compassion to one another."," “Haec ait Dominus exercituum dicens: Iudicium verum iudicate et misericordiam et miserationes facite unusquisque cum fratre suo;","כה אמר יהוה צבאות לאמר משפט אמת שפטו וחסד ורחמים עשו איש את אחיו׃"],["45","7","10","과부와 고아 이방인과 가난한 이를 억누르지 마라. 서로 남을 해치려고 마음속으로 궁리하지 마라.’”","과부와 고아, 더부살이와 영세민을 억누르지 말고 동족끼리 해칠 마음을 품지 마라.\"","과부와 고아와 나그네와 궁핍한 자를 압제하지 말며 서로 해하려고 마음에 도모하지 말라 하였으나","과부와 고아와 나그네와 궁핍한 자를 압제하지 말며 남을 해하려하여 심중에 도모하지 말라 하였으나","과부와 고아들, 고용살이를 하는 사람들과 가난한 사람들을 억압하지 말아라! 동족끼리 서로 해칠 궁리를 하지 말아라!\"","Do not oppress the widow or the orphan, the resident alien or the poor; do not plot evil against one another in your hearts.","And oppress not the widow, nor the fatherless, the stranger, nor the poor; and let none of you imagine evil against his brother in your heart.","Do not oppress the widow or the fatherless, the alien or the poor. In your hearts do not think evil of each other.'","et viduam et pupillum et advenam et pauperem nolite calumniari, et malum unusquisque contra fratrem suum nolite cogitare in corde vestro.","ואלמנה ויתום גר ועני אל תעשקו ורעת איש אחיו אל תחשבו בלבבכם׃"],["45","7","11","그러나 그들은 들으려 하지 않고 등을 돌렸으며, 듣지 않으려고 귀를 막았다.","이렇게 일러주셨는데도 사람들은 귀담아듣기는커녕 오히려 외면한 채 귀를 막았다.","그들이 듣기를 싫어하여 등을 돌리며 듣지 아니하려고 귀를 막으며","그들이 청종하기를 싫어하여 2)등으로 향하며 듣지 아니하려고 귀를 막으며 굳은 어깨로 향하며","그런데도 너희 조상들은 이 말씀을 듣지 않고 거절하였다. 그들은 거역하는 자세로 등을 돌리고, 그 말씀이 듣기 싫어서 손가락으로 귀를 막은 자들이다.","But they refused to listen; they stubbornly turned their backs and stopped their ears so as not to hear.","But they refused to hearken, and pulled away the shoulder, and stopped their ears, that they should not hear.","\"But they refused to pay attention; stubbornly they turned their backs and stopped up their ears.","Et noluerunt attendere; et opposuerunt dorsum rebelle et aures suas aggravaverunt, ne audirent.","וימאנו להקשיב ויתנו כתף סררת ואזניהם הכבידו משמוע׃"],["45","7","12","그들은 만군의 주님께서 당신의 영으로 이전의 예언자들을 통하여 자기들에게 보내신 율법과 말씀을 듣지 않으려고, 마음을 금강석처럼 굳게 만들었다. 그리하여 만군의 주님에게서 커다란 분노가 내렸다.","마음이 차돌처럼 굳어져 만군의 야훼께서 일찍이 당신의 영을 부어주시며 예언자들을 시켜 내리신 법과 교훈을 듣지 않았다. 그리하여 만군의 야훼께서 크게 노하셨다.","그 마음을 금강석 같게 하여 율법과 만군의 여호와가 그의 영으로 옛 선지자들을 통하여 전한 말을 듣지 아니하므로 큰 진노가 만군의 여호와께로부터 나왔도다","그 마음을 금강석 같게 하여 율법과 만군의 여호와가 신으로 이전 선지자를 빙자하여 전한 말을 듣지 아니하므로 큰 노가 나 만군의 여호와께로서 나왔도다","온 세상의 주인이신 여호와께서 그 당시의 예언자들을 시켜서 너희의 조상들에게 자신의 영으로써 들려 주신 그 교훈과 경고가 듣기 싫어서 그들은 차돌같이 굳은 마음이 되어 있었다. 그래서 온 세상의 주인이신 여호와께서 그토록 무서운 진노를 그들에게 내리셨던 것이다.","And they made their hearts as hard as diamond so as not to hear the instruction and the words that the LORD of hosts had sent by his spirit through the earlier prophets. So great anger came from the LORD of hosts:","Yea, they made their hearts as an adamant stone, lest they should hear the law, and the words which the LORD of hosts hath sent in his spirit by the former prophets: therefore came a great wrath from the LORD of hosts.","They made their hearts as hard as flint and would not listen to the law or to the words that the LORD Almighty had sent by his Spirit through the earlier prophets. So the LORD Almighty was very angry.","Et cor suum posuerunt adamantem, ne audirent legem et verba, quae misit Dominus exercituum in spiritu suo per manum prophetarum priorum, et facta est indignatio magna a Domino exercituum.","ולבם שמו שמיר משמוע את התורה ואת הדברים אשר שלח יהוה צבאות ברוחו ביד הנביאים הראשנים ויהי קצף גדול מאת יהוה צבאות׃"],["45","7","13","만군의 주님께서 말씀하셨다. “내가 부를 때에 그들이 듣지 않은 것처럼, 그들이 부를 때에 나도 듣지 않겠다.","만군의 야훼께서는 당신께서 아무리 부르셔도 사람들이 듣지 않으므로 당신께서도 사람들이 부르짖을 때 듣지 아니하시리라고 말씀하셨다.","내가 불러도 그들이 듣지 아니한 것처럼 그들이 불러도 내가 듣지 아니하리라 만군의 여호와가 말하였느니라","만군의 여호와가 말하였었노라 내가 불러도 그들이 듣지 아니하였은즉 그들이 불러도 내가 듣지 아니하고","그렇기 때문에 온 세상의 주인이신 여호와께서 이같이 말씀하셨다. \"내가 불러도 그들이 듣지 않았던 것과 같이, 이제는 그들이 아무리 불러도 내가 들어 주지 않겠다.","Just as when I called out and they did not listen, so they will call out and I will not listen, says the LORD of hosts.","Therefore it is come to pass, that as he cried, and they would not hear; so they cried, and I would not hear, saith the LORD of hosts:","\"'When I called, they did not listen; so when they called, I would not listen,' says the LORD Almighty.","Et factum est, sicut cum clamaret, et ipsi non audierunt, sic clamabunt, et non exaudiam, dicit Dominus exercituum.","ויהי כאשר קרא ולא שמעו כן יקראו ולא אשמע אמר יהוה צבאות׃"],["45","7","14","나는 그들도 모르는 그 모든 민족들 가운데로 그들을 날려 버렸다. 그들이 떠난 이 땅은 오가는 사람 하나도 없이 황폐하게 되었다. 그들이 이 탐스러운 땅을 폐허로 만들어 버린 것이다.”","그리고 사람들을 흩뜨리시어 낯선 민족들 가운데 끼여 살게 하셨다. 그들이 다 흩어진 다음, 이 나라는 오가는 사람도 없이 황폐해졌고 기름진 땅은 거친 쑥밭이 되고 말았다.","내가 그들을 바람으로 불어 알지 못하던 여러 나라에 흩었느니라 그 후에 이 땅이 황폐하여 오고 가는 사람이 없었나니 이는 그들이 아름다운 땅을 황폐하게 하였음이니라 하시니라","회리바람으로 그들을 그 알지 못하던 모든 열국에 헤치리라 한 후로 이 땅이 황무하여 왕래하는 사람이 없었나니 이는 그들이 아름다운 땅으로 황무하게 하였음이니라 하시니라","나는 오히려 광풍이 되어 그들을 흩어 멀고먼 타국에 들어가 살도록 하고, 그들이 떠나간 고향땅을 황폐케 하여 오가는 사람도 없게 하겠다. 그 아름답던 땅을 황무지로 만든 것은 바로 너희들 자신이다\"","And I will scatter them among all the nations that they do not know. So the land was left desolate behind them with no one moving about, and they made a pleasant land into a wasteland.","But I scattered them with a whirlwind among all the nations whom they knew not. Thus the land was desolate after them, that no man passed through nor returned: for they laid the pleasant land desolate.","'I scattered them with a whirlwind among all the nations, where they were strangers. The land was left so desolate behind them that no one could come or go. This is how they made the pleasant land desolate.'\"","Et disperdam eos per omnes gentes, quas nesciunt; et terra desolata est post eos, ita ut non esset transiens et revertens. Et posuerunt terram desiderabilem in desertum “.","ואסערם על כל הגוים אשר לא ידעום והארץ נשמה אחריהם מעבר ומשב וישימו ארץ חמדה לשמה׃"],["45","8","1",null,"만군의 야훼께서 나에게 말씀을 내리셨다.","만군의 여호와의 말씀이 임하여 이르시되","만군의 여호와의 말씀이 임하여 이르시되","온 세상의 주인이신 여호와께서 내게 다시 다음과 같이 말씀하셨다.","Then the word of the LORD of hosts came:","Again the word of the LORD of hosts came to me, saying,","Again the word of the LORD Almighty came to me.","Et factum est verbum Domini exercituum dicens:","ויהי דבר יהוה צבאות לאמר׃"],["45","8","2",null,"\"나 만군의 야훼가 말한다. 시온을 생각만 해도 역겨워지는구나. 속이 화끈거리며 타오른다.","만군의 여호와가 이같이 말하노라 내가 시온을 위하여 크게 질투하며 그를 위하여 크게 분노함으로 질투하노라","만군의 여호와가 말하노라 내가 시온을 위하여 크게 질투하며 그를 위하여 크게 분노함으로 질투하노라","온 세상의 주인이신 여호와께서 이렇게 말씀하셨다. \"나는 시온을 생각만 해도 질투가 나서 속이 터진다. 원수들이 예루살렘에 한 짓들을 생각하면 맹렬한 분노가 폭발한다.\"","Thus says the LORD of hosts: I am intensely jealous for Zion, stirred to jealous wrath for her.","Thus saith the LORD of hosts; I was jealous for Zion with great jealousy, and I was jealous for her with great fury.","This is what the LORD Almighty says: \"I am very jealous for Zion; I am burning with jealousy for her.\""," “Haec dicit Dominus exercituum: Zelatus sum Sion zelo magno et ardore magno zelatus sum eam.","כה אמר יהוה צבאות קנאתי לציון קנאה גדולה וחמה גדולה קנאתי לה׃"],["45","8","3",null,"나 만군의 야훼가 말한다. 내가 시온으로 돌아가 예루살렘 안에서 살리라. 그리되면 예루살렘은 미쁜 도읍이라 불리고, 만군의 야훼의 산, 거룩한 산이라고 불리리라.","여호와가 이같이 말하노라 내가 시온에 돌아와 예루살렘 가운데에 거하리니 예루살렘은 진리의 성읍이라 일컫겠고 만군의 여호와의 산은 성산이라 일컫게 되리라","나 여호와가 말하노라 내가 시온에 돌아왔은즉 예루살렘 가운데 거하리니 예루살렘은 진리의 성읍이라 일컫겠고 만군의 여호와의 산은 성산이라 일컫게 되리라","여호와께서 이렇게 말씀하셨다. \"내가 이제 시온으로 돌아가겠다. 내가 예루살렘 성안에서 살겠다. 그때에는 예루살렘이 진실한 도성이라고 불리며, 내가 온 세상의 주인으로 거주하는 시온산은 거룩한 산이라고 불릴 것이다\"","Thus says the LORD: I have returned to Zion, and I will dwell within Jerusalem; Jerusalem will be called the faithful city, and the mountain of the LORD of hosts, the holy mountain.","Thus saith the LORD; I am returned unto Zion, and will dwell in the midst of Jerusalem: and Jerusalem shall be called a city of truth; and the mountain of the LORD of hosts the holy mountain.","This is what the LORD says: \"I will return to Zion and dwell in Jerusalem. Then Jerusalem will be called the City of Truth, and the mountain of the LORD Almighty will be called the Holy Mountain.\"","Haec dicit Dominus: Reversus sum ad Sion et habitabo in medio Ierusalem; et vocabitur Ierusalem civitas Veritatis, et mons Domini exercituum mons Sanctitatis.","כה אמר יהוה שבתי אל ציון ושכנתי בתוך ירושלם ונקראה ירושלם עיר האמת והר יהוה צבאות הר הקדש׃"],["45","8","4",null,"나 만군의 야훼가 말한다. 수도 예루살렘 장터마다 할아버지 할머니들이 지팡이를 짚고 모여와 앉아 쉬는 모습이 다시 보이고,","만군의 여호와가 이같이 말하노라 예루살렘 길거리에 늙은 남자들과 늙은 여자들이 다시 앉을 것이라 다 나이가 많으므로 저마다 손에 지팡이를 잡을 것이요","만군의 여호와가 말하노라 예루살렘 길거리에 늙은 지아비와 늙은 지어미가 다시 앉을 것이라 다 나이 많으므로 각기 손에 지팡이를 잡을 것이요","온 세상의 주인이신 여호와께서 이렇게 말씀하셨다. \"예루살렘은 끝없는 번영과 평화의 시대를 맞이하여 백발 노인들이 다시 지팡이를 짚고 길거리에 돌아다니며","Thus says the LORD of hosts: Old men and old women will again sit in the streets of Jerusalem, each with staff in hand because of old age.","Thus saith the LORD of hosts; There shall yet old men and old women dwell in the streets of Jerusalem, and every man with his staff in his hand for very age.","This is what the LORD Almighty says: \"Once again men and women of ripe old age will sit in the streets of Jerusalem, each with cane in hand because of his age.","Haec dicit Dominus exercituum: Adhuc sedebunt senes et anus in plateis Ierusalem et unusquisque cum baculo suo in manu sua prae multitudine dierum;","כה אמר יהוה צבאות עד ישבו זקנים וזקנות ברחבות ירושלם ואיש משענתו בידו מרב ימים׃"],["45","8","5",null,"이 도읍 장터마다 사내아이 계집아이들이 우글거리며 뛰놀게 되리라.","그 성읍 거리에 소년과 소녀들이 가득하여 거기에서 뛰놀리라","그 성읍 거리에 동남과 동녀가 가득하여 거기서 장난하리라","거리마다 뛰노는 어린아이들로 가득 찰 것이다.\"","The city will be filled with boys and girls playing in its streets.","And the streets of the city shall be full of boys and girls playing in the streets thereof.","The city streets will be filled with boys and girls playing there.\"","et plateae civitatis complebuntur pueris et puellis ludentibus in plateis eius.","ורחבות העיר ימלאו ילדים וילדות משחקים ברחבתיה׃"],["45","8","6",null,"나 만군의 야훼가 말한다. 그 날이 오면 이런 일이 살아 남은 이 백성의 눈에도 신기하겠지만, 내 눈에도 신기하리라. 만군의 야훼가 이르는 말이다.","만군의 여호와가 이같이 말하노라 이 일이 그 날에 남은 백성의 눈에는 기이하려니와 내 눈에야 어찌 기이하겠느냐 만군의 여호와의 말이니라","만군의 여호와가 말하노라 이 일이 그 날에 남은 백성의 눈에는 기이하려니와 내 눈에 어찌 기이하겠느냐 만군의 여호와의 말이니라","온 세상의 주인이신 여호와께서 이와같이 말씀하셨다. \"지금 실의에 빠져 있는 소수의 남은 자들에게는 이런 일이 믿어지지 않겠지만 너희는 온 세상의 주인인 내게 그런 일이 불가능할 것으로 생각하느냐?\"","Thus says the LORD of hosts: Even if this should seem impossible in the eyes of the remnant of this people in those days, should it seem impossible in my eyes also?—oracle of the LORD of hosts.","Thus saith the LORD of hosts; If it be marvellous in the eyes of the remnant of this people in these days, should it also be marvellous in mine eyes? saith the LORD of hosts.","This is what the LORD Almighty says: \"It may seem marvelous to the remnant of this people at that time, but will it seem marvelous to me?\" declares the LORD Almighty.","Haec dicit Dominus exercituum: Si videbitur difficile in oculis reliquiarum populi huius in diebus illis, numquid etiam in oculis meis difficile erit?, dicit Dominus exercituum.","כה אמר יהוה צבאות כי יפלא בעיני שארית העם הזה בימים ההם גם בעיני יפלא נאם יהוה צבאות׃"],["45","8","7",null,"나 만군의 야훼가 말한다. 이제 나는 나의 백성을 해뜨는 곳과 해지는 곳에서 건져내어","만군의 여호와가 이같이 말하노라 보라, 내가 내 백성을 해가 뜨는 땅과 해가 지는 땅에서부터 구원하여 내고","만군의 여호와가 말하노라 내가 내 백성을 동방에서부터, 서방에서부터 구원하여 내고","온 세상의 주인이신 여호와께서 이렇게 말씀하셨다. \"보아라, 내가 해 뜨는 곳에서부터 해 지는 곳에 이르기까지 온 세상에서 내 백성을 해방시켜서","Thus says the LORD of hosts: I am going to rescue my people from the land of the rising sun, and from the land of the setting sun.","Thus saith the LORD of hosts; Behold, I will save my people from the east country, and from the west country;","This is what the LORD Almighty says: \"I will save my people from the countries of the east and the west.","Haec dicit Dominus exercituum: Ecce ego salvabo populum meum de terra orientis et de terra occasus solis:","כה אמר יהוה צבאות הנני מושיע את עמי מארץ מזרח ומארץ מבוא השמש׃"],["45","8","8",null,"예루살렘으로 데려다가 살게 하리라. 그들은 다시 내 백성이 되고 나는 신실과 정의로 그들의 하느님이 되리라.","인도하여다가 예루살렘 가운데에 거주하게 하리니 그들은 내 백성이 되고 나는 진리와 공의로 그들의 하나님이 되리라","인도하여다가 예루살렘 가운데 거하게 하리니 그들은 내 백성이 되고 나는 성실과 정의로 그들의 하나님이 되리라","그들을 모두 고향 땅으로 데려다가 예루살렘에서 다시 안전하게 살도록 하겠다. 그때에는 그들이 내 백성이 되고, 나는 변함없이 진실하고 의로운 관계로 그들의 하나님이 될 것이다.\"","I will bring them back to dwell within Jerusalem. They will be my people, and I will be their God, in faithfulness and justice.","And I will bring them, and they shall dwell in the midst of Jerusalem: and they shall be my people, and I will be their God, in truth and in righteousness.","I will bring them back to live in Jerusalem; they will be my people, and I will be faithful and righteous to them as their God.\"","et adducam eos, et habitabunt in medio Ierusalem; et erunt mihi in populum, et ego ero eis in Deum in veritate et iustitia.","והבאתי אתם ושכנו בתוך ירושלם והיו לי לעם ואני אהיה להם לאלהים באמת ובצדקה׃"],["45","8","9",null,"나 만군의 야훼가 말한다. 만군의 야훼의 성전을 다시 세우려고 주춧돌을 놓는 이 날, 예언자들의 입으로 이 말을 직접 듣는 사람들아, 힘을 내어라.","만군의 여호와가 이같이 말하노라 만군의 여호와의 집 곧 성전을 건축하려고 그 지대를 쌓던 날에 있었던 선지자들의 입의 말을 이 날에 듣는 너희는 손을 견고히 할지어다","만군의 여호와가 말하노라 만군의 여호와의 집 곧 전을 건축하려고 그 지대를 쌓던 날에 일어난 선지자들의 입의 말을 이 때에 듣는 너희는 손을 견고히 할지어다","온 세상의 주인이신 여호와께서 이렇게 말씀하셨다. \"온 세상의 주인이신 분의 성전을 지으려고 주춧돌을 놓던 그날, 예언자들에게서 이런 말씀을 직접 들었던 사람들아, 힘을 내어 성전 공사를 완성하여라!","Thus says the LORD of hosts: Let your hands be strong, you who now hear these words which were spoken by the prophets when the foundation of the house of the LORD of hosts was laid for the building of the temple.","Thus saith the LORD of hosts; Let your hands be strong, ye that hear in these days these words by the mouth of the prophets, which were in the day that the foundation of the house of the LORD of hosts was laid, that the temple might be built.","This is what the LORD Almighty says: \"You who now hear these words spoken by the prophets who were there when the foundation was laid for the house of the LORD Almighty, let your hands be strong so that the temple may be built.","Haec dicit Dominus exercituum: Confortentur manus vestrae, qui auditis in his diebus sermones istos per os prophetarum in die, qua fundata est domus Domini exercituum, ut templum aedificaretur.","כה אמר יהוה צבאות תחזקנה ידיכם השמעים בימים האלה את הדברים האלה מפי הנביאים אשר ביום יסד בית יהוה צבאות ההיכל להבנות׃"],["45","8","10",null,"전에는 일을 하고도 품값을 못 받았고, 원수들 등쌀에 마음놓고 드나들 수도 없었다. 그 때 나는 너희끼리 서로 잡아먹는 것을 내버려두었지만,","이 날 전에는 사람도 삯을 얻지 못하였고 짐승도 삯을 받지 못하였으며 사람이 원수로 말미암아 평안히 출입하지 못하였으니 내가 모든 사람을 풀어 서로 치게 하였느니라","그 날 전에는 사람도 삯을 얻지 못하였고 짐승도 삯을 받지 못하였으며 사람이 대적을 인하여 출입에 평안치 못하였었나니 이는 내가 뭇 사람으로 서로 치게 하였음이어니와","그때에 나는 예언자들을 시켜서 너희에게 이런 말을 하였다. 이제까지는 너희의 모든 수고가 허사였다. 너희가 아무리 일을 하여도 품삯을 전혀 받지 못하였고, 너희의 가축들도 전혀 벌어들인 것이 없었다. 그때에는 범죄가 들끓고 있었기 때문에, 도성 밖으로 나가는 사람은 다시 안전하게 되돌아올 수 있을지 아무런 보장이 없었다. 그때에는 내가 동족끼리 서로 잡아먹도록 분쟁을 일으켜 놓았었다.","For before those days, there were no wages for people, nor hire for animals. Those who came and went were not safe from the enemy, for I set neighbor against neighbor.","For before these days there was no hire for man, nor any hire for beast; neither was there any peace to him that went out or came in because of the affliction: for I set all men every one against his neighbour.","Before that time there were no wages for man or beast. No one could go about his business safely because of his enemy, for I had turned every man against his neighbor.","Siquidem ante dies istos merces hominis non erat, nec merces iumenti erat, neque introeunti neque exeunti erat pax prae tribulatione; et dimisi omnes homines, unumquemque contra proximum suum.","כי לפני הימים ההם שכר האדם לא נהיה ושכר הבהמה איננה וליוצא ולבא אין שלום מן הצר ואשלח את כל האדם איש ברעהו׃"],["45","8","11",null,"이제는 살아 남은 이 백성을 예전처럼 다루지 아니하리라. 만군의 야훼가 이르는 말이다.","만군의 여호와의 말씀이니라 이제는 내가 이 남은 백성을 대하기를 옛날과 같이 아니할 것인즉","만군의 여호와가 말하노니 이제는 내가 이 남은 백성을 대하기를 전일과 같이 아니할 것인즉","그러나 이제는 내가 살아남은 이 백성에게 완전히 다르게 대해 주겠다!\" 온 세상의 주인이신 여호와께서 하신 말씀이다.","But now I will not deal with the remnant of this people as in former days—oracle of the LORD of hosts.","But now I will not be unto the residue of this people as in the former days, saith the LORD of hosts.","But now I will not deal with the remnant of this people as I did in the past,\" declares the LORD Almighty.","Nunc autem non iuxta dies priores ego sum reliquiis populi huius, dicit Dominus exercituum;","ועתה לא כימים הראשנים אני לשארית העם הזה נאם יהוה צבאות׃"],["45","8","12",null,"이제 내가 평화를 심어주리니, 포도나무는 열매를 맺고 하늘은 비를 내리며 땅은 소출을 내리라. 그리하여 살아 남은 내 백성으로 하여금 이 모든 것을 받아 누리게 하리라.","곧 평강의 씨앗을 얻을 것이라 포도나무가 열매를 맺으며 땅이 산물을 내며 하늘은 이슬을 내리리니 내가 이 남은 백성으로 이 모든 것을 누리게 하리라","곧 1)평안한 추수를 얻을 것이라 포도나무가 열매를 맺으며 땅이 산물을 내며 하늘은 이슬을 내리리니 내가 이 남은 백성으로 이 모든 것을 누리게 하리라 평안의 종자가 있을 것이라","\"이제는 내가 오직 너희에게 평화와 번영을 심어 주겠다. 너희의 농사는 평화로운 시절을 맞이하여 풍년이 들고, 포도나무마다 열매가 풍성할 것이다. 온 땅은 풍년을 누리고, 하늘은 철마다 고른 비를 내릴 것이다. 살아남은 이 백성에게 내가 이 모든 복을 누리게 하겠다.","For there will be a sowing of peace: the vine will yield its fruit, the land will yield its crops, and the heavens will yield their dew. I will give all these things to the remnant of this people to possess.","For the seed shall be prosperous; the vine shall give her fruit, and the ground shall give her increase, and the heavens shall give their dew; and I will cause the remnant of this people to possess all these things.","\"The seed will grow well, the vine will yield its fruit, the ground will produce its crops, and the heavens will drop their dew. I will give all these things as an inheritance to the remnant of this people.","sed semen pacis erit: vinea dabit fructum suum, et terra dabit proventum suum, et possidere faciam reliquias populi huius universa haec.","כי זרע השלום הגפן תתן פריה והארץ תתן את יבולה והשמים יתנו טלם והנחלתי את שארית העם הזה את כל אלה׃"],["45","8","13",null,"유다 가문아, 이스라엘 가문아, 너희는 뭇 민족에게 욕을 먹는 신세였으나 이제는 내가 너희를 구해 내어 사람들로 하여금 너희를 부러워하게 하리라. 그러니 겁내지 말고 힘을 내어라.","유다 족속아, 이스라엘 족속아, 너희가 이방인 가운데에서 저주가 되었었으나 이제는 내가 너희를 구원하여 너희가 복이 되게 하리니 두려워하지 말지니라 손을 견고히 할지니라","유다 족속아, 이스라엘 족속아, 너희가 이방 가운데서 저주가 되었었으나 이제는 내가 너희를 구원하여 너희로 축복이 되게 하리니 두려워 말지니라 손을 견고히 할지니라","유다와 이스라엘아, 이방인들은 저주하고 욕을 할 때마다 \"유다 사람들처럼 가련한 신세가 되어라\" 하였으나 이제는 그 소리가 사라질 것이다. 이제 유다라는 말은 저주하는 말이 아니라 축복하는 말이 될 것이기 때문이다. \"유다 사람처럼 성공하고 행복하기를 바란다\"는 말이 이방인들에게 유행할 것이다. 그러므로 너희는 두려워하거나 실망하지 말아라! 오히려 힘을 내어 성전 재건을 계속하여라!\"","Just as you became a curse among the nations, O house of Judah and house of Israel, so will I save you that you may be a blessing. Do not fear; let your hands be strong.","And it shall come to pass, that as ye were a curse among the heathen, O house of Judah, and house of Israel; so will I save you, and ye shall be a blessing: fear not, but let your hands be strong.","As you have been an object of cursing among the nations, O Judah and Israel, so will I save you, and you will be a blessing. Do not be afraid, but let your hands be strong.\"","Et erit: sicut eratis maledictio in gentibus, domus Iudae et domus Israel, sic salvabo vos, et eritis benedictio. Nolite timere; confortentur manus vestrae.","והיה כאשר הייתם קללה בגוים בית יהודה ובית ישראל כן אושיע אתכם והייתם ברכה אל תיראו תחזקנה ידיכם׃"],["45","8","14",null,"나 만군의 야훼가 말한다. 일찍이 너희 조상들이 나를 화나게 하여 내가 너희에게 재앙을 내리기로 작정하고는 망설이지 않고 그대로 했듯이, 만군의 야훼가 이르는 말이다,","만군의 여호와가 이같이 말하노라 너희 조상들이 나를 격노하게 하였을 때에 내가 그들에게 재앙을 내리기로 뜻하고 뉘우치지 아니하였으나","만군의 여호와가 말하노라 전에 너희 열조가 나의 노를 격발할 때에 내가 그들에게 재앙을 내리기로 뜻하고 뉘우치지 아니하였었으나","보아라. 온 세상의 주인이신 여호와께서 이같이 말씀하셨다. \"너희의 조상들이 나의 분노를 폭발시켜 놓았을 때에는 내가 너희에게 재앙을 내리기로 작정하고, 어떤 일이 있어도 그 결심을 바꾸지 않았었다.\" 온 세상의 주인이신 여호와께서 하신 말씀이다.","Thus says the LORD of hosts: Just as I intended to harm you when your ancestors angered me—says the LORD of hosts—and I did not relent,","For thus saith the LORD of hosts; As I thought to punish you, when your fathers provoked me to wrath, saith the LORD of hosts, and I repented not:","This is what the LORD Almighty says: \"Just as I had determined to bring disaster upon you and showed no pity when your fathers angered me,\" says the LORD Almighty,","Quia haec dicit Dominus exercituum: Sicut cogitavi, ut affligerem vos, cum ad iracundiam provocassent patres vestri me, dicit Dominus exercituum,","כי כה אמר יהוה צבאות כאשר זממתי להרע לכם בהקציף אבתיכם אתי אמר יהוה צבאות ולא נחמתי׃"],["45","8","15",null,"나 이제 마음을 돌이켜 그 이상으로 예루살렘과 유다 가문에게 잘해 주기로 작정하였다. 그러니 너희는 겁내지 마라.","이제 내가 다시 예루살렘과 유다 족속에게 은혜를 베풀기로 뜻하였나니 너희는 두려워하지 말지니라","이제 내가 예루살렘과 유다 족속에게 은혜를 베풀기로 뜻하였나니 너희는 두려워 말지니라","\"그와 똑같이 오늘날에는 내가 다시 예루살렘 시민과 유다 백성에게 복을 내려 주기로 작정을 하였다. 너희는 내 마음이 다시 바뀔까봐 걱정하지도 말고 두려워하지도 말아라!","so again in these days I intend to favor Jerusalem and the house of Judah; do not fear!","So again have I thought in these days to do well unto Jerusalem and to the house of Judah: fear ye not.","\"so now I have determined to do good again to Jerusalem and Judah. Do not be afraid.","et non sum misertus, sic conversus cogitavi in diebus istis, ut benefaciam Ierusalem et domui Iudae; nolite timere.","כן שבתי זממתי בימים האלה להיטיב את ירושלם ואת בית יהודה אל תיראו׃"],["45","8","16",null,"너희는 이렇게 살아라. 이웃에게 거짓말을 하지 말고, 성문 앞 재판정에서 바른 재판을 하여 평화를 이룩하여라.","너희가 행할 일은 이러하니라 너희는 이웃과 더불어 진리를 말하며 너희 성문에서 진실하고 화평한 재판을 베풀고","너희가 행할 일은 이러하니라 너희는 각기 이웃으로 더불어 진실을 말하며 너희 성문에서 진실하고 화평한 재판을 베풀고","오히려 너희는 내가 시키는 일들을 하여라. 너희는 서로 진실한 말을 하여라! 모든 사람에게 유익하도록 법정에서 올바른 판결을 내려라!","These then are the things you must do: Speak the truth to one another; judge with honesty and complete justice in your gates.","These are the things that ye shall do; Speak ye every man the truth to his neighbour; execute the judgment of truth and peace in your gates:","These are the things you are to do: Speak the truth to each other, and render true and sound judgment in your courts;","Haec sunt ergo, quae facietis: Loquimini veritatem unusquisque cum proximo suo et iudicium pacis iudicate in portis vestris,","אלה הדברים אשר תעשו דברו אמת איש את רעהו אמת ומשפט שלום שפטו בשעריכם׃"],["45","8","17",null,"부디 이웃을 해칠 생각은 말고, 거짓 맹세로 속이는 일을 좋아하지 마라. 그런 것은 다 내가 미워하는 일이다. 야훼가 이르는 말이다.\"","마음에 서로 해하기를 도모하지 말며 거짓 맹세를 좋아하지 말라 이 모든 일은 내가 미워하는 것이니라 여호와의 말이니라","심중에 서로 해하기를 도모하지 말며 거짓 맹세를 좋아하지 말라 이 모든 일은 나의 미워하는 것임이니라 나 여호와의 말이니라","서로 다른 사람을 해치려는 궁리를 하지 말아라! 검은 것도 희다고 하는 따위의 거짓말은 아예 입에서 떼어 버려라! 이런 것들은 내가 모두 미워하기 때문이다.\" 여호와께서 하신 말씀이다.","Let none of you plot evil against another in your heart, nor love a false oath. For all these things I hate—oracle of the LORD.","And let none of you imagine evil in your hearts against his neighbour; and love no false oath: for all these are things that I hate, saith the LORD.","do not plot evil against your neighbor, and do not love to swear falsely. I hate all this,\" declares the LORD.","et unusquisque malum contra amicum suum ne cogitetis in cordibus vestris et iuramentum mendax ne diligatis: omnia enim haec sunt quae odi “, dicit Dominus.",null],["45","8","18",null,"만군의 야훼께서 나에게 말씀을 내리셨다.","만군의 여호와의 말씀이 내게 임하여 이르시되","만군의 여호와의 말씀이 내게 임하여 이르시되","온 세상의 주인이신 여호와께서 내게 다음과 같이 말씀하셨다.","The word of the LORD of hosts came to me:","And the word of the LORD of hosts came unto me, saying,","Again the word of the LORD Almighty came to me.","Et factum est verbum Domini exercituum ad me dicens:",null],["45","8","19",null,"\"나 만군의 야훼가 말한다. 유다 가문은 사월에도 단식하고 오월에도 단식하고 칠월에도 단식하고 시월에도 단식해 왔다. 이제 그 단식은 기쁨과 즐거움으로 바뀌어 즐거운 축제가 되리라. 너희는 성실과 평화를 기리어라.","만군의 여호와가 이같이 말하노라 넷째 달의 금식과 다섯째 달의 금식과 일곱째 달의 금식과 열째 달의 금식이 변하여 유다 족속에게 기쁨과 즐거움과 희락의 절기들이 되리니 오직 너희는 진리와 화평을 사랑할지니라","만군의 여호와가 말하노라 사월의 금식과 오월의 금식과 칠월의 금식과 시월의 금식이 변하여 유다 족속에게 기쁨과 즐거움과 희락의 절기가 되리니 오직 너희는 진실과 화평을 사랑할찌니라","\"너희가 ㄱ) 4월과 5월과 7월과 10월에 슬퍼하며 금식하던 절기들이 이제 환희의 명절로 바뀔 것이다. 유다의 탄식이 환호성으로 바뀌고, 그 슬픔과 고통이 기쁘고 즐거운 잔치로 변할 것이다. 그러므로 이제는 나와 진실한 관계를 유지하고 항상 모든 사람의 유익을 먼저 생각하여라!\" 온 세상의 주인이신 여호와께서 말씀하셨다. (ㄱ. BC 587년 4월 9일에 예루살렘의 성벽에 첫 돌파구가 뚫리어 적군이 들어 왔으며(왕하25:3-4), BC 589년 10월 10일에 느부갓네살이 예루살렘 도성의 포위를 시작하였다(왕하25:1))","Thus says the LORD of hosts: The fast days of the fourth, the fifth, the seventh, and the tenth months  will become occasions of joy and gladness, and happy festivals for the house of Judah. So love faithfulness and peace!","Thus saith the LORD of hosts; The fast of the fourth month, and the fast of the fifth, and the fast of the seventh, and the fast of the tenth, shall be to the house of Judah joy and gladness, and cheerful feasts; therefore love the truth and peace.","This is what the LORD Almighty says: \"The fasts of the fourth, fifth, seventh and tenth months will become joyful and glad occasions and happy festivals for Judah. Therefore love truth and peace.\""," “Haec dicit Dominus exercituum: Ieiunium quarti et ieiunium quinti et ieiunium septimi et ieiunium decimi erit domui Iudae in gaudium et laetitiam et in sollemnitates praeclaras; veritatem tantum et pacem diligite.",null],["45","8","20",null,"나 만군의 야훼가 말한다. 앞으로 많은 민족과 여러 도시에 사는 사람들이 이리로 모여올 것이다.","만군의 여호와가 이와 같이 말하노라 다시 여러 백성과 많은 성읍의 주민이 올 것이라","만군의 여호와가 말하노라 그 후에 여러 백성과 많은 성읍의 거민이 올 것이라","온 세상의 주인이신 여호와께서 이같이 말씀하셨다. \"또 이런 일도 일어날 것이다. 온 세상의 백성들이 예루살렘으로 성지 순례를 하고, 많은 성읍의 주민들이 와서 나를 온 세상의 주님으로 경배하며 내게 예물을 바칠 것이다. 한 성읍의 주민들이 다른 성읍의 주민들을 찾아가서 이렇게 권면할 것이다. \"우리와 함께 예루살렘으로 갑시다! 우리는 성지를 순례하려 한다오!\"","Thus says the LORD of hosts: There will yet come peoples and inhabitants of many cities;","Thus saith the LORD of hosts; It shall yet come to pass, that there shall come people, and the inhabitants of many cities:","This is what the LORD Almighty says: \"Many peoples and the inhabitants of many cities will yet come,","Haec dicit Dominus exercituum: Adhuc venient populi et habitatores civitatum magnarum,",null],["45","8","21",null,"한 도시에 사는 사람들이 다른 도시로 가서 '야훼께 나아가 자비를 빌자. 만군의 야훼를 찾으러 가자. 나는 이렇게 나섰다.' 하고 말하면,","이 성읍 주민이 저 성읍에 가서 이르기를 우리가 속히 가서 만군의 여호와를 찾고 여호와께 은혜를 구하자 하면 나도 가겠노라 하겠으며","이 성읍 거민이 저 성읍에 가서 이르기를 우리가 속히 가서 만군의 여호와를 찾고 여호와께 은혜를 구하자 할 것이면 나도 가겠노라 하겠으며","(20절에 포함되어 있음)","and the inhabitants of one city will approach those of another, and say, “Come! let us go to implore the favor of the LORD and to seek the LORD of hosts. I too am going.”","And the inhabitants of one city shall go to another, saying, Let us go speedily to pray before the LORD, and to seek the LORD of hosts: I will go also.","and the inhabitants of one city will go to another and say, 'Let us go at once to entreat the LORD and seek the LORD Almighty. I myself am going.'","et ibunt habitatores unius ad alteram dicentes: “Eamus, ut deprecemur faciem Domini et quaeramus Dominum exercituum; vadam etiam ego”.",null],["45","8","22",null,"많은 민족과 강한 나라들이 예루살렘으로 만군의 야훼를 찾아와 야훼의 자비를 빌게 될 것이다.","많은 백성과 강대한 나라들이 예루살렘으로 와서 만군의 여호와를 찾고 여호와께 은혜를 구하리라","많은 백성과 강대한 나라들이 예루살렘으로 와서 만군의 여호와를 찾고 여호와께 은혜를 구하리라","(20절에 포함되어 있음)","Many peoples and strong nations will come to seek the LORD of hosts in Jerusalem and to implore the favor of the LORD.","Yea, many people and strong nations shall come to seek the LORD of hosts in Jerusalem, and to pray before the LORD.","And many peoples and powerful nations will come to Jerusalem to seek the LORD Almighty and to entreat him.\"","Et venient populi multi et gentes robustae ad quaerendum Dominum exercituum in Ierusalem et deprecandam faciem Domini.",null],["45","8","23",null,"나 만군의 야훼가 말한다. 앞으로는 말이 다른 종족의 열 사람이 유다 사람 하나의 옷자락을 붙잡고 '하느님께서는 당신들과 함께 계신 줄 압니다. 그러니 우리도 함께 데려가 주십시오.' 하고 부탁하리라.\"","만군의 여호와가 이와 같이 말하노라 그 날에는 말이 다른 이방 백성 열 명이 유다 사람 하나의 옷자락을 잡을 것이라 곧 잡고 말하기를 하나님이 너희와 함께 하심을 들었나니 우리가 너희와 함께 가려 하노라 하리라 하시니라","만군의 여호와가 말하노라 그 날에는 방언이 다른 열국 백성 열명이 유다 사람 하나의 옷자락을 잡을 것이라 곧 잡고 말하기를 하나님이 너희와 함께하심을 들었나니 우리가 너희와 함께 가려 하노라 하리라 하시니라","온 세상의 주인이신 여호와께서 이같이 말씀하셨다. \"그때에는 이런 경험들을 하게 될 것이다. 세계 만민들 중에서 언어가 다른 열 사람이 와서 유다 사람 한 명의 옷자락을 붙잡고 \"하나님께서 당신들 편에 계시다는 소식을 우리가 들었으니, 우리가 당신들과 동행하기를 원합니다.\" 하고 간청할 것이다\"","Thus says the LORD of hosts: In those days ten people from nations of every language will take hold, yes, will take hold of the cloak of every Judahite and say, “Let us go with you, for we have heard that God is with you.”","Thus saith the LORD of hosts; In those days it shall come to pass, that ten men shall take hold out of all languages of the nations, even shall take hold of the skirt of him that is a Jew, saying, We will go with you: for we have heard that God is with you.","This is what the LORD Almighty says: \"In those days ten men from all languages and nations will take firm hold of one Jew by the hem of his robe and say, 'Let us go with you, because we have heard that God is with you.'\" An Oracle","Haec dicit Dominus exercituum: In diebus illis apprehendent decem homines ex omnibus linguis gentium, apprehendent fimbriam viri Iudaei dicentes: “Ibimus vobiscum; audivimus enim quoniam Deus vobiscum est” “.",null],["45","9","1",null,"야훼께서 계시하신 말씀. 야훼께서 하드락 땅을 거쳐 다마스쿠스에 머물러 계시다. 이 아람의 수도도 이스라엘 모든 지파와 마찬가지로 야훼의 것이다.","여호와의 말씀이 하드락 땅에 내리며 다메섹에 머물리니 사람들과 이스라엘 모든 지파의 눈이 여호와를 우러러봄이니라","여호와의 말씀의 경고가 하드락 땅에 임하며 다메섹에 머물리니 세상 사람과 이스라엘 모든 지파의 눈이 여호와를 우러러 봄이니라","여호와께서 하드락 지역을 통과해 가셨고, 다메섹을 거처로 삼으셨다. 아람 족속의 성읍들도 이스라엘의 모든 지파들과 마찬가지로 주님의 것이기 때문이다.","An oracle: the word of the LORD is against the land of Hadrach, and Damascus is its destination, For the cities of Aram are the LORD’s, as are all the tribes of Israel.","The burden of the word of the LORD in the land of Hadrach, and Damascus shall be the rest thereof: when the eyes of man, as of all the tribes of Israel, shall be toward the LORD.","The word of the LORD is against the land of Hadrach and will rest upon Damascus--for the eyes of men and all the tribes of Israel are on the LORD--","Oraculum.  “Verbum Domini in terra Ha drach et Damasci requiei eius, quia Domini est oculus Aram sicut omnes tribus Israel.","משא דבר יהוה בארץ חדרך ודמשק מנחתו כי ליהוה עין אדם וכל שבטי ישראל׃"],["45","9","2",null,"국경도시 하맛도 그의 것이요, 슬기가 뛰어난 띠로와 시돈도 그의 것이다.","그 접경한 하맛에도 임하겠고 두로와 시돈에도 임하리니 그들이 매우 지혜로움이니라","그 접경된 하맛에도 임하겠고 두로와 시돈은 넓은 지혜가 있으니 그들에게도 임하리라","다메섹에 인접한 성읍 하맛도 주님의 것이다. 두로와 시돈이 아무리 영리하고 빈틈이 없다고 하여도, 그들도 주님의 것이다.","Hamath also on its border, Tyre too, and Sidon, no matter how clever they be.","And Hamath also shall border thereby; Tyrus, and Zidon, though it be very wise.","and upon Hamath too, which borders on it, and upon Tyre and Sidon, though they are very skillful.","Emath quoque in terminis eius et Tyrus et Sidon, quae sapiens est valde.","וגם חמת תגבל בה צר וצידון כי חכמה מאד׃"],["45","9","3",null,"띠로는 요새를 세우고 은을 티끌 더미처럼 쌓아놓고, 금을 길바닥의 흙더미처럼 쌓았지만,","두로는 자기를 위하여 요새를 건축하며 은을 티끌 같이, 금을 거리의 진흙 같이 쌓았도다","두로는 자기를 위하여 보장을 건축하며 은을 티끌 같이, 정금을 거리의 진흙 같이 쌓았은즉","비록 두로가 철저하게 무장을 하고, 지극히 부유하게 되어 은을 흙덩이처럼 쌓아놓고, 금을 길바닥의 돌덩이처럼 모아 놓았다고 하여도","Tyre built itself a stronghold, and heaped up silver like dust, and gold like the mud of the streets.","And Tyrus did build herself a strong hold, and heaped up silver as the dust, and fine gold as the mire of the streets.","Tyre has built herself a stronghold; she has heaped up silver like dust, and gold like the dirt of the streets.","Et aedificavit Tyrus munitionem suam et coacervavit argentum quasi pulverem et aurum ut lutum platearum.","ותבן צר מצור לה ותצבר כסף כעפר וחרוץ כטיט חוצות׃"],["45","9","4",null,"보아라, 이제 주님이 띠로를 차지하러 오신다. 그 세력을 바다에서 꺾으시고 성을 불살라 없애시리라.","주께서 그를 정복하시며 그의 권세를 바다에 쳐넣으시리니 그가 불에 삼켜질지라","주께서 그를 쫓아 내시며 그의 바다 권세를 치시리니 그가 불에 삼키울찌라","주께서 성의 군인들을 바닷속에 집어 던지셔서 그 성을 점령하실 것이다. 그때에 두로는 불에 탈 것이다.","But now the Lord will dispossess it, and cast its wealth into the sea, and it will be devoured by fire.","Behold, the LORD will cast her out, and he will smite her power in the sea; and she shall be devoured with fire.","But the LORD will take away her possessions and destroy her power on the sea, and she will be consumed by fire.","Ecce Dominus possidebit eam et percutiet in mari fortitudinem eius; et haec igni devorabitur.","הנה אדני יורשנה והכה בים חילה והיא באש תאכל׃"],["45","9","5",null,"이것을 보고 아스클론은 질겁을 하고 가자는 안절부절못하고 에크론은 더 이상 기댈 데가 없어지리라. 가자에선 왕이 없어지고 아스클론은 무인지경이 되며","아스글론이 보고 무서워하며 가사도 심히 아파할 것이며 에그론은 그 소망이 수치가 되므로 역시 그러하리라 가사에는 임금이 끊어질 것이며 아스글론에는 주민이 없을 것이며","아스글론이 보고 무서워하며 가사도 심히 아파할 것이며 에그론은 그 소망이 수치가 되므로 역시 그러하리라 가사에는 임금이 끊칠 것이며 아스글론에는 거민이 없을 것이며","아스글론이 이런 일을 보고 두려워할 것이다. 가사도 그 일을 보고 두려워서 벌벌 떨 것이며, 에그론도 무서워서 떨 것이다. 그 성의 희망이 수치로 변하였기 때문이다. 가사는 정복을 당하여 왕이 피살되고, 아스글론의 주민들은 모두 잡혀가서 한 사람도 남지 않을 것이다.","Ashkelon will see it and be afraid; Gaza too will be in great anguish; Ekron also, for its hope will wither. The king will disappear from Gaza, Ashkelon will not be inhabited,","Ashkelon shall see it, and fear; Gaza also shall see it, and be very sorrowful, and Ekron; for her expectation shall be ashamed; and the king shall perish from Gaza, and Ashkelon shall not be inhabited.","Ashkelon will see it and fear; Gaza will writhe in agony, and Ekron too, for her hope will wither. Gaza will lose her king and Ashkelon will be deserted.","Videbit Ascalon et timebit, et Gaza dolore torquetur nimis, et Accaron, quoniam confusa est spes eius; et peribit rex de Gaza, et Ascalon non habitabitur.","תרא אשקלון ותירא ועזה ותחיל מאד ועקרון כי הביש מבטה ואבד מלך מעזה ואשקלון לא תשב׃"],["45","9","6",null,"아스돗에는 트기들이나 살게 되리라. \"나는 저 거만한 불레셋의 기를 꺾고는","아스돗에는 잡족이 거주하리라 내가 블레셋 사람의 교만을 끊고","아스돗에는 잡족이 거하리라 내가 블레셋 사람의 교만을 끊고","아스돗에는 혼합 민족이 와서 정착할 것이다. \"그때에 내가 블레셋 족속의 자주권을 박탈하겠다.","and the illegitimate will rule in Ashdod. I will destroy the pride of the Philistines","And a bastard shall dwell in Ashdod, and I will cut off the pride of the Philistines.","Foreigners will occupy Ashdod, and I will cut off the pride of the Philistines.","Et habitabit spurius in Azoto, et disperdam superbiam Philisthim.","וישב ממזר באשדוד והכרתי גאון פלשתים׃"],["45","9","7",null,"이빨 사이에 낀 부정한 고기를 빼내고 그 입에 묻은 피를 닦아주리라.\" 그 가운데서도 우리 하느님을 섬길 사람들이 살아 남아 유다의 한 부락이 되리라. 에크론도 여부스족처럼 우리와 한 족속이 되리라.","그의 입에서 그의 피를, 그의 잇사이에서 그 가증한 것을 제거하리니 그들도 남아서 우리 하나님께로 돌아와서 유다의 한 지도자 같이 되겠고 에그론은 여부스 사람 같이 되리라","그 입에서 그 피를, 그 잇사이에서 그 가증한 것을 제하리니 그도 남아서 우리 하나님께로 돌아와서 유다의 한 두목 같이 되겠고 에그론은 여부스 사람 같이 되리라","혼합 민족에게는 내가 짐승의 고기를 피와 함께 먹지 못하도록 가르치고, 돼지고기와 같이 부정한 고기도 먹지 못하도록 가르치겠다.\" 그런 후에 그들도 우리의 하나님을 섬기는 남은 자들이 되어서 이스라엘의 새 지파로 채용될 것이다. 그때에는 에그론의 주민들도 여부스 족속과 같이 될 것이다.","and take from their mouths their bloody prey, their disgusting meat from between their teeth. They will become merely a remnant for our God, and will be like a clan in Judah; Ekron will be like the Jebusites.","And I will take away his blood out of his mouth, and his abominations from between his teeth: but he that remaineth, even he, shall be for our God, and he shall be as a governor in Judah, and Ekron as a Jebusite.","I will take the blood from their mouths, the forbidden food from between their teeth. Those who are left will belong to our God and become leaders in Judah, and Ekron will be like the Jebusites.","Et auferam sanguinem eius de ore eius et abominationes eius de medio dentium eius, et relinquetur etiam ipse Deo nostro, et erit quasi dux in Iuda, et Accaron quasi Iebusaeus.","והסרתי דמיו מפיו ושקציו מבין שניו ונשאר גם הוא לאלהינו והיה כאלף ביהודה ועקרון כיבוסי׃"],["45","9","8",null,"\"나는 내 집에 진을 둘러쳐서 아무도 지나다니지 못하게 하고 다시는 정복자가 밟고 다니지 못하게 하리라. 나 이제 이 백성의 비참한 모습을 똑똑히 보았다.\"","내가 내 집을 둘러 진을 쳐서 적군을 막아 거기 왕래하지 못하게 할 것이라 포학한 자가 다시는 그 지경으로 지나가지 못하리니 이는 내가 눈으로 친히 봄이니라","내가 내 집을 둘러 진을 쳐서 적군을 막아 거기 왕래하지 못하게 할 것이라 포학한 자가 다시는 그 지경으로 지나지 못하리니 이는 내가 눈으로 친히 봄이니라","\"이때부터는 내가 내 땅의 사령관으로 주둔하여 통과하는 모든 사람들을 통제하겠다. 어떤 압제자도 다시는 내 땅을 침입하지 못할 것이다. 내가 이미 내 백성의 고통을 똑똑히 보았기 때문이다.\"","I will encamp at my house, a garrison against invaders; No oppressor will overrun them again, for now I have seen their affliction.","And I will encamp about mine house because of the army, because of him that passeth by, and because of him that returneth: and no oppressor shall pass through them any more: for now have I seen with mine eyes.","But I will defend my house against marauding forces. Never again will an oppressor overrun my people, for now I am keeping watch.","Et circumdabo domum meam ut praesidium contra euntes et revertentes; et non transibit super eos ultra exactor, quia nunc vidi in oculis meis.","וחניתי לביתי מצבה מעבר ומשב ולא יעבר עליהם עוד נגש כי עתה ראיתי בעיני׃"],["45","9","9",null,"수도 시온아, 한껏 기뻐하여라. 수도 예루살렘아, 환성을 올려라. 보아라, 네 임금이 너를 찾아오신다. 정의를 세워 너를 찾아오신다. 그는 겸비하여 나귀, 어린 새끼 나귀를 타고 오시어","시온의 딸아 크게 기뻐할지어다 예루살렘의 딸아 즐거이 부를지어다 보라 네 왕이 네게 임하시나니 그는 공의로우시며 구원을 베푸시며 겸손하여서 나귀를 타시나니 나귀의 작은 것 곧 나귀 새끼니라","시온의 딸아 크게 기뻐할찌어다 예루살렘의 딸아 즐거이 부를찌어다 보라 네 왕이 네게 임하나니 그는 공의로우며 구원을 베풀며 겸손하여서 나귀를 타나니 나귀의 작은 것 곧 나귀새끼니라","너 시온성아, 기뻐 뛰어라! 너희 예루살렘 시민들아, 환호성을 올려라! 보아라, 네 왕께서 네게로 오실 것이다. 그분은 의로우시고 노련한 해방자이시다. 그런데도 겸비하여 나귀를 타고 오신다. 잡종도 아니고 전투용도 아닌 새끼 수나귀를 타고 오신다.","Exult greatly, O daughter Zion! Shout for joy, O daughter Jerusalem! Behold: your king is coming to you, a just savior is he, Humble, and riding on a donkey, on a colt, the foal of a donkey.","Rejoice greatly, O daughter of Zion; shout, O daughter of Jerusalem: behold, thy King cometh unto thee: he is just, and having salvation; lowly, and riding upon an ass, and upon a colt the foal of an ass.","Rejoice greatly, O Daughter of Zion! Shout, Daughter of Jerusalem! See, your king comes to you, righteous and having salvation, gentle and riding on a donkey, on a colt, the foal of a donkey.","Exsulta satis, filia Sion; iubila, filia Ierusalem. Ecce rex tuus venit tibi iustus et salvator ipse, pauper et sedens super asinum et super pullum filium asinae.","גילי מאד בת ציון הריעי בת ירושלם הנה מלכך יבוא לך צדיק ונושע הוא עני ורכב על חמור ועל עיר בן אתנות׃"],["45","9","10",null,"에브라임의 병거를 없애고 예루살렘의 군마를 없애시리라. 군인들이 메고 있는 활을 꺾어버리시고 뭇 민족에게 평화를 선포하시리라. 이 바다에서 저 바다까지, 큰 강에서 땅 끝까지 다스리시리라.","내가 에브라임의 병거와 예루살렘의 말을 끊겠고 전쟁하는 활도 끊으리니 그가 이방 사람에게 화평을 전할 것이요 그의 통치는 바다에서 바다까지 이르고 유브라데 강에서 땅 끝까지 이르리라","내가 에브라임의 병거와 예루살렘의 말을 끊겠고 전쟁하는 활도 끊으리니 그가 이방 사람에게 화평을 전할 것이요 그의 정권은 바다에서 바다까지 이르고 유브라데 강에서 땅 끝까지 이르리라","그분은 전쟁의 무기들이 소멸되도록 에브라임에서 전차들을 없애시고 예루살렘에서 군마들을 없애실 것이다. 그분은 또 세계 만민에게 평화를 제공해 주셔서 그분의 통치가 이 바다에서 저 바다로 퍼지고 세계 이끝에서 저끝까지 이를 것이다.","He shall banish the chariot from Ephraim, and the horse from Jerusalem; The warrior’s bow will be banished, and he will proclaim peace to the nations. His dominion will be from sea to sea, and from the River to the ends of the earth.","And I will cut off the chariot from Ephraim, and the horse from Jerusalem, and the battle bow shall be cut off: and he shall speak peace unto the heathen: and his dominion shall be from sea even to sea, and from the river even to the ends of the earth.","I will take away the chariots from Ephraim and the war-horses from Jerusalem, and the battle bow will be broken. He will proclaim peace to the nations. His rule will extend from sea to sea and from the River to the ends of the earth.","Et disperdam currum ex Ephraim et equum de Ierusalem; et confringetur arcus belli, et loquetur pacem gentibus. Et imperium eius a mari usque ad mare et a flumine usque ad fines terrae.","והכרתי רכב מאפרים וסוס מירושלם ונכרתה קשת מלחמה ודבר שלום לגוים ומשלו מים עד ים ומנהר עד אפסי ארץ׃"],["45","9","11",null,"\"너는 나와 피로 계약을 맺었으니 나 그 피를 생각하여 사로잡힌 너희를 물 없는 굴에서 건져내리라.","또 너로 말할진대 네 언약의 피로 말미암아 내가 네 갇힌 자들을 물 없는 구덩이에서 놓았나니","또 너로 말할진대 네 언약의 피를 인하여 내가 너의 갇힌 자들을 물 없는 구덩이에서 놓았나니","여호와께서 말씀하셨다. \"이스라엘 백성아, 너와 피로 맺은 계약에 따라서 내가 네 포로들을 물 없는 웅덩이 속에서 해방시키겠다.","As for you, by the blood of your covenant, I have freed your prisoners from a waterless pit.","As for thee also, by the blood of thy covenant I have sent forth thy prisoners out of the pit wherein is no water.","As for you, because of the blood of my covenant with you, I will free your prisoners from the waterless pit.","Tu quoque: in sanguine testamenti tui extraho vinctos tuos de lacu, in quo non est aqua.","גם את בדם בריתך שלחתי אסיריך מבור אין מים בו׃"],["45","9","12",null,"수도 시온아, 포로들은 그리던 고향을 찾아 너에게로 돌아오리라. 네가 포로로 지내던 시절의 아픔은 내가 곱절로 갚아주리라.","갇혀 있으나 소망을 품은 자들아 너희는 요새로 돌아올지니라 내가 오늘도 이르노라 내가 네게 갑절이나 갚을 것이라","소망을 품은 갇혔던 자들아 너희는 보장으로 돌아올지니라 내가 오늘날도 이르노라 내가 배나 네게 갚을 것이라","시온성아, 포로들이 희망이 가득 차서 네게로 돌아올 것이다. 네가 쫓겨나서 고생한 세월에 대하여 내가 두배로 갚아주겠다.","Return to a fortress, O prisoners of hope; This very day, I announce I am restoring double to you.","Turn you to the strong hold, ye prisoners of hope: even to day do I declare that I will render double unto thee;","Return to your fortress, O prisoners of hope; even now I announce that I will restore twice as much to you.","Convertimini ad munitionem, vincti spei; hodie quoque annuntians: Duplicia reddam tibi.","שובו לבצרון אסירי התקוה גם היום מגיד משנה אשיב לך׃"],["45","9","13",null,"나는 유다를 활처럼 당기고 에브라임을 화살처럼 메우리라. 시온아, 내가 네 아들들을 불러내어 그리스 군을 치게 하리라. 내가 너를 용사의 칼처럼 쓰리라.\"","내가 유다를 당긴 활로 삼고 에브라임을 끼운 화살로 삼았으니 시온아 내가 네 자식들을 일으켜 헬라 자식들을 치게 하며 너를 용사의 칼과 같게 하리라","내가 유다로 당긴 활을 삼고 에브라임으로 먹인 살을 삼았으니 시온아 내가 네 자식을 격동시켜 헬라 자식을 치게 하며 너로 용사의 칼과 같게 하리라","보아라. 내가 직접 나서서 헬라의 군대를 치겠다. 나의 활은 유다 사람들이며, 나의 화살은 에브라임 사람들이고, 내가 원수에게 휘두르는 칼은 예루살렘 사람들이다.\"","For I have bent Judah as my bow, I have set Ephraim as its arrow; I will arouse your sons, O Zion, against your sons, O Yavan, and I will use you as a warrior’s sword.","When I have bent Judah for me, filled the bow with Ephraim, and raised up thy sons, O Zion, against thy sons, O Greece, and made thee as the sword of a mighty man.","I will bend Judah as I bend my bow and fill it with Ephraim. I will rouse your sons, O Zion, against your sons, O Greece, and make you like a warrior's sword.","Nam extendi mihi Iudam quasi arcum, implevi Ephraim; et suscitabo filios tuos, Sion, super filios tuos, Graecia, et ponam te quasi gladium fortium.","כי דרכתי לי יהודה קשת מלאתי אפרים ועוררתי בניך ציון על בניך יון ושמתיך כחרב גבור׃"],["45","9","14",null,"야훼께서 그들 위에 나타나시어 번개처럼 화살을 쏘시리라. 야훼 하느님께서 나팔 소리도 우렁차게 거센 마파람을 타고 나오시리라.","여호와께서 그들 위에 나타나서 그들의 화살을 번개 같이 쏘아내실 것이며 주 여호와께서 나팔을 불게 하시며 남방 회오리바람을 타고 가실 것이라","여호와께서 그 위에 나타나서 그 살을 번개 같이 쏘아내실 것이며 주 여호와께서 나팔을 불리시며 남방 회리바람을 타고 행하실 것이라","그때에 여호와께서 몸소 그들의 곁으로 오셔서, 번개처럼 화살을 쏘실 것이다. 주 여호와께서 우뢰 소리처럼 나팔을 부시고 사막의 열풍을 타고 원수들을 치러 가실 것이다.","The LORD will appear over them, God’s arrow will shoot forth as lightning; The Lord GOD will sound the ram’s horn, and come in a storm from the south.","And the LORD shall be seen over them, and his arrow shall go forth as the lightning: and the LORD God shall blow the trumpet, and shall go with whirlwinds of the south.","Then the LORD will appear over them; his arrow will flash like lightning. The Sovereign LORD will sound the trumpet; he will march in the storms of the south,","Et Dominus super eos videbitur, et exibit ut fulgur iaculum eius; et Dominus Deus in tuba canet et vadet in procellis austri.","ויהוה עליהם יראה ויצא כברק חצו ואדני יהוה בשופר יתקע והלך בסערות תימן׃"],["45","9","15",null,"이 백성이 만군의 야훼를 방패삼고 던진 그 팔맷돌에 원수들의 살이 찢기리라. 그 상처에서 흐르는 피를 술 마시듯 마시리니, 마치 넘쳐나는 동이 같고, 제단 모서리같이 흥건하리라.","만군의 여호와께서 그들을 호위하시리니 그들이 원수를 삼키며 물맷돌을 밟을 것이며 그들이 피를 마시고 즐거이 부르기를 술취한 것 같이 할 것인즉 피가 가득한 동이와도 같고 피 묻은 제단 모퉁이와도 같을 것이라","만군의 여호와께서 그들을 호위하시리니 그들이 원수를 삼키며 물매 돌을 밟을 것이며 그들이 피를 마시고 즐거이 부르기를 술취한 것 같이 할 것인즉 피가 가득한 동이와도 같고 피 묻은 제단 모퉁이와도 같을 것이라","온 세상의 주인이신 여호와께서 방패가 되어 자기 백성을 보호해 주실 것이다. 주께서 던지시는 팔맷돌들이 원수들을 모조리 때려 눕히고, 주님의 용사들은 그들의 몸에서 흐르는 피를 포도주처럼 마시고 승리의 환호성을 외칠 것이다. 원수들의 피가 희생제물의 피를 담은 대접처럼 흘러 넘쳐서 제단의 모서리를 흥건히 적실 것이다.","The LORD of hosts will protect them; they will devour and conquer with sling stones, they will drink and become heated as with wine; they will be full like bowls—like the corners of the altar.","The LORD of hosts shall defend them; and they shall devour, and subdue with sling stones; and they shall drink, and make a noise as through wine; and they shall be filled like bowls, and as the corners of the altar.","and the LORD Almighty will shield them. They will destroy and overcome with slingstones. They will drink and roar as with wine; they will be full like a bowl used for sprinkling the corners of the altar.","Dominus exercituum proteget eos; et devorabunt et conculcabunt lapides fundae et bibent, agitabuntur quasi vino et replebuntur ut phialae et quasi cornua altaris.","יהוה צבאות יגן עליהם ואכלו וכבשו אבני קלע ושתו המו כמו יין ומלאו כמזרק כזויות מזבח׃"],["45","9","16",null,"그 날이 오면, 야훼께서 당신의 백성을 양떼인 양 돌보시리니 이 백성은 면류관에 박힌 보석처럼 당신의 땅에서 빛나리라.","이 날에 그들의 하나님 여호와께서 그들을 자기 백성의 양 떼 같이 구원하시리니 그들이 왕관의 보석 같이 여호와의 땅에 빛나리로다","이 날에 그들의 하나님 여호와께서 그들을 자기 백성의 양떼 같이 구원하시리니 그들이 면류관의 보석 같이 여호와의 땅에 1)빛나리로다 혹 높이 들리리로다","그날에는 그들의 하나님 여호와께서 그들을 해방시키시고 그들을 양 떼처럼 이끄실 것이다. 그들은 반짝이는 보석처럼 그 땅을 장식할 것이다.","And the LORD their God will save them: the people, like a flock on that day; For like gemstones of a crown they will shine on the land.","And the LORD their God shall save them in that day as the flock of his people: for they shall be as the stones of a crown, lifted up as an ensign upon his land.","The LORD their God will save them on that day as the flock of his people. They will sparkle in his land like jewels in a crown.","Et salvabit eos Dominus Deus eorum in die illa ut gregem populi sui, quia lapides coronae fulgebunt super terram eius.","והושיעם יהוה אלהיהם ביום ההוא כצאן עמו כי אבני נזר מתנוססות על אדמתו׃"],["45","9","17",null,"얼마나 복되고 멋진 백성인가! 젊은이들은 양껏 먹어 튼튼하고 처녀들의 몸은 햇포도주로 피어나리라.","그의 형통함과 그의 아름다움이 어찌 그리 큰지 곡식은 청년을, 새 포도주는 처녀를 강건하게 하리라","2)그의 형통함과 2)그의 아름다움이 어찌 그리 큰지 소년은 곡식으로 강건하며 처녀는 새 포도주로 그러하리로다혹 그들이혹 그들이","그때에 그 백성의 영광이 얼마나 드높고, 그 아름다움이 얼마나 찬란하겠는가! 그 땅에 곡식과 포도주가 풍부하여 젊은이들이 튼튼하고 행복하게 자라날 것이다.","Then how good and how lovely! Grain will make the young men flourish, and new wine the young women.","For how great is his goodness, and how great is his beauty! corn shall make the young men cheerful, and new wine the maids.","How attractive and beautiful they will be! Grain will make the young men thrive, and new wine the young women.","Quid enim bonum eius est, et quid pulchrum eius! Frumentum succrescere facit iuvenes, et mustum virgines.","כי מה טובו ומה יפיו דגן בחורים ותירוש ינובב בתלות׃"],["45","10","1",null,"봄비를 제때에 내려달라고 야훼께 빌어라. 야훼께서는 먹구름을 몰아다가 큰 비를 뿌리시어 들에 사람들이 먹을 곡식과 푸성귀를 내신다.","봄비가 올 때에 여호와 곧 구름을 일게 하시는 여호와께 비를 구하라 무리에게 소낙비를 내려서 밭의 채소를 각 사람에게 주시리라","봄비 때에 여호와 곧 번개를 내는 여호와께 비를 구하라 무리에게 소낙비를 내려서 밭의 채소를 각 사람에게 주리라","봄부터 가물어서 늦은 비밖에 기대할 수 없거든 여호와께 비를 내려 달라고 빌어라! 먹구름을 몰아다가 번갯불을 일으키며 큰비를 내리시는 분은 여호와이시기 때문이다. 모든 사람이 배불리 먹도록 들녘에서 곡식을 키워 주시는 분은 하나님이시다.","Ask the LORD for rain in the spring season, the LORD who brings storm clouds, and heavy rains, who gives to everyone grain in the fields.","Ask ye of the LORD rain in the time of the latter rain; so the LORD shall make bright clouds, and give them showers of rain, to every one grass in the field.","Ask the LORD for rain in the springtime; it is the LORD who makes the storm clouds. He gives showers of rain to men, and plants of the field to everyone.","Petite a Domino pluviam in tempore pluviae serotinae. Dominus facit fulgura et pluviam imbris dabit eis, singulis herbam in agro.","שאלו מיהוה מטר בעת מלקוש יהוה עשה חזיזים ומטר גשם יתן להם לאיש עשב בשדה׃"],["45","10","2",null,"그런데 우상은 헛소리나 하고 점쟁이들은 허깨비를 보고 계시를 받았다고 하니, 백성은 목자 없는 양떼처럼 헤매며 고생만 하는구나.","드라빔들은 허탄한 것을 말하며 복술자는 진실하지 않은 것을 보고 거짓 꿈을 말한즉 그 위로가 헛되므로 백성들이 양 같이 유리하며 목자가 없으므로 곤고를 당하나니","대저 드라빔들은 허탄한 것을 말하며 복술자는 진실치 않은 것을 보고 거짓꿈을 말한즉 그 위로함이 헛되므로 백성이 양 같이 유리하며 목자가 없으므로 곤고를 당하나니","비가 오지 않는다고 점쟁이들을 찾아가서 물어 보고 기우제나 지내는 것은 쓸데없는 짓이다. 그런 사람들은 너희들을 속이고 허황한 위로를 팔아먹는다. 바로 너희 조상들이 그런 짓을 하였기 때문에, 목자의 보호를 받지 못하고 강도와 맹수들에게 쫓기고 잡혀 죽는 양 떼같이 되었다.","For the teraphim have spoken nonsense, the diviners have seen false visions; Deceitful dreams they have told, empty comfort they have offered. This is why they wandered like sheep, wretched, for they have no shepherd.","For the idols have spoken vanity, and the diviners have seen a lie, and have told false dreams; they comfort in vain: therefore they went their way as a flock, they were troubled, because there was no shepherd.","The idols speak deceit, diviners see visions that lie; they tell dreams that are false, they give comfort in vain. Therefore the people wander like sheep oppressed for lack of a shepherd.","Quia theraphim loquuntur inania, et divini vident mendacium, et somnia loquuntur vana, vane consolantur; idcirco migrant quasi grex, affliguntur, quia non est eis pastor.","כי התרפים דברו און והקוסמים חזו שקר וחלמות השוא ידברו הבל ינחמון על כן נסעו כמו צאן יענו כי אין רעה׃"],["45","10","3",null,"\"나는 내 백성을 인도한다는 목자들에게 화를 쏟고 앞서가는 숫염소들을 치리라.\" 만군의 야훼께서는 당신의 양떼, 유다 가문을 돌보시어 이를 준마로 키워 몸소 타시리라.","내가 목자들에게 노를 발하며 내가 숫염소들을 벌하리라 만군의 여호와가 그 무리 곧 유다 족속을 돌보아 그들을 전쟁의 준마와 같게 하리니","내가 목자들에게 노를 발하며 내가 수염소들을 벌하리라 만군의 여호와가 그 무리 곧 유다 족속을 권고하여 그들로 전쟁의 준마와 같게 하리니","여호와께서 말씀하셨다. \"내 양 떼를 탄압하는 모든 목자들에게 내가 이제 분노를 폭발하고, 양 떼를 해치고 돌아다니는 힘센 염소들을 잡아죽이겠다. 온 세상의 주인이신 여호와께서 자신의 양 떼인 유다 백성을 찾아와 돌보시고 그들을 자기의 군마들처럼 강하게 키우실 것이기 때문이다.","My wrath is kindled against the shepherds, and I will punish the leaders. For the LORD of hosts attends to the flock, the house of Judah, and will make them like a splendid horse in battle.","Mine anger was kindled against the shepherds, and I punished the goats: for the LORD of hosts hath visited his flock the house of Judah, and hath made them as his goodly horse in the battle.","\"My anger burns against the shepherds, and I will punish the leaders; for the LORD Almighty will care for his flock, the house of Judah, and make them like a proud horse in battle.","Super pastores iratus est furor meus, et super hircos visitabo: certe visitat Dominus exercituum gregem suum, domum Iudae, et faciet eos quasi equum gloriae suae in bello.","על הרעים חרה אפי ועל העתודים אפקוד כי פקד יהוה צבאות את עדרו את בית יהודה ושם אותם כסוס הודו במלחמה׃"],["45","10","4",null,"그에게서 모퉁잇돌이 나오고, 천막 말뚝이 나오리라. 싸움터에서 쏠 활이 나오고 그에게서 지휘관들도 나오리라. 모두가","모퉁잇돌이 그에게서, 말뚝이 그에게서, 싸우는 활이 그에게서, 권세 잡은 자가 다 일제히 그에게서 나와서","모퉁이 돌이 그에게로서, 말뚝이 그에게로서, 싸우는 활이 그에게로서, 권세 잡은 자가 다 일제히 그에게로서 나와서","그들 중에서 정치 지도자가 나오고, 그들 중에서 군대의 지휘관이 나오고, 민족의 집권자가 모두 이 백성에게서 나올 것이다.","From them will come the tower, from them the tent peg, from them the bow of war, from them every officer.","Out of him came forth the corner, out of him the nail, out of him the battle bow, out of him every oppressor together.","From Judah will come the cornerstone, from him the tent peg, from him the battle bow, from him every ruler.","Ex ipso angulus, ex ipso paxillus, ex ipso arcus proelii, ex ipso egredietur omnis exactor simul.","ממנו פנה ממנו יתד ממנו קשת מלחמה ממנו יצא כל נוגש יחדו׃"],["45","10","5",null,"날쌘 용사 되어 원수를 길바닥의 진흙 밟듯 밟으리라. 야훼께서 함께 싸워주시리니, 기병들도 하릴없이 달아나리라.","싸울 때에 용사 같이 거리의 진흙 중에 원수를 밟을 것이라 여호와가 그들과 함께 한즉 그들이 싸워 말 탄 자들을 부끄럽게 하리라","싸울 때에 용사 같이 거리의 진흙 중에 대적을 밟을 것이라 여호와가 그들과 함께한즉 그들이 싸와 말 탄 자들로 부끄러워하게 하리라","이 백성 모두가 하나님의 강한 용사들이 되어 모든 적들의 얼굴을 밟아 길바닥의 먼지 속에 으깨어 놓을 것이다. 그들이 싸울 때에 주께서 그들과 함께 계시기 때문이다. 사기 충천한 적의 기마병들도 이 전쟁에서는 수치만 당하고 말 것이다.","Together they will be like warriors, trampling the mud of the streets in battle. They will wage war because the LORD is with them, and will put the horsemen to shame.","And they shall be as mighty men, which tread down their enemies in the mire of the streets in the battle: and they shall fight, because the LORD is with them, and the riders on horses shall be confounded.","Together they will be like mighty men trampling the muddy streets in battle. Because the LORD is with them, they will fight and overthrow the horsemen.","Et erunt quasi fortes conculcantes lutum viarum in proelio et bellabunt, quia Dominus cum eis; et confundentur ascensores equorum.","והיו כגברים בוסים בטיט חוצות במלחמה ונלחמו כי יהוה עמם והבישו רכבי סוסים׃"],["45","10","6",null,"\"나는 유다 가문을 굳세게 하고 요셉 가문을 도와주리라. 그들이 가엾어 다시 세워주리라. 애초에 버리지 않았던 것처럼 해주리라. 나 야훼는 이 백성의 하느님, 어찌 그 하소연을 들어주지 않으랴!","내가 유다 족속을 견고하게 하며 요셉 족속을 구원할지라 내가 그들을 긍휼히 여김으로 그들이 돌아오게 하리니 그들은 내가 내버린 일이 없었음 같이 되리라 나는 그들의 하나님 여호와라 내가 그들에게 들으리라","내가 유다 족속을 견고하게 하며 요셉 족속을 구원할지라 내가 그들을 긍휼히 여김으로 그들로 돌아오게 하리니 그들이 내게 내어 버리움이 없었음 같이 되리라 나는 그들의 하나님 여호와라 내가 그들을 들으리라","내가 유다 백성을 강하게 할 뿐만 아니라 요셉의 후손들인 이스라엘 백성도 해방시켜 그들을 고향으로 데려오겠다. 내가 그들을 사랑하기 때문이다. 그때에는 내가 그들을 버린 적이 없었던 것과 같이 된 것이다. 나 여호와가 그들의 하나님이요, 그들의 호소를 들어줄 작정이기 때문이다.","I will strengthen the house of Judah, the house of Joseph I will save; I will bring them back, because I have mercy on them; they will be as if I had never cast them off, for I am the LORD their God, and I will answer them.","And I will strengthen the house of Judah, and I will save the house of Joseph, and I will bring them again to place them; for I have mercy upon them: and they shall be as though I had not cast them off: for I am the LORD their God, and will hear them.","\"I will strengthen the house of Judah and save the house of Joseph. I will restore them because I have compassion on them. They will be as though I had not rejected them, for I am the LORD their God and I will answer them.","Et confortabo domum Iudae et domum Ioseph salvabo et reducam eos, quia miserebor eorum; et erunt, sicut non proiecissem eos: ego enim Dominus Deus eorum et exaudiam eos.","וגברתי את בית יהודה ואת בית יוסף אושיע והושבותים כי רחמתים והיו כאשר לא זנחתים כי אני יהוה אלהיהם ואענם׃"]]